6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 1/525
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH
ORDINANCE NO. 18-07-29
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION AND PERMITTING FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
ADOPTED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE
VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH, ILLINOIS
ON
July 9, 2018
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Village Board
of the Village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois,
this 10th day of July 2018.
LAWRENCE M. HANSON President JERRY JOHNSON Trustee
MARY DOMINIAK Trustee
LORI K. ROMINE Clerk TED POULOS Trustee
SCOTT A. PIERCE Trustee
ROBERT J.LONG Attorney ED MACEK Trustee
JAY JOZWIAK Trustee
Village of Antioch
ORDINANCE 18-07-29
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION AND PERMITTING FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 2/525
WHEREAS, the Illinois General Assembly has recently enacted Public Act 100-0585, known as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (the Act), which becomes
effective on June 1, 2018; and
WHEREAS, the Village is authorized, under existing State and federal law, to enact appropriate regulations and restrictions relative to small wireless facilities,
distributed antenna systems and other personal wireless telecommunication facility installations in the public right-of-way as long as it does not conflict with State and
federal law; and
WHEREAS, the Act sets forth the requirements for the collocation of small wireless facilities by local authorities.
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois as follows:
SECTION ONE: Chapter 8 of Title 4 of the Antioch Municipal Code is hereby adopted and it shall hereafter read as follows:
Chapter 8. Small Cell Wireless Facility Permitting.
4-8-1. Purpose and Scope.
) Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way
within the Village’s jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent
with the Act.
) Conflicts with Other Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all Ordinances or parts of Ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of
such conflict.
) Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance, the wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations.
4-8-2. Definitions.
“The Act” shall mean Public Act 100-0585, known as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. All other terms shall have the same meaning ascribed to them as by
the Act.
4-8-3. Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities.
) Permitted Use.Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in paragraph (9) regarding Height
Exceptions or Variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in
property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
) Permit Required. An applicant shall obtain a permit from the Village prior to collocating any small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and
permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
(1) Application Requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village, together with the Village’s Small Cell Facilities Permit
Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to
be installed;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation Requirements and Conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge.
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent written evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
(2) Application Process. The Village shall process applications as follows:
a. The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless
support structure.
b. An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the
application within 90 days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days following the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the 90th day after submission of the complete application, or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit application within the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 3/525
time limits as provided under this Ordinance.
c. An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis
and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the 120th day after submission of the complete application, or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit application within the
time limits as provided under this Ordinance.
d. The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances, or regulations that concern public safety, or the Collocation Requirements and Conditions
contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on
the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant concurrent with the notice of application denial.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent
to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of the denial shall require the
application to submit a new application, with applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village’s review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
e. Pole Attachment Agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Village and
the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the
application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall
enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
(3) Completeness of Application. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the
Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
(4) Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
b. A local, State, or federal disaster declaration, or similar emergency, that causes the delay.
(5) Consolidated Applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the applicant's
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are
denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
(6) Duration of Permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than 5 years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the
Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this Ordinance.
If the Act is repealed, as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable Village code provisions or regulations in effect at
the time of renewal.
(7) Means of Submitting Applications. Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery at the
Village’s designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
) Collocation Requirements and Conditions.
(1) Public Safety Space Reservation. The Village may reserve space on municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village’s electric utility uses,
or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably determines that the municipal
utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 4/525
(2) Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair, and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair,
and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this Ordinance. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents, or contractors that
perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental
standards and regulations.
(3) No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the
frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's
communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the
wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with
public safety spectrum established by the FCC.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
(4) The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within
the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the
top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings
given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
(5) The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
(6) The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment
and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan
that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
(7) Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this Collocation Requirements and Conditions Section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation
small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole.
However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant
shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose
technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits, or
material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
(8) Height Limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which
the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
a. 10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the
application is submitted to the Village, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in
the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300
feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
b. 45 feet above ground level.
(9) Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small
wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms, and conditions set forth in the
Village of Antioch Zoning Ordinance.
(10) Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
(11) Ground-mounted Equipment Spacing. The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.
(12) Undergrounding Regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that
prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver,
zoning, or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the replacement of
utility poles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 5/525
(13) Collocation Completion Deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the
Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial
power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for
commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the
permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
) Application Fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
(1) Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support
structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility
poles or wireless support structures.
(2) Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole
for such collocation.
(3) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by the required application
fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable, and applications not accompanied by the fee shall be deemed incomplete.
(4) The Village shall not require an application, approval, or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to
occupy the rights-of-way, for:
a. routine maintenance;
b. the replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the
Village at least 10 days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with
subsection d. under the Section titled Application Requirements; or
c. the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
(5) Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
) Exceptions to Applicability. Nothing in this Ordinance authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
(1) property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way,
or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
(2) property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or conservation purposes
without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction
and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
(3) property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail
service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or
electric utility. The provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used,
developed, and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this Ordinance
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or
(b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this
Ordinance.
Annual Recurring Rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the
issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
) Abandonment.A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove
the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If
the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its
pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost
recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village. Such notice shall
include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 6/525
) Indemnification. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage
resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this Ordinance and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to
indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless
provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the
theory of liability.
Insurance.
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
(i) property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
(ii) workers' compensation insurance, as required by law;
OR
(iii) commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits
consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of
inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-insures is
not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this Section. A wireless provider that
elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the
Village.
SECTION TWO: Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this Ordinance that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this
Ordinance is severable.
SECTION THREE: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as required by law.
PASSED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH, ILLINOIS, ON THIS 9TH DAY OF JULY, 2016.
ATTEST:
___________________________________
LAWRENCE M. HANSON, MAYOR
__________________________________________
CHERYL MATEJA, DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 7/525
19-03-08
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING AND REPLACING CHAPTER 2-8 OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF ANTIOCH RELATING TO EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS
ADOPTED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE
VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH, ILLINOIS
ON
MARCH 11, 2019
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Village Board
of the Village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois,
this 12th day of March, 2019.
LAWRENCE M. HANSON President MARY C. DOMINIAK Trustee
JERRY T. JOHNSON Trustee
LORI K. ROMINE Clerk JAY JOZWIAK Trustee
ED MACEK Trustee
ROBERT J. LONG Attorney SCOTT A. PIERCE Trustee
TED P. POULOS Trustee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 8/525
ORDINANCE 19-03-08
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING AND REPLACING
CHAPTER 2-8 OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF ANTIOCH
RELATING TO EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS
WHEREAS, the Police Chief has recommended that the corporate authorities consider repealing and replacing the existing Chapter 2-8 of the Village Code which
establishes an emergency management agency, and
WHEREAS, the Village Board finds that the existing code provisions no longer are suitable for the public’s interests in large part because of the merger of the former
Village Fire Department into the independent First Fire Protection District and because management of the emergency preparedness response protocols have changes
within the past 15 years since that chapter was originally adopted, and
WHEREAS, attached hereto as Exhibit A is a revised code provision which more effectively deals with the current best practices available to municipalities of this nature
to deal with emergencies, whether natural or man-made, and
WHEREAS, the Village Board finds that the provisions set forth in Exhibit A ought to be adopted and the protocols established therein should be established,
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION ONE: Chapter 2-8 of the Antioch Municipal Code is hereby repealed and replaced by the new Chapter 2-8 set forth on Exhibit A attached hereto.
SECTION TWO: The Mayor, Administrator and Chief of Police are directed to take all appropriate action necessary or helpful in implementing the protocols and
provisions described in the new Chapter 2-8 as soon as practical.
SECTION THREE: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as required by law.
PASSED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH, ILLINOIS, ON THIS 11TH DAY OF MARCH, 2019.
ATTEST:
___________________________________
LAWRENCE M. HANSON, MAYOR
_______________________________________
LORI K. ROMINE, VILLAGE CLERK
(Exhibit A)
Chapter 8
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 9/525
2-8-1 : POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
A. Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of significant size and destructiveness resulting from fire, flood, earthquake, or other naturalor
manmade causes, and in orderto ensure that this villagewill be prepared to and will adequately deal with any such disasters, preserve the lives and the property of
the people of this villageand protect the public peace,health, and safetyin the event of sucha disaster; it is found and declared to be necessary:
1. To confer upon the village mayor the extraordinary power necessary to preserve the public health, peace and safety during and after a disaster.
2. To providefor the renderingof mutual aid to other cities and politicalsubdivisions with respect to the carryingout of emergencymanagement operations.
B. It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the village that all emergency management programs of this village be coordinated to the
maximum extent with the comparable functions of the federal, state, and county governments, including their various departments and agencies, of other
municipalities and localities, and private agenciesof every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of manpower, resources, and
facilities for dealing with any disasterthat may occur.
2-8-2 : LIMITAT IONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
A. Interfere with the course of conduct of a private labor dispute, except that actions otherwise authorized by this chapteror other laws may be taken when necessary to
forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health orsafety;
B. Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but any communications facility or organization (including, but not limited to, radio and
television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested to transmit or print public service messagesfurnishing information or instructions in
connection with a disaster;
C. Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,firefighting forces,units of the armed forcesof the United States,or of any personnel therefor, when on
activeduty; but state and local emergency
operations plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance of functions related to disaster emergencies;
D. Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the village mayor and the village board to exercise any other powers vested in them under the constitution, statutes, or
common law of this state, independent of or inconjunction with any provisions of this chapter.
2-8-3 : DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the definitions hereinafter ascribed:
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including, but not
limited to: fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or leak, other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage,
epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of essential fuels and energy, explosion,
riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action."Disaster" includes, but is not limitedto, all occurrences and threats thereof, which are contemplated by the concept of
"emergency management operations".
DISASTER OPERATIONS: The functionscreated in accordance with the provisions of this chapterto be performed by the village in cooperation with other political
subdivisions to alleviatethe effects of disaster.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of this village, its departments and other private and public organizations, to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, provide,
implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN: The written plan of this village describing the organization, mission, and functions of the government and supporting services for
responding to and recovering from disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The preparation for and carryingout of such functionsfor which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be necessary or proper to
prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, earthquake, or other manmade or natural causes. These functions
include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency aviation services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken or threatened areas, emergencyassigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of publicutility services and functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to
protecting life or property.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Any county, city, village, or incorporated town or township, or other taxing body.
2-8-4 : POWERS OF THE VILLAGE MAYOR:
A. Pursuant to the grant of powers set forth in 20 ILCS 3305/11, the village mayor (or the successor designated by said statute) shall have the sole power to
declare a local emergency for a period of up to 7 days unilaterally, and for such longer term as the corporate authority may grant in extraordinary
circumstances. The village mayor shall be responsible for ensuring that any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local disaster shall
be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the village clerk.
B. The Antioch village mayor shall have the general direction and control of the Antioch emergency managementoperations, and shall be responsible for the
carryingout of the provisions of this chapter through the assignment of village staff, as defined by village policy.
C. In performing the duties under this chapter, the village mayor is authorized to cooperate with state and federal governments and with other municipalities and
politicalsubdivisions in all matterspertaining to emergencymanagement operations defined in this chapter.
D. In performing the duties under this chapter, the village mayor is further authorized:
1. To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and regulations of the local emergencyoperations plan to carryout the provisions of this
chapterwithin the limitsof the authority conferred upon him.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 10/525
2. To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the emergency management of thisvillage which plan and program shall be integrated into and
with emergency plans of the county, state and federalgovernments and of other political subdivisions, and which planand program may include:
a. Prevention and minimization of injuryand damage caused by disaster;
b. Prompt and effective response to disaster;
c. Emergency relief;
d. Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
e. Recommendations for zoning, building and other land use controls, safetymeasures for securing permanent structures and other preventative preparedness
measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters and their impact;
f. Assistance to other localofficials in designing local emergencyoperations plans;
g. Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works designed to protectagainst or mitigatedanger, damageor loss from
flood, conflagration or other disaster;
h. Organization of village manpower and chains ofcommand;
i. Coordination of local emergency management activities;
j. Other necessary matters.
3. In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency management of this village,and out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to procure and preposition
supplies, medicines, materials and equipment to institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all other preparatory steps,
including the partialor full mobilization of emergencymanagement organizations in advance of actual disaster to ensure the furnishing of adequately trained and
equipped forces for disaster operations.
4. Out of the funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this village as may be necessary
to ascertainthe capabilities of the villagefor the emergencymanagement phasesof mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery, and to plan for the most
efficient emergency use thereof.
E. The village mayor is authorized to designate spacein a villagebuilding, or elsewherefor the Antioch emergency management agencyas its office(s) to
facilitate emergency operations.
F. The village mayor is authorized to designate spacein a villagebuilding, or elsewherefor the Antioch emergency operation center. In addition, the mayor or his
designee shall be able to designate vehicle(s) or other space(s)to be used as a field operations post(s), if such emergencyor disaster dictates such designation.
2-8-5 : FINANCING:
A. It is the intent of the village board and declaredto be the policy of the village that every effort shall be made to provide funds for disaster emergencies.
B. It is the village board's intent that the first recourse shall be to funds regularly appropriated to the village’s emergency funds. If the village mayor finds that the
demandsplaced upon these funds in copingwith a particular disaster are unreasonably great, and the governorhas proclaimed the village a disaster,the village mayor
may make application for funds from the state disaster relief fund. If the monies from all available previously appropriated emergency funds are insufficient, and
the village mayor finds that other sources of money to cope with the disaster are not available or are insufficient, the village mayor may issue a call for an
immediate session of the village board for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the board may deem necessary to transfer and expend monies appropriated for
other purposes, to borrow monies from the United States government or other public or private sources. If less than a quorum of the members of the board is
capable of conveningin session to enact such ordinances for the transfer,expenditure or loan of such monies, the villagemayor is authorized to carryout those
decisions until such time as a quorum of the board can convene.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall beconstrued to limitthe village mayor's authority to applyfor, administer and expend grants, gifts, or payments in aid
of disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response or recovery.
D. The village mayor may, on recommendation of the village administrator, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the village in a position to
combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and
provideemergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
E. In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the village administrator is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment, or
material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law
pertaining to village contracts or obligations, as authorized by 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes. However, if the mayor meets with the board of trusteesat this time, he
shall act subjectto the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
2-8-6 : LOCAL DISASTERS:
A. A local disaster may be declared only by the village mayor or the successors as described in this chapter. When declared by the village mayor, any disaster
declaration shall not be continued for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the village board. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing or terminating a local disastershall be given promptand general publicity, and shall be filed promptly with the village clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 11/525
B. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the responseand recovery aspectsof any and all applicable local emergency operations plans and to
authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
C. During a local disaster, the village mayor may suspend the provisions of any village ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of village business, or the
orders, rules and regulations of any villageagency, if strictcompliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or
delay necessary action in coping with the emergency, as authorized by "the Illinois emergency management agencyact", provided that, if the villageboard meets at
such time, the village mayor shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the body.
2-8-7 : STATE EMERGENCYACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of Illinois of a
major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from manmadeor natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Village of Antioch to cooperate fully
with the Illinois emergency management agencyand with the governorin the exerciseof emergency powers as provided by law.
2-8-8 : TESTING OF WARNING DEVICES:
The testing of disaster warning devices including outdoor warning sirens shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
2-8-9 : MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL
SUBDIVISIONS:
The Village of Antioch may, in collaboration with other public agencies within the immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with
other political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic within this state for reciprocal disaster response and recoveryin case a disasteris too great to be
dealt with unassisted. The mutualaid shall not, however, be effective unless and until approved by each of such political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies
of politic as are partiesthereto, in the manner provided by law, and unless and until filed with and approved in writing by the state director.Such arrangements shall be
consistent with the state and local emergency management operations plan and program, and in the event of such a "disaster" as described in section2-8-3 ofthis
chapter, it shall be the duty of each local department for emergency management operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid
arrangements.
2-8-10 : COMMUNICATIONS:
The village administrator, or his designee shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster emergencies. The village
administrator shall consider the desirability of supplementing these communications resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or network. In
studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the village administrator shall evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof for general
village and local governmental purposes. The village administrator shall make recommendations to the village mayor or the village board as appropriate.
2-8-11 :IMMUNITY:
Neither the village, its elected officials, its officers, its agents or any person acting at their direction, engaged in any emergency management operations or disaster
activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter is liable for the deathof or any
injury to persons,or damage to property, as a result of such activity.This section does not, however, affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would
otherwise be entitled under this act, under the workers' compensation act or the workers' occupational diseases act, or under any pension law, and this section does not
affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of congress.
2-8-12 :PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS:
If such "disaster" as is described in section2-8-3 ofthis chapter occurs in this village and the servicesof persons who are competentto practice any profession, tradeor
occupation are required in this village to cope with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons licensed or registered in this village to practice such
profession, trade or occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are licensed elsewhere to practice any such profession, trade or occupation
may, if a member of another political subdivision rendering aid in this village pursuant to the order of the head of that political subdivision and upon request of the
village, or if otherwise requested so to do by the village mayor or the village administrator, during the time the disaster condition continues, practice such profession,
trade or occupation in this village without being licensed or registered in this village.
2-8-13 : APPROPRIAT IONS FOR EMERGENCYMANAGEMENT
OPERATIONS:
The village board may make appropriations for emergency management operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the ordinary
expenses of such political subdivision.
2-8-14 : AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS
ORLOANS:
Whenever the federal, state or local governments or any agency or officer thereof, or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the village services,
equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergencymanagement, the village, acting throughthe village mayor or through the
village board, may acceptsuch offer and upon such acceptance to the village mayor or the village board may authorize any officer of the village to receive such services,
equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the village.
2-8-15 : ORDERS, RULES AND REGULAT IONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 12/525
The village mayor or the village board shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and any amendment thereof made by him pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter in the office of the village clerk. No such rule, regulation or order, or any amendment upon the declaration of such a disaster emergency by the village mayor as
is described in section2-8-7 of this chapter, the provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation, order or amendment issued pursuant to this chapter and
during the state of such disasteremergency, is abrogated, and said rule, regulation, orderor amendment shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the
village clerk, accompanied by a certificate stating the reasonfor the emergency.
2-8-16 :UTILIZAT ION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIESAND
PERSONNEL:
In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the village mayor and the village administrator are directed to utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of
existing departments, offices and agencies of the village to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies
are directed, upon request, to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the director and the emergency management agency.
2-8-17 : NO PRIVATE LIABILITY:
A. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or otherwisepermits
the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual or impending
disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civillyliable for negligently causing the
deathof, or injury to, any personon or about such real estate or premises under license,privilege or other permission, or for negligently causing loss of, or damage
to, the property of such person.
B. Any private person, firm, or corporation and employees and agents of such person,firm or corporation in the performance of a contract with, and under direction
of, the village under the provisions of this chapter, shall not be civilly liable for causing death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property except in the
event of willful misconduct.
C. Any private person, firm, or corporation, and any employee or agent of such person, firm or corporation, who renders assistance or advice at the requestof the
village,shall not be civillyliable for causing the death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property except in the event of willful misconduct. The
immunities provided in this subsection C shall not apply to any private person, firm, corporation, or to any employee or agent of such person, firm, corporation
whose act or omission caused in whole or in part such actual or impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable therefor.
2-8-18 :SUCCESSION:
In the event ofthe death, absencefrom Antioch or other disability of the village mayor preventing him from acting under this chapter or for any other village purpose, and
until the office is filled in the manner prescribed by law, the following village officials shall succeed to the duties and responsibilities of the village mayor outlined in
sections 2-8-5, 2-8-6 and 2-8-7 of this chapter:
A. Senior trustee of the village board.
B. Village Administrator
C. Chief of Police
2-8-19 : SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect such other provisions or
applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapterare hereby declared to
be severable.
CERTIFICATE
I, Lori K. Romine, certify that I am the duly appointed Municipal Clerk of the Village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois.
I certify that on March 11, 2019, the Corporate Authorities of such municipality passed and approved Ordinance No. 19-03-08, entitled
“AN ORDINANCE REPEALING AND REPLACING CHAPTER 2-8 OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF ANTIOCH RELATING TO EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
PROTOCOLS ” which provided by its terms that it should be published in pamphlet form.
The pamphlet form of Ordinance No. 19-03-08, including the Ordinance and cover sheet thereof, was prepared, and a copy of such Ordinance
was posted in the municipal building, commencing on March 12, 2019 and continuing for at least ten days thereafter. Copies of such Ordinance were
also available for public inspection upon request in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
DATED at Antioch, Illinois, this 12th day of March, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 13/525
_________________________
Lori K. Romine, RMC/CMC
Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH
19-04-15
AN ORDINANCE ADDING ONE CLASS "A" AND ONE CLASS "A-1" LIQUOR LICENSE FOR CORNICIONES LLC LOCATED AT 1200 MAIN
STREET
ADOPTED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
OF THE
VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH, ILLINOIS
ON
APRIL 8, 2019
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Village Board
of the Village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois,
this 9th day of April, 2019
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 14/525
LAWRENCE M. HANSON President MARY C. DOMINIAK Trustee
JERRY T. JOHNSON Trustee
LORI K. ROMINE Clerk JAY JOZWIAK Trustee
ED MACEK Trustee
ROBERT J. LONG Attorney SCOTT A. PIERCE Trustee
TED P. POULOS Trustee
ORDINANCE 19-04-15
AN ORDINANCE ADDING ONE CLASS "A" AND ONE CLASS "A-1" LIQUOR LICENSE FOR CORNICIONES LLC LOCATED AT 1200 MAIN STREET
WHEREAS, the Village Board has been petitioned by Alexander Kaliakmanis on behalf of his corporation known as “Corniciones, LLC”, and
WHEREAS, the petitioner has advised the Board that Corniciones, LLC intends to open an establishment known as Corniciones, at the former site of
1200 Embers which operated under a Class “A” and “A-1” liquor license until its closure in 2017, and
WHEREAS, the applicant has compelted a background check and investigation through the Antioch Police Department, who subsequently provided a
report of their findings to the liquor commissioner, and
WHEREAS, the Village Board has considered the application and has determined that the proposal is appropriate for the suggested location and type of
business, and it is an appropriate designated licensee, and
WHEREAS, the Village Board wishes to expand business opportunities wherever possible, for the overall benefit of the citizens and taxpayers of this
Village, and
WHEREAS, the Village Board further finds that prorating the fees for issuance of the license to Corniciones, LLC is appropriate in view of the very limited
amount of time remaining for this license year,
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois, as follows:
SECTION ONE: The Village Clerk, acting as the Secretary of the Local Liquor Commissioner is directed to revise the chart of allowed liquor licenses
as necessary to allow an additional Class "A" and Class "A-1" liquor license to Corniciones, LLC once all necessary paperwork has been submitted and
the applicants qualify for a license.
SECTION TWO: The fees for issuance of the liquor license to Corniciones, LLC shall be prorated to the amount due of $500 for the remainder of the
current license year expiring May 31, 2019, with the full fee due for the license commencing June 1, 2019.
SECTION THREE: This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as required by law.
PASSED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH, ILLINOIS, ON THIS 8th DAY OF APRIL, 2019.
ATTEST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 15/525
___________________________________
LAWRENCE M. HANSON, MAYOR
_______________________________________
LORI K. ROMINE, VILLAGE CLERK
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Antioch, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 18-07-29, passed July 9, 2018.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH, ILLINOIS VILLAGE CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Antioch, Illinois as follows:
Section 1: Pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/1-2-3, and from and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the Village Code of the Village of
Antioch, Illinois prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to
said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the Village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law of the
Village as enacted by the Village President and Board of Trustees.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting
provisions of the official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of
which shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is
regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and
the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said official Village Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the official Village Code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Village Code,
or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Village Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
Village to be misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: This ordinance and the Village Code adopted by the same shall be recorded and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED this 16 day of June , 2003.
APPROVED this 16 day of June , 2003.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 16/525
Roll Call Vote:
AYES: 6; Pierce, Larson, Caulfield, Porch, Hanson, Turner
NAYS: 0
ABSENT: 0
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
This code shall be known and may be designated and cited as the ANTIOCH VILLAGE CODE. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes.
Footnotes, cross references and other comments found in this code are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any
section. Historical references following or within any section show the source of the provision in the village's ordinances and/or 1976 municipal code. (1976
Code § 10.001; amd. 2003 Code)
1-1-2: INTENT:
Except when specifically provided, all general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall be literally construed in order that
the intent of the legislative body may be fully carried out. (1976 Code § 10.002)
1-1-3: SEVERABILITY; SAVING CLAUSE:
A. Severability: Each chapter, section or whatever divisible part section of this code of ordinances is declared to be severable, and the validity of any
chapter, section or divisible part section shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, section or part section of this code. (1976
Code § 10.006)
B. Saving Clause:
1. From and after its effective date, this code shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
(1976 Code § 10.009)
2. Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of said ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved. (1976 Code § 10.010)
3. All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code shall
remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication. (1976 Code § 10.011)
C. Errors And Omissions: If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any words, the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intent of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published. No such alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error. (1976
Code § 10.012)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
1-2-1: INTERPRETATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 17/525
A. Reference To Other Code Sections: Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the
sections referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter be changed or materially altered by the
amendment or revision. (1976 Code § 10.007)
B. Reference To Offices:
1. Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer or employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Antioch" and shall be taken to mean the officer or employee of this village having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
2. No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any
fine or penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the village board of trustees to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
3. Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office or officer exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the
provision irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. (1976 Code § 10.008)
1-2-2: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code and all ordinances of the village, the following rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the
intent of the village board of trustees or the context clearly requires otherwise:
A. Gender: Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders.
B. Number: Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular.
C. Limitations: A general term following a specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. (1976
Code § 10.005)
1-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
AND/OR: Either conjunction "and" or "or" shall include the other as if written and/or.
CODE: The municipal code as adopted by ordinance, and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
DATUM PLANE: There is established and fixed a base or datum plane in and for the village for determining, measuring and fixing elevations and grades in
said village, which base or datum plane shall be known as Antioch village datum. The said Antioch village datum shall be a plane that is sixty and twenty
two-hundredths feet (60.22') below the "USPBM" located on the school building on the corner of Depot Street and Main Street (Fox River Road).
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the village shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30 of each and every year.
ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES: The statutes of the state of Illinois as from time to time amended.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OFFICIAL TIME: Central standard time shall be the official time within the village for the transaction of all village business, except that from two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. on the first Sunday in April each year, official time for the village shall be advanced one hour and at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the last Sunday
in October of each year, such official time shall, by the retarding of one hour, be returned to central standard time. All legal or official business thereof shall
be regulated as to this section and when by ordinance, resolution or action of any municipal officer or body an act must be performed at or within a
prescribed time, it shall be performed according to the official time as herein prescribed.
A. Clocks Set By Village: All clocks or other timepieces in or upon any public buildings or other premises maintained at the expense of the village shall
be set and operated according to the official time as provided in this definition.
B. Clocks Set By Public: All persons residing within the village and all persons, firms or corporations doing business within the village are requested to
set and operate any and all clocks or other timepieces under their control within the village in accordance with the official time as provided in this
definition.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant of the whole or a
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, partnership or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person", as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations and officers thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except real property.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.
SHALL: To be considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise specifically provided.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines of the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 18/525
STREET: Except as provided in the traffic code, the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public, as a matter of right.
VILLAGE: The village of Antioch.
WHOLESALER OR WHOLESALE DEALER: Relates to the sale of goods, merchandise articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing. (1976 Code §§ 10.005, 12.001, 12.002, 12.005, 12.006, 12.007; amd. 2003 Code)
1-2-4: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2003 Code)
Chapter 3
GENERAL PENALTY
1-3-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Violation: Any person who pleaded guilty to, stipulated to the facts supporting a charge or has been found guilty of a violation of any section of this code
shall be fined in a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such
fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. (Ord. 06-05-17, 5-15-2006)
ADJUDICATION HEARING CODE VIOLATIONS
Section Offense
Set Fines - Per Offense
(Check In-House For Priors)
First
Second
Third Fourth
Liquor Control
4-2B-1 Unlicensed sale prohibited $ 50.00 $100.00
$200.00
$400.00
4-2B-2 Sale in violation of license prohibited 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2B-4 Application for license 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2B-10 Classification of licenses 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2B-15 Bond required 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2B-16 Insurance required 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2B-17 Employee guidelines required 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-1 Sales restricted to authorized premises; change of location 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-2 Display of license; BASSET certificate 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-3 Displaying of birth defects warning sign 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-4 Hours of business 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-5 Sales at outdoor cafes 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-6 Outdoor sales at taverns and bars 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-7 Sanitary conditions maintained 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-8 Health of employees 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-9 Sales to intoxicated persons 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-10 Free dispensation prohibited 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-11 Retail sales from original packages 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2C-12 Sales to persons under the age of 21 years 150.00 500.00 750.00 750.00
4-2C-13 Purchase or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years 150.00 500.00 750.00 750.00
4-2C-14 Persons under the age of 21 years in licensed premises or mixing drinks 150.00 500.00 750.00 750.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 19/525
4-2C-15 Social hosting 500.00 750.00 750.00 750.00
4-2D-1 Consumption prohibited in public places 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
4-2D-2 Prohibited activity 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
Public Health And Safety
5-1-1 Weeds and vegetative growth 50.00 50.00 50.00 100.00
5-1-2 Junk and junkyards 50.00 250.00 500.00 750.00
5-1-3 Smoke 50.00 100.00 200.00 300.00
5-1-4A Garbage and rubbish (removal required) 50.00 75.00 100.00 150.00
5-1-4B Garbage and rubbish (containers required) 50.00 75.00 100.00 150.00
5-1-4C Dumping prohibited 150.00 250.00 500.00 750.00
5-1-5A1a, A1b
Miscellaneous nuisances (noxious or offensive odors) 50.00 150.00 300.00 600.00
5-1-5A2 Miscellaneous nuisances (building construction start and stop times) 100.00 200.00 300.00 400.00
5-1-5A3 Miscellaneous nuisances (dangerous structures) 100.00 250.00 500.00 750.00
5-1-5A4 Miscellaneous nuisances (condition of property) 100.00 200.00 300.00 600.00
5-1-5A5 Miscellaneous nuisances (public property) 100.00 200.00 300.00 600.00
5-1-5A7 Miscellaneous nuisances (open burning) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
5-1-5A8 Miscellaneous nuisances (animals) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
5-1-5A9 Miscellaneous nuisances (loitering) 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00
5-1-5A10 Miscellaneous nuisances (alcoholic beverages) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
5-2-2 Air pollution (open burn) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
5-2-4 Permit requirements 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
5-4-5 Garbage, landscape waste and recyclable materials (collection) 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00
5-4-7 Landscape wastes (burning/
disposing)
50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
5-5-2 Landscape watering and sprinkling (water use restrictions) Warning
50.00 100.00 100.00
5-5-3 Landscape watering and sprinkling (lawn installation restrictions) Warning
50.00 100.00 100.00
5-5-4 Permitted uses (sprinkling times) Warning
50.00 100.00 100.00
5-5-5 Water emergencies Warning
50.00 100.00 100.00
5-6-2 Phosphorus-containing fertilizer (prohibition)
5-6-3 Phosphorus-containing fertilizer (impervious surfaces, drainageways and buffer
zones)
5-6-5 Signs $250.00
300.00 350.00 400.00
Police Regulations
6-1-2 Dogs and cats (rabies inoculation) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-1-3 Dogs and cats (limits number allowed) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-1-4 Keeping of other animals 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-1-5 Horses 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-1-6 Vicious dogs, cats or domestic animals 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-1-7 Animals (prohibited acts and conditions) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-1-8 Procedure for animal bite 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-1-1 Theft 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-1-2 Posting bills 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-1-3 Advertising materials 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 20/525
6-2-1-4 Littering 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-1-5 Deceptive practices 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-1-6 Criminal damage to property 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6-2-1-7 Criminal trespass 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6-2-1-8A Smoke free Illinois act 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-1-8B1 Smoke free Illinois act 100.00 250.00 250.00 250.00
6-2-1-8B2 Smoke free Illinois act 100.00 250.00 250.00 250.00
6-2-1-8B3 Smoke free Illinois act 500.00 750.00 750.00 750.00
6-2-1-8B4 Smoke free Illinois act 500.00 750.00 750.00 750.00
6-2-1-8B5 Smoke free Illinois act 250.00 250.00 250.00 250.00
6-2-3-1 Disorderly conduct 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6-2-3-2 Assault, battery, and reckless conduct 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6-2-4 Resisting or obstructing peace officers 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6-2-5-2 Advertising alcohol and tobacco 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6-2-5-3 Possession of cannabis 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6-2-5-4 Possession of drug paraphernalia 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6-2-5-5 Possession of tobacco by minors 25.00 50.00 100.00 100.00
6-2-6-1 Discharging weapons 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-6-2 Air rifles, bows and arrows, and slingshots 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-7 Criminal housing management 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-2-8 Fireworks 50.00 100.00 250.00 250.00
6-2-9 Shopping carts 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-3-1 Curfew 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6-3-2 Truancy 50.00 100.00 100.00 100.00
6-3-2 Truancy (adult responsibility) 50.00 100.00 100.00 100.00
6-3-3 Parental responsibility for unemancipated minors 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
Motor Vehicles And Traffic
7-1-1 Illinois Vehicle Code 75.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-1-2 Vehicle Tax 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-1-3 Parking fines 50.00 100.00 200.00 200.00
7-3-1A Traffic schedules (yards, parkways, fire lanes) $10.00 - $50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-1B Prohibited parking $10.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-2 Parallel parking $5.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-3 Traffic schedules (loading or unloading zones; hours) $5.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-4 Traffic schedules (parking during street maintenance) $10.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-5 Off street parking zones $5.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-5C Handicapped parking 250.00 250.00 250.00 250.00
7-3-6A Restricted parking $5.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-6B Restricted parking $10.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-6C - E Restricted parking $5.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-7 Train station parking $5.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-8 School parking areas $5.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-9 Traffic schedules (parking in residential areas) $5.00 - $50.00 25.00 50.00 50.00 50.00
7-3-10 Stop streets (specific streets) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-3-11 Special stops (specific streets) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-3-12 One-way streets 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 21/525
7-3-13 Speed limits (specific streets) 75.00 150.00 300.00 600.00
7-3-15 School speed zones 150.00 300.00
7-3-17 Truck and trailer parking restrictions 25.00 50.00 100.00 500.00
7-4-1 Bicycle registration 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-4-2 Bicycle equipment and mechanical condition 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-4-3 Bicycle operations 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-4-6 Skates 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-4-7 Skateboards 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
7-5-2 Abandoned, wrecked vehicles (prohibited) 50.00 100.00 250.00 500.00
7-5-3 Abandoned, wrecked vehicles (inoperable vehicles) 50.00 100.00 250.00 500.00
Public Ways And Property
8-1-11 Combined waterworks and sewerage system (additional regulations) 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00
8-4-1 Parks regulations 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
8-4-2 Prohibitions 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
8-4-2-1 Lightning conditions 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
8-4-3 Aqua Center rules 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
8-4-4A, B Permits registration 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
8-4-4C Alcohol in parks without permit 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
8-4A-1 Cross Lake boating restrictions/fishing 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
8-6-4E2a, E2b
Trees and vegetation (replacement standards)
Building Regulations
9-1-1 Building code (adoption of codes) 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
9-1-2 Building code (amendments to adopted codes) 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
9-1-3 Building code (additional regulations) 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
9-1-10 Building code (hours construction work authorized) 100.00 200.00 300.00 400.00
9-1-11B Building code (fence restrictions) 50.00 150.00 300.00 600.00
9-1-15 Building code (fill requirements) 50.00 150.00 300.00 600.00
9-3-2 Smoke detectors (residential requirements) 50.00 50.00 50.00 100.00
9-3-3A Smoke detectors (buildings housing transient occupants) 50.00 50.00 50.00 100.00
9-4-2 Trailers (location restrictions) 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00
9-5-2 Numbering buildings (numbering required) 50.00 50.00 50.00 100.00
9-5-4 Numbering buildings (deface, damage numbers) 25.00 50.00 100.00 100.00
9-6-3 Alarm holder permits 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
9-6-4 Direct communications to village facilities 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
9-6-5 False alarms (per call in excess of 3 per calendar year) 50.00 75.00 100.00 100.00
9-6-6 Daily test signal 50.00 75.00 100.00 100.00
9-6-7A1 Registration 50.00 75.00 100.00 100.00
9-6-7A4 False alarms (per call in excess of 3 per calendar year) 50.00 75.00 100.00 100.00
105 International building code (permits required) 50.00 150.00 300.00 600.00
107.4 International property maintenance code (unauthorized tampering) 50.00 250.00 500.00 750.00
108.1.5 International property maintenance code (dangerous structure or premises) 50.00 250.00 500.00 750.00
109 International building code (inspections required) 150.00 150.00 150.00 300.00
110 International building code (certificate of occupancy) 150.00 150.00 150.00 300.00
112.4 International property maintenance code (failure to comply)
113 International building code (violations) 50.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 22/525
114 International building code (stop work order) 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
115 International building code (unsafe structures and equipment) 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
301.3 International property maintenance code (vacant structures and land) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
302 International property maintenance code (exterior property areas) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
307 International property maintenance code (rubbish and garbage) 50.00 75.00 100.00 150.00
308 International property maintenance code (extermination) 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00
Zoning
10-1-3 General provisions (scope of regulations) 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
10-2-1 Definitions (terms defined such as guesthouse, home occupation, business sign,
etc.)
50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
10-3-1 Supplementary regulations (buildings on a lot) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
10-3-5A - D Supplementary regulations (accessory buildings) 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00
10-5-2 Residential districts (fences and walls) 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00
10-5G - K Residential districts (permitted obstructions) 100.00 250.00 500.00 750.00
10-6-2A, B Business districts (fences and walls) 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00
10-6A - C Business districts (permitted uses) 100.00 200.00 300.00 400.00
10-7A, B Manufacturing districts (permitted uses) 100.00 200.00 300.00 400.00
10-7A-4A - F Manufacturing districts (performance standard) 100.00 250.00 500.00 750.00
10-12-1 Nonconforming uses and structures (nonconforming uses) 100.00 250.00 500.00 750.00
10-12-2 Nonconforming uses and structures (nonconforming buildings and structures) 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
10-12-3 Nonconforming uses and structures (damage or destruction) 100.00 200.00 400.00 600.00
Notes:
Fines are per day, commencing on the eighth day after notice.
Fines are per day. Each day is a separate offense.
Plus restitution.
The entire Illinois Vehicle Code has been adopted as a codified ordinance of the Village in section 7-1-1 of this Code, as permitted by 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/20-204. References are to the parallel sections of that Code.
(Ord. 11-06-07, 6-20-2011; amd. Ord. 14-08-17, 8-18-2014; Ord. 16-01-03, 1-18-2016; Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017; Ord. 18-05-17, 5-14-2018)
B. Community Service: Any person who pleaded guilty to, stipulated to the facts supporting a charge or has been found guilty of a violation of any section
of this Code, in addition to any fine levied pursuant to subsection A of this section, may be sentenced to a period of community service1. (Ord. 06-05-
17, 5-15-2006)
1-3-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Unless otherwise indicated, the penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where a duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or
where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically
provided in this Code.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the Prosecuting Officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a
license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. (2003 Code)
Chapter 4
MAYOR AND VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-4-1: INAUGURATION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS:
All newly elected officers of the village shall be inaugurated at the first regular meeting or the first special meeting, whichever may be first, of the village
board of trustees in the month of May following the election of the officers. (1976 Code § 12.004)
1-4-2: MAYOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 23/525
A. Election: The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term, and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified, as is provided by statute1.
(1976 Code § 30.001)
B. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the mayor shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by
statute2 conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office. (1976 Code § 30.006)
C. Compensation: The compensation and salary of the mayor is fixed and established by legislative authority. (1976 Code § 30.007)
D. Duties: The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the village, and shall perform all such duties as may be required of him by statute or ordinance.
He shall have supervision over all of the executive officers of the village, and shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records
pertaining to village affairs and kept by any officer of the village at any reasonable time. (1976 Code § 30.002)
1. Appointment Of Officers: Subject to the approval of the village board of trustees, the mayor shall appoint all officers of the village whose election or
appointment is not otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. (1976 Code § 30.003)
2. Designate Officers' Duties: Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the village, this dispute shall
be settled by the mayor after consultation with the village attorney; and the mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty
which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform that duty. (1976 Code § 30.004)
3. Formal Occasions: The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the village on formal occasions and receptions; but in his absence or inability to attend
any such occasion, the village board may select any other village officer to so act. (1976 Code § 30.005)
4. Meetings; Fine For Missing: The mayor, being absent from any meeting without good and sufficient cause, may be fined five dollars ($5.00) on
majority vote of the village board. (1976 Code § 30.008)
1-4-3: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
A. Election: The members of the village board of trustees shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term as is provided by statute3.
B. Functions, Duties: The board of trustees shall be the legislative division of the village government, and shall perform such duties and have such powers
as may be authorized by statute4. (1976 Code § 30.010)
C. Compensation: The compensation and salary for each member of the board of trustees is fixed and established by legislative authority. (1976 Code
§ 30.022)
1-4-4: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the village board of trustees shall be held on the first and third Monday of each and every month at the hour
of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M., in the council chambers of the village hall. (1976 Code § 30.011)
B. Special Meetings:
1. Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any three (3) village trustees upon a twenty four (24) hour notice to every member of the village
board of trustees; provided that the requirements of a notice shall not be binding in any special meeting to which all of the members of the village
board of trustees are present, as is provided by statute.
2. Such notices may be served by any member of the police department or by any other person in the village; and it shall be the duty of the village clerk
when given copies of such notices to serve the same or to cause the same to be served immediately. (1976 Code § 30.012)
C. Quorum; Failure To Attend:
1. Quorum: A majority of the elected members of the corporate authorities of the village, which consists of the mayor and village board of trustees, shall
constitute a quorum thereof, but no ordinance shall be passed except on the favorable vote of a majority of the elected members, as provided by
statute. (1976 Code § 30.015)
2. Failure To Attend Meetings, Fine5: (Rep. by Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
D. Presiding Officers: The mayor shall be the presiding officer of all regular or special meetings of the village board of trustees; provided that in the
absence of the mayor from any meeting, the village board of trustees may select one of their own number to preside. (1976 Code § 30.013)
E. Records: The village clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the meetings of the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 30.020)
1-4-5: COMMITTEES OF VILLAGE BOARD:
A. Committee Of The Whole: The village board shall meet and discuss the general business of the village at one or more committee of the whole meetings
per month. An agenda for these meetings shall be posted not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to the meetings (or such other, longer period as may
be required by the Illinois open meetings act), and all meetings shall be held at times and places convenient to the public, and unless unusual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 24/525
circumstances require, during early evening hours on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, but not holidays, and they shall be held in the
boardroom in village hall or at some other public location that is amenable to hosting groups of the size reasonably anticipated to attend. No decisions
shall be made at these meetings, but a consensus of the board may be taken to give general directions to village staff.
B. Special Committees: Special committees of the village board shall be appointed by majority vote of the members of the village board present at any
regular board meeting, provided that such appointments shall be limited to specific tasks or areas of concern, shall be limited in duration to not more
than three (3) months and shall be strictly for the purpose of gathering information and reporting back to the village board on any conclusions or
findings and recommendations that may be reached.
C. Liaisons:
1. From the members of the village board, the mayor shall appoint individual liaisons who will serve to communicate directly with village staff. The
liaisons shall not make decisions or direct staff, but are appointed for the sole purpose of providing a link between the village board and the
department heads responsible for implementing policy. Liaisons are expected to work with the administrator and department heads in locating
problem areas and working up solutions to present to the board for further action. The liaisons shall be responsible for the following tasks:
a. Aid the administrator and department heads in implementing official village policy;
b. Coordinate with the administrator and department heads for the delivery of services to residents pursuant to direction of the corporate authorities;
c. Assist in making recommendations on personnel, equipment and resource issues in each department;
d. Observe departmental use of budgetary allotments and report on the same to the village board;
e. Assist the administrator and department head in securing any information necessary to the proper execution of his or her job;
f. Assist the village board in understanding what any department is doing on any particular projects that may be of interest at the time;
g. Assist the administrator and department head in formulating long range strategic planning for the delivery of services on an economically sound
basis;
h. Otherwise serve to foster improved communications between the village board and village staff.
2. The liaisons shall serve the following departments and service areas. The mayor, at his or her discretion, may determine which groupings may be
appropriate for the board at the time of appointment and may assign any combination of departments or service areas as deemed necessary, and
may also appoint liaisons to other areas when he or she deems appropriate:
a. Public safety, including police, fire and emergency management;
b. Parks, including special events, senior services and community service;
c. Finance, including utility and water clerk, information technology, and human resources;
d. Economic development, including business creation and retention, incentives, tourism and related matters, planning, zoning and building,
including village zoning, code enforcement, permits coordination and building inspection;
e. Engineering, including staff and consultant engineers, public works/utilities, and stormwater management;
f. Legislative, environmental protection, SWALCO, municipal associations, state lobbying. (Ord. 15-05-05, 5-18-2015)
1-4-6: RULES AND ORDER:
A. Meeting Rules Adopted: Subject to the provisions of subsection F of this section relating to remote attendance at meetings, and except as provided in
rule 2 below, the village board of trustees shall observe at its meetings the following rules and order of business:
Rule 1. The mayor shall, if present, take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting of the village board. If he be not present, the village board
shall elect a temporary chair, who shall act in his stead.
Rule 2. The order of business of the village board shall be as follows:
1. Call to order.
2. Pledge Of Allegiance.
3. Roll call.
4. Absent trustees wishing to attend remotely.
5. Mayor's report.
6. Citizens wishing to address the board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 25/525
7. Consent agenda including minutes of prior meetings and routine matters, provided that any elected official may ask that one or more items be
removed and voted on separately as a matter of personal privilege.
8. Regular business, including set motions, resolutions and ordinances for debate and/or adoption.
9. Administrator's report.
10. Clerk's report.
11. Trustee and liaison reports.
12. Executive session.
13. Adjournment.
So long as there is complete compliance with the provisions of the Illinois open meetings act, the village board of trustees may, prior to its
approval, alter or amend the contents of the proposed meeting agenda upon motion duly made, seconded, and receiving a majority vote of the
trustees present at the duly convened meeting. For example, and without limitation, matters on the proposed agenda may be stricken therefrom
or the sequence of the items on the proposed agenda may be rearranged.
Rule 3. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum. He may speak to points of order in preference to any other member and shall decide points of
order, subject to an appeal to the village board by any two (2) members; on which appeal no member shall speak more than once, unless by leave of
the board of trustees.
Rule 4. The mayor may call upon any member to perform the duties of chair; no such substitution, however, shall extend beyond the adjournment of
the particular meeting.
Rule 5. No member shall speak more than twice to the same question, unless permitted by the village board.
Rule 6. No motion shall be put or debated until it is seconded, and every question shall be distinctly stated by the mayor before it is open for debate.
Rule 7. Every member present when a vote is taken shall vote unless excused by the board of trustees, or unless he shall or may become directly
interested in the matter pending, in which case no such member shall vote.
Rule 8. In all cases, when a resolution is offered or motion made, it shall be entered on the journal of the board of trustees; the name of the member
offering or making the same shall also be entered on such record. And it is further provided that, in case such motion or resolution is not seconded, it
shall not be entered upon the journal unless the member presenting such motion or resolution requests that the same be so entered.
Rule 9. When a question before the board of trustees contains two (2) or more distinct propositions, any member of the board of trustees may call for
a division of the question, and the vote shall be taken on each distinct proposition separately.
Rule 10. Every ordinance shall, when introduced, be laid over until a future meeting.
Rule 11. The foregoing rules of procedure and order of business shall be adhered to by the mayor and board of trustees unless the same shall be
temporarily suspended by a majority vote of all the members of the board of trustees present. These rules shall be subject to amendment or
modification at a regular meeting next following a regular meeting at which notice in writing specifying the proposed amendment is presented.
B. Rescinding Action: No vote or action of the village board of trustees shall be rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special
meeting as many members of the village board of trustees as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken, as is provided by
statute.
C. Addressing Meetings: Except during the time allotted for public comment, no person other than the mayor or a member of the village board of trustees
shall address the village board at any regular or special meeting except upon the consent of a majority of the members present.
D. Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful to disturb any regular or special meeting of the village board of trustees or of any committee thereof, or to
behave in a disorderly manner at any such meeting. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined not less than one dollar
($1.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
E. Robert's Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the deliberations of the board of trustees, except when in conflict with any of the
foregoing rules.
F. Remote Attendance At Board Of Trustees Meeting: It is the policy of the corporate authorities of Antioch that the presence of the elected officials at all
public meetings is highly desirable. The public's ability to view actions being taken by elected officials and to make meaningful input into the decision
making process will be materially impaired by the lack of direct access to elected officials in the public forum provided by meetings of the board of
trustees. Accordingly, the provisions for remote attendance at meetings set forth in this subsection are intended to provide for the public's good, not
necessarily for the convenience or ease of the elected officials. As such, this policy should be used sparingly and in strict conformance with the
provisions described herein.
1. Definitions: For purposes of this subsection F, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ATTEND BY ELECTRONIC MEANS: Attending by audio or video conference.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 26/525
MEETING: Any gathering, whether in person or by video or audio conference, telephone call, electronic means (such as, without limitation, electronic
mail, electronic chat, and instant messaging), or other means of contemporaneous interactive communications, of a majority of a quorum of the
members of the board of trustees held for the purposes of discussing public business.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building or portion thereof owned or leased by any public body.
2. Electronic Participation:
a. If a quorum of the members of the board of trustees is physically present as required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/7, a majority of those
members present may allow a member to attend the meeting by means of video or audio conference if the member is prevented from physically
attending because of the following exclusive reasons and no others:
(1) Personal illness or disability; or
(2) Employment purposes; or
(3) Business of the public body; or
(4) A family or other emergency.
3. Notification Requirements:
a. If a member wishes to attend a meeting by audio or video conference, then the member must notify the clerk before the meeting unless such
advance notice is impractical.
4. Consideration Of Request For Electronic Participation:
a. Consideration of a member's request for electronic participation shall occur under the agenda item titled "absent trustees wishing to attend
remotely".
b. Any member physically present may state an objection to allowing remote attendance. In the absence of any such objection, the remote
attendance shall be deemed to be allowed without objection.
c. Upon the making of an objection, those members physically present shall consider whether any such request meets the requirements of
subsection F2 of this section, and vote regarding whether such member may be allowed to participate electronically or whether the objection
should be upheld.
d. An objection shall be upheld only where there is an affirmative majority vote of the members physically present.
e. Any member requesting to attend the meeting by electronic means may participate in the debate on such question but may not vote on the
approval of their own request.
f. If more than one member requests to attend the meeting by electronic means, such requests will be considered in the order in which notification
was received by the clerk as required in subsection F3 of this section.
g. Any member whose request to attend the meeting by electronic means is approved may not vote on the approval of any other member's request
considered during that meeting, but may participate in any debate on the question.
h. Any member whose request for attendance by electronic means is denied may continue to listen to and/or view the meeting via electronic means,
but may only participate to the same extent in which a member of the public physically present at the meeting could participate.
5. Closed Sessions:
a. Any member's request to attend by electronic means only the closed session of any such meeting shall be considered and voted upon in open
session and otherwise in accordance with the open meetings act.
6. Reimbursement Of Costs Associated With Attendance By Electronic Means:
a. Reasonable costs associated with or occasioned by a member's attendance at a meeting by electronic means shall be reimbursed by the village
to the member. (Ord. 12-07-13, 7-16-2012)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
1-5-1: APPOINTMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, all village officials named in this chapter shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the village
board of trustees, to serve for a period of one year or until his successor is appointed. (2003 Code)
1-5-2: VILLAGE CLERK:
A. Compensation: The salary of the village clerk shall be as established by legislative authority and paid out of the general fund, and he shall receive no
other fee or emolument. (1976 Code § 31.077; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village clerk shall execute a bond in such amount and with surety bond as may be required by
the village board of trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. The fee for the bond will be paid from the village treasury. (1976
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 27/525
Code § 31.071)
C. Village Seal And Signatures: The village clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal and attest all contracts of the village and all licenses, permits
and such other documents as shall require this formality. (1976 Code § 31.072)
D. Keeper Of The Records: The village clerk shall keep the following:
1. Records: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the village clerk is required by statute to keep, a register of all licenses and
permits issued, and the payments thereon; a record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the village; and such other records as may
be required by the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 31.075)
2. Documents: Be custodian of all documents belonging to the village which are not assigned to the custody of some other office. (1976 Code
§ 31.078)
3. Indexes: Keep and maintain proper indexes to all documents and records kept by him, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
(1976 Code § 31.079)
E. General Duties: In addition to the duties prescribed by statute and this section, the village clerk shall be responsible for the following duties:
1. Attend all meetings of the corporate authorities, and the keeping of a full record of its proceedings in the journal.
2. Execute all documents required by any law to be executed and to affix the seal of the village clerk thereto. (1976 Code § 31.076)
3. Account for and turn over to the village all fees provided for by ordinance to be received and collected by him. (1976 Code § 31.077)
4. Perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance. (1976 Code § 31.080)
F. Local Registrar Of Vital Statistics:
1. The village clerk shall be registrar of vital statistics for the village1.
2. The local registrar shall keep a record showing all births, stillbirths and deaths occurring within the village, which record shall include all information
required to be kept by state law. (1976 Code § 31.081; amd. 2003 Code)
1-5-3: VILLAGE TREASURER:
A. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village treasurer shall execute a bond in an amount and with any sureties as may be required by
state law and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office.
B. General Duties:
1. Required Duties: The village treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed of him by statute or by ordinance. He shall receive all money
paid into the village, either directly from the person paying the money or from the hands of such other officer as may receive it, and he shall pay out
money only on vouchers or order properly signed by any two (2) of the following persons: the village administrator, the village clerk, the village
treasurer and/or the mayor.
2. Deposit Of Funds: He shall deposit the village funds in such depositories as are designated in the village's fiscal policy manual, established and
maintained pursuant to section 1-8-10 of this title.
3. Reports: The treasurer shall make such reports as are required or suggested by the village's fiscal policy manual, established and maintained
pursuant to section 1-8-10 of this title.
C. Records:
1. Accounting Practices And Records: The treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by the village's fiscal policy manual,
established and maintained pursuant to section 1-8-10 of this title.
2. Register Of Warrants: The treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds or orders issued by the village, filed with him or paid by him, and all
vouchers, as is required by statute; such bonds, warrants and vouchers to be registered when countersigned.
D. Special Assessments:
1. Reserved.
2. Interest:
a. Interest accruing upon the deposit of money derived from special assessments shall be credited to and paid to the village and shall be kept
separate and apart from all other funds and shall be known as the special assessment interest fund.
b. Such interest shall first be used in retiring outstanding special assessment vouchers and bonds that are delinquent by reason of any deficiency in
the funds out of which said vouchers or bonds are to be paid, in the order in which they were issued both as to the particular special assessments
and also as to the particular vouchers or bonds of said special assessments; however, they shall be paid as presented as hereinafter set forth;
after the payment of all said delinquent vouchers and bonds the balance of said interest shall be used for the payment of assessments on account
of public benefits in the order in which said assessments were levied.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 28/525
E. Disbursement Of Interest Monies: The village treasurer shall:
1. Maintain an index of all the vouchers and bonds that are delinquent by reason of any deficiency in the funds out of which said vouchers or bonds are
to be paid which were presented to him and are unpaid during the fiscal year which shall contain an accurate description of said vouchers and bonds
and the names and addresses of the persons who presented them.
2. On March 1 each year and within thirty (30) days thereafter redeem the said outstanding vouchers and bonds with the said interest money in the
order in which they were issued both as to the particular special assessments and also as to the particular vouchers and bonds of said special
assessments. In case the said fund shall be insufficient to pay all of the said outstanding vouchers and bonds in any one year, the names and
addresses of the owners of the said unpaid vouchers or bonds shall be carried over into the succeeding years until they are paid. After the payment
of all said delinquent vouchers and bonds, the balance of said interest shall be paid by the village treasurer for the payment of assessments on
account of public benefits in the order in which said assessments were levied. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
1-5-4: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
A. Office Created; Additional Counsel: The office of village attorney is hereby created as an executive office of the village. With the advice and consent of
the village board, the mayor may appoint additional counsel to assist the attorney on special matters; such special counsel to receive such
compensation as may be directed. (1976 Code §§ 31.001, 31.006)
B. Duties And Responsibilities: The village attorney shall:
1. Prosecute And Defend: Prosecute and defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the village may be a party or in which it may be
interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the village on behalf of the village or in the capacity of such person as an officer of
the village, whenever directed to do so by the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 31.002)
2. Judgments: See to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the village, and of all similar interlocutory orders.
(1976 Code § 31.003)
3. Advice: Be the legal advisor of the village, and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the village whenever requested to do so by the
mayor or by any member of the board of trustees. Upon request by the mayor or by the board of trustees, he shall reduce any such opinion to
writing; and upon request by the mayor, he shall render an opinion to any officer of the village with regard to his duties or powers. (1976 Code
§ 31.004)
4. Special Assessments: See to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings. He shall receive reasonable
compensation not to exceed the amount provided by statute. (1976 Code § 31.005)
5. Ordinances And Documents: Draft or supervise the phraseology of any contracts, leases or other documents or instruments to which the village may
be a party; and, upon request by the board of trustees, to draft ordinances covering any subjects within the powers of the municipality. (1976 Code
§ 31.007)
1-5-5: VILLAGE COMPTROLLER:
(Rep. by Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
1-5-6: CHIEF BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The chief building inspector shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Building And Zoning Ordinances: To see to the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to buildings or zoning. He shall inspect all buildings or
structures being erected or altered, as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the village ordinances. He shall have the power to
see to the enforcement of all ordinances pertaining thereto, and is authorized and given the power to issue and serve nontraffic citations to persons
whom the inspector reasonably believes have committed a violation of titles 8, 9, 10 and 11 of this code. (1976 Code § 31.036; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Stop Work Orders: Order all work stopped on construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the village when such work is being done in violation of
the provision of any ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the zoning ordinance. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such stop order
except on the written permission of the inspector or by order of the mayor; provided that, if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written
stop order within one hour. Such written stop order may be served by any police officer of the village. Any person who shall continue work in violation of
a stop order of the inspector shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this title. (1976 Code § 31.037)
C. Entry Powers: Make or cause to be made entry into any building or premises where the work of altering, repairing or constructing any buildings or
structure is going on, for the purpose of making inspections, at any reasonable hour. (1976 Code § 31.038)
D. Employees: Have supervision of all employees of the village who may be assigned to work on the water pipe system or in connection therewith; and all
such employees shall perform their duties subject to the supervision of the inspector. (1976 Code § 31.039)
1-5-7: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
A. Position Established: There is established the position of electrical inspector for the regulation of installation, alteration and use of all electrical
equipment, as herein provided. The electrical inspector shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of the rules and regulations relating to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 29/525
the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment, as provided by ordinance, and shall function under the immediate supervision and control of
the chief building inspector. (1976 Code § 31.045; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Qualifications:
1. The person chosen to fill the office of chief electrical inspector shall be a competent electrician of good moral character, who shall have had at least
two (2) years' experience as a journeyman in the practice of his trade, or two (2) years' training at a recognized college of electrical engineering, and,
in addition thereto, one year of practical experience in electrical construction; shall be well versed in approved methods of electrical construction; for
safety to life and property, the statutes of the state of Illinois relating to electrical work, the rules and regulations issued by the fire marshal of Illinois
under the authority of the statutes, the national electrical code2, and other installation and safety rules and standards approved by the American
Engineering Standards Association. Provided, however, that should it not be possible to obtain any person with the aforementioned qualifications, the
mayor shall appoint the chief building inspector or such other person, at his discretion, who shall be qualified to fill the office of chief electrical
inspector. (1976 Code § 31.046; amd. 2003 Code)
2. The chief electrical inspector shall take and subscribe an oath to faithfully discharge the duties of his office, which oath, together with the certificate
of his appointment, shall be filed with the village clerk. It shall be unlawful for the chief electrical inspector, except in the performance of his official
duties hereunder, to engage in the business of the installation, alteration, maintenance or sale of electric wiring, electric devices or electrical material,
either directly or indirectly, and he shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in this village at any time while holding
the office of chief electrical inspector. Any violation of the provisions of this section by said chief electrical inspector shall be sufficient cause for his
removal from office. (1976 Code § 31.047)
C. Powers And Duties: The chief electrical inspector shall:
1. General: Have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any
inspection or test of the installation or alteration of electrical equipment contained therein, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of any
wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the fire department. (1976 Code § 31.048)
2. Inspections: Make all inspections necessary to ensure compliance with the ordinances of the village. These inspections shall be made at reasonable
times, and the inspector shall make reasonable rules and regulations governing the time for inspections. It shall be unlawful to cover up any electrical
installation without having had it first inspected. (1976 Code § 31.049)
3. Certificates: Give a certificate of approval to the owner or person in charge of all premises which he shall inspect and find that the electrical
apparatus and wiring therein fully complies with the village ordinances. (1976 Code § 31.050)
1-5-8: COMMISSIONER OF STREETS:
A. Office Created; Compensation: The office of commissioner of streets shall be an executive office of the village, and such officer shall receive such
compensation as may be provided at the time of such appointment or otherwise. (1976 Code §§ 31.060, 31.061)
B. Powers And Duties: The commissioner of streets shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To keep the streets and alleys of the village clean and free from obstructions, and see that the streets are properly graded and that the drains thereto
are free and unobstructed; and shall perform such other duties as may be provided or required by the village board of trustees.
2. To issue and serve nontraffic citations to persons whom the street department reasonably believes have committed a violation of any nuisance set
out in title 4, chapter 1 of this code. (1976 Code § 31.062)
3. To report to the village board of trustees any ordinance violation with relation to the care or use of the streets, alleys or sidewalks in the village of
which he may become cognizant. (1976 Code § 31.063)
1-5-9: DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION:
A. Position; Compensation: The director of parks and recreation shall be a full time employee of the village with salary and benefits to be determined from
time to time by the mayor and village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 31.066)
B. Duties: The director of parks and recreation shall develop and maintain the park and recreation programs, and make recommendations to the village
board of trustees for park and recreation programs in order to ensure the most efficient use of the park and recreation facilities of the village. In this
regard, the director of parks and recreation shall cooperate with the village park commission in the development and recommendation of park and
recreation programs3. (1976 Code § 31.067)
1-5-10: ASSISTANT LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. Conditions Of Office: The assistant local liquor control commissioner shall function without remuneration. If, for any reason, the reappointment should
not take place, the sitting assistant commissioner shall act until a new appointment is made by the mayor.
B. Duties: The duties of the assistant local liquor control commissioner shall be the same duties and functions of the commissioner, to attend all hearings,
to enforce all licenses and to perform all of the other duties incidental to the position of local liquor control commissioner. (1976 Code § 31.105)
1-5-11: EMPLOYEE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 30/525
A. There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, the "village of Antioch employee policies with a final draft date of November 6, 2006"
(hereinafter "manual").
B. The village reserves the right, from time to time, unilaterally to revise, add to, supplement or discontinue any of the policies, rules or benefits described
in the manual, with or without notice.
C. Nothing contained in the manual or any written or oral statement contradicting, modifying, interpreting, explaining or clarifying any provision of the
manual is intended to create, nor shall create, an employment contract, either express or implied, nor shall it guarantee any fixed terms and conditions
of employment. Village employment is not for any specific time and may be terminated at will by the village or the employee, with or without cause, and
without prior notice. No supervisor, department head, village administrator, or other representative of the village (except as delegated and approved by
the village trustees) shall have the authority to enter into any agreement for employment for any specified period of time, or to make any agreement
contrary to the above.
D. The mayor, village administrator and department heads shall be responsible for overseeing the enforcement of the policies contained within the manual,
and for the direction of the activities of all employees, except for those officers appointed by the mayor with advice and consent of the village board, or
whose appointment is otherwise prescribed. Each employee shall be provided a copy of the manual, and shall sign, date and return an appropriate
form acknowledging receipt of same, and shall review it and become familiar with its contents. The village administrator is authorized and directed to
produce such additional duplicate copies of the manual as is necessary. The village administrator's interpretation of any provision of the manual shall
be final. Village employees covered by specific labor or collective bargaining agreements are subject to all provisions of the manual not addressed or
specified within or in conflict with the respective agreements. In the event of a conflict between a collective bargaining agreement and the manual, the
provisions of the collective bargaining agreement shall govern. (Ord. 06-11-39, 11-6-2006)
1-5-12: LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL:
A. Contract: In order to provide the village board with proper legal advice separate and apart from that rendered to the mayor and to the village generally
by the village attorney, the corporate authorities may, by majority vote of the trustees and mayor, enter into a contract with a duly licensed Illinois
attorney to serve as legislative counsel for the trustees. The contract shall have the following provisions, consistent with the requirements of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-1-7(b):
1. The contract shall be for a period of time in excess of one year;
2. The contract shall not extend past the term of the then current sitting mayor;
3. The fee provisions of the contract shall be a flat monthly rate;
4. The fee provisions shall be consistent with sums appropriated for the same in the village's then current appropriations ordinance;
5. The legislative counsel shall be required to submit bills to the village monthly.
B. Duties And Responsibilities: The legislative counsel shall:
1. Advise the trustees of the village on all matters germane to the performance of their duties, to the structure and work of any committee of the board
and all other matters that may assist them in the faithful and competent fulfillment of their governmental roles, and in such capacity, issue such legal
memoranda as may be beneficial to the trustees.
2. Prepare such draft legislation as any one or more of the trustees may direct, and provide legal advice to the trustees in connection therewith on
matters of policy, constitutionality, conformance with statutory provisions and other issues germane to their duties as trustees.
3. Prepare such draft resolutions, initiatives, strategic plans and other documents as may be requested by any one or more of the trustees.
4. Coordinate with the village attorney when appropriate or necessary to assist in the preparation of final drafts of legislation or to ensure compliance
with all relevant laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 07-09-22, 9-17-2007)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
1-5A-1: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; REMOVAL:
A. Appointment: The village administrator shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the majority approval of the village board. (For the purposes of
definition, the village board is defined as consisting of the mayor and board of trustees.) No village board member shall receive such appointment while
he is serving in that capacity.
B. Qualifications: He shall be chosen for his executive and administrative qualifications and educational background with special reference to his actual
experience in or his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office hereinafter set forth. (1976 Code § 31.110)
C. Removal From Office: The village board may remove the village administrator at any time by a majority vote of its members but shall continue his salary
for one month following this action if he has served in that capacity for six (6) months or more, or one-half (1/2) month's salary if he has served for less
than six (6) months. (1976 Code § 31.111)
1-5A-2: COMPENSATION AND BOND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 31/525
The village administrator shall receive such compensation as the village board shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. He shall furnish a
surety bond in the amount of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to be approved by the village board, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful
performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the village. (1976 Code §§ 31.110, 31.112(P))
1-5A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the village, under the direction of the mayor, who is the chief executive officer. He may
head one or more departments and shall be responsible to the mayor and the village board of trustees for the proper administration of all affairs of the
village, excepting, however, such affairs or matters as the mayor and village board of trustees may from time to time determine shall be under their direct
control and supervision. All provisions herein contained shall be subject to the exceptions set forth in this section. To the ends hereinbefore contemplated,
but subject to the exceptions and qualifications hereinbefore set forth, the village administrator shall have power and shall be required to do the following:
A. When necessary for the good of the village, reprimand any employee and/or suspend said employee for a period of time up to and including three (3)
working days without pay. This provision, however, is subject to any local employment rules and practices presently or hereinafter enacted by the
village and any union rules or regulations presently or hereinafter accepted by the village;
B. Recommend appointments of village officers designated by state statute or village ordinance; and also recommend the suspension or removal of the
following officers, employees and persons retained for services by the village: village attorney; treasurer; chief of police; director of planning, zoning
and building; director of civil defense; and any others which are by village ordinance, or applicable provision of the state statutes all appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the village board of trustees;
C. Annually prepare the budget and submit it together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after
adoption;
D. As of the end of the fiscal year, furnish a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the village for the preceding year;
E. Keep the village board advised of the financial condition and future needs of the village, and make such recommendations as he may deem desirable;
F. Recommend a standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the village service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum
rates;
G. From time to time, recommend adoption of such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community
or for the improvement of administrative services;
H. Recommend the creating, consolidating and combining of offices, positions, departments or units of the administrative and executive departments of the
village;
I. Attend all meetings of the village board unless excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the village board. He shall
be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the village board; (1976 Code § 31.112)
J. Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; let contracts necessary for operation or
maintenance of village services for amounts up to and including twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), that for a purchase of more than twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00), he shall be required to solicit two (2) or more sealed bids, such bids shall be presented to the board of trustees for
approval or rejection. No purchase shall be made, contract let or obligation incurred for any item or service which exceeds the current appropriation
without a supplemental appropriation by the village board. The village administrator may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures within the
administrative organization as the village board shall approve; (Ord. 13-06-12, 6-17-2013)
K. See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;
L. Investigate the affairs of any department or division under his jurisdiction. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters under his jurisdiction
concerning the administration of the government of the village, and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the village, and see that all
franchises, permits and privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed;
M. Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties;
N. Perform such other duties as may be required by the village board, not inconsistent with the village ordinances; (1976 Code § 31.112)
O. 1. In case of accident, disaster or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the village administrator, with approval of the mayor or two (2)
village trustees may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency for amounts up to and including twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000.00), but he shall promptly file with the village clerk a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together
with an itemized account for all expenditures and request that these expenditures be ratified at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the village
board;
2. In the event the public emergency described in subsection O1 of this section results in a catastrophic loss or need for expenditures of more than
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the administrator shall consult with the mayor (or in his or her absence, the most senior village trustee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 32/525
available) and secure his or her approval to the expenditures. A certificate shall promptly be filed with the village clerk and the village board asked to
ratify the expenditures as quickly as possible, in a special meeting if necessitated by the scope of the emergency. (Ord. 13-06-12, 6-17-2013)
P. Coordinate with the village clerk a proper and complete agenda for every village board meeting. (1976 Code § 31.112)
ARTICLE B. DIRECTOR OF PLANNING, ZONING AND BUILDING
1-5B-1: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; REMOVAL:
A. Appointment: There is hereby created the position of director of planning, zoning and building, such position to be filled by appointment of the mayor,
with the approval of the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 31.120)
B. Qualifications: The requirements necessary to fill this position shall be as follows:
1. Education: Requires knowledge, skill and mental development equivalent to four (4) years of college with major courses in urban or regional
planning or related field.
2. Experience:
a. Requires five (5) years progressively responsible experience in urban planning or related field;
b. Requires possession of a valid state class D vehicle operators license;
c. Requires thorough knowledge of all pertinent federal, state and local rules and regulations affecting the planning, zoning and building departments;
d. Requires thorough knowledge of the principles and practices of regional and urban planning;
e. Requires thorough knowledge of the social, economic and cultural facets of community planning and development;
f. Requires working knowledge of budget preparation and implementation; and
g. Requires working knowledge of administrative practices and procedures. (1976 Code § 31.122)
C. Removal From Office: The mayor, with the approval of a majority of the village board, may remove the director of planning, zoning and building.
However, his salary shall continue for one month following village board action, if he has served in that capacity for six (6) months or more, or one-half
(1/2) month's salary if he has served for less than six (6) months. (1976 Code § 31.123)
1-5B-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The director of planning, zoning and building shall have the following duties, responsibilities and work assignments:
A. Plan, direct and coordinate all community development activities, such as village planning, building and zoning, including code compliance, grants
administration, building and housing inspections and land use regulations (subdivisions, PUDs); develop and implement departmental goals, policies
and procedures;
B. Supervise the daily work activities of a small professional and technical staff engaged in reviewing plans and conducting on site investigations of
building development projects; interview and recommend the hiring and provide training for new employees; perform daily and periodic evaluations
through monitoring on site investigations and review of submitted status reports;
C. Forecast operational needs, anticipate costs and formulate departmental budget for administration and village board review; maintain departmental
expenditures within budgetary limitations;
D. Act as liaison to developers, realtors and other planners on proposed development for the village; examine and approve all architectural and structural
plans and administer conformance with zoning ordinances; evaluate improvement projects and requests for their potential long range impact;
E. Review ordinances related to community development and TIF management, develop and/or recommend improvements; research requests and testify
before various commissions and boards as required, interpreting all applicable codes and ordinances;
F. Perform special studies, as requested by the village administrator or village board, relative to the conditions and future need of the village in areas to
include, but not limited to: comprehensive planning, capital improvements, developments, zoning, building and subdivision code review; research grant
availabilities and prepare grant proposals for state and federal funds;
G. Develop and generate the development of short/long term plans for growth; review specifications, designs and cost estimates for improvement to
publicly owned properties; direct and coordinate contracted services for village property improvements and maintenance;
H. Perform final review of building and sign permit applications, confer with subordinate staff where permit issuance is in question and approve or deny
permits according to applicable village ordinances or state law;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 33/525
I. Attend and participate in all required meetings, conferences and professional seminars; speak at various organization meetings and schools as
requested; and
J. Perform such other duties as are required and/or assigned which are reasonably within the scope of the duties listed above. (1976 Code § 31.121)
ARTICLE C. DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
1-5C-1: CREATION OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL:
A. Creation, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of village of Antioch director of community services. The director of community services shall
be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the village board for a term of one year and not to exceed the term of the mayor. He shall be
chosen for his execution and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practice in
respect to the duties of his office as set forth in the appropriate job description. The director of community services shall receive such compensation as
the village board shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
B. Qualifications: Qualifications include a bachelor's degree in planning, business, or public administration with an emphasis on community and economic
development or at least six (6) years of actual execution and experience in the administration of related community development activities.
C. Removal From Office: The village director of community services shall be subject to removal from office during the term of his appointment as provided
in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-10. If he is terminated by the village for any reason other than removal pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-35-10, he shall be paid a sum of money equal to his then current salary for a ninety (90) day period to include existing insurance benefits
for ninety (90) days subsequent to his termination. This sum shall be reduced by any deductions required by law. (Ord. 05-06-11, 6-20-2005)
1-5C-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The village director of community services shall perform responsible administrative work in surveying, promoting, fostering and advising the village of
Antioch and various segments of the business community as to the ways and means to foster, maintain, and promote the economic, commercial and
industrial development of the village. The director shall report to the village administrator or his designee on matters relating to the economic conditions
of the village and shall coordinate the activity of economic development.
B. The village director of community services shall:
1. Develop a business prospect list of likely businesses to occupy available commercial and industrial space.
2. Develop a working relationship with the chamber of commerce and area realtors.
3. Develop public relation programs with village merchants to promote Antioch and attract shoppers.
4. Open lines of communication with the Illinois department of commerce and economic opportunity, Illinois Retail Merchants Association and various
trade associations to keep abreast of new economic opportunities.
5. Establish ties with commercial property owners for the purpose of providing counsel in the form of property market values, current square footage
leasing rates and providing information on prospective businesses seeking to locate in the village of Antioch.
6. Provide staff support to various boards and commissions as assigned.
7. Oversee the development and maintenance of a database of information for community development purposes.
8. Attend professional development workshops and conferences to keep abreast of changing trends in the field of village developmental services.
9. Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
10. Furnish a surety bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The premium for the bond shall be paid by the village.
11. Supervise and direct all village employees and activities as they relate to community service, community development, economic development, and
special events. (Ord. 05-06-11, 6-20-2005)
1-5C-3: KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS AND ABILITIES:
A. Knowledge of: land use planning and zoning; budget preparation procedures; current and proposed local, state and federal legislation affecting
community development projects; effective management and supervisory principles and practices.
B. Ability to: effectively utilize conflict resolution and negotiation skills; communicate verbally and in writing; prepare and maintain accurate reports and
records; maintain effective working relationships with other employees, supervisors, public/village officials, contractors, property owners and the
general public; work without direct supervision within boundaries of areas of responsibility.
C. Ability to: use hands and fingers to handle equipment; occasionally sit for an extended period of time; occasionally lift/or move at least twenty five (25)
pounds with or without assistance; work in an office environment. (Ord. 05-06-11, 6-20-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 34/525
1-5C-4: TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT USED:
Motorized vehicles, personal computers, word processing, database, and spreadsheet software, telecommunications equipment and standard office
equipment are used in this position. (Ord. 05-06-11, 6-20-2005)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE A. POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-6A-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is created a police department, an executive department of the village. (Ord. 09-08-22, 8-17-2009)
1-6A-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Appointment: The police chief shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the village board of trustees.
B. Powers And Duties: The chief of police shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, and shall be responsible for the promulgation of all
policies of the police department. He shall further be the keeper of the village jail, and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall
keep such records and make such reports concerning the functions of the police department as may be required by statute or the mayor.
C. Salary And Benefits: The chief of police shall receive a salary as set from time to time by the village administrator, within parameters set by the village
board. The chief of police shall also be entitled to insurance, vacation and other routine benefits consistent with the then current villagewide personnel
manual. In the event the chief of police shall retire while in office, in each of the last two (2) paychecks issued to him or her shall include longevity pay
in the amount of seven hundred twenty five dollars ($725.00) per biweekly pay period which shall be used in calculating his or her annualized
retirement base pay. (Ord. 12-09-19, 9-17-2012)
1-6A-3: COMMAND STRUCTURE:
A. Appointments Made By Police Chief: The police chief is authorized to appoint deputy chief(s) and commander(s) upon approval of the village
administrator. The police chief is authorized to discipline any person appointed to the position of deputy chief or commander up to and including
suspension or discharge, pursuant to established village policies. Any person discharged from the position of deputy chief or commander shall revert to
his or her permanent rank, if any, in the police department as established by the board of fire and police commissioners.
B. Appointments Made By The Board Of Fire And Police Commissioners: The rank of sergeant and patrol officer shall be appointed by the board of fire
and police commissioners as set forth in title 2, chapter 5 of this code.
C. Salary And Benefits: The deputy chief and commander(s) shall receive salaries as set from time to time by the chief of police, within parameters set by
the village board and village administrator. The deputy chief and commander(s) shall also be entitled to insurance, vacation and other routine benefits
consistent with the then current villagewide personnel manual. In the event the deputy chief or commander(s) shall retire while in office, in each of the
last two (2) paychecks issued to him or her shall include longevity pay in the amount of seven hundred twenty five dollars ($725.00) per biweekly pay
period which shall be used in calculating his or her annualized retirement base pay. (Ord. 12-09-19, 9-17-2012)
1-6A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. General: It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the enforcement of all of the ordinances of the village, and all laws of the
state of Illinois and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof.
B. Serving Process: No member of the police department, other than the chief of police, shall serve any process except on command of the chief of the
police department.
C. Conduct Of Members: It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner at all times,
and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the orders and directions of his superiors.
D. Witness Fees: Every member of the police department shall appear as witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an
ordinance or of any state or federal law. No such member shall receive any witness fee for service as witness in any action or suit to which the village is
a party; any fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the chief of police who shall deposit the same with the village treasurer. (Ord. 09-08-22,
8-17-2009)
1-6A-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 35/525
A. The chief of the police department may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the department as he shall deem
advisable; such rules, when approved in writing by the village administrator, shall be binding on such members. Those rules shall then be immediately
forwarded to the mayor and village board of trustees for their review and final approval by resolution. Should the mayor and village board fail to
approve such rules and regulations, as presented, then at the time of said negative vote the rule shall no longer be binding on the members of the
police department.
B. "Rules and regulations" shall be defined as meaning an established written standard, or guide, by the executive authority of the police department
prescribing, or directing, action or forbearance on matters relative to the conduct of the police department and affecting all members of that department.
(Ord. 09-08-22, 8-17-2009)
1-6A-6: POLICE PENSION FUND:
A. Fund Established: There shall be a police pension fund established in this village, as provided by statute1, and shall be known as the village police
pension fund. Such fund shall be for the benefit of the police officers of the village, their surviving spouses, children or certain other dependents.
B. Pension Fund Board: A board of five (5) members shall constitute a board of trustees to administer the pension fund and to designate the beneficiaries
thereof. The board shall be known as the board of trustees of the police pension fund of the village.
1. Members:
a. Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor. The third and fourth members of the board shall be elected from the active
participants of the pension fund by such active participants. The fifth member shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries.
b. One of the members appointed by the mayor shall serve for one year beginning on the second Tuesday in May after the village establishes the
police pension fund. The other appointed member shall serve for two (2) years beginning on the same date. Their successors shall serve for two
(2) years each or until their successors are appointed and qualified.
c. The election for board members shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April at such place or places as the village shall direct and be under
the Australian ballot system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the board. The active pension fund
participants shall be entitled to vote only for the active participant members of the board. All beneficiaries of legal age may vote only for the
member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at such election. The term of the elected
members shall be two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after the election.
d. Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any elected board member, his successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special
election to be called by the board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election.
e. Members of the board shall neither receive nor have any right to receive any salary from the pension fund for services performed as trustees in
that office.
2. Meetings: The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall meet at least quarterly during the months of July, October, January and April and
shall hold such additional meetings as may be called by the president of the board. Suitable rooms for offices and meetings of the board shall be
assigned by the mayor or village board of trustees.
3. Powers And Duties:
a. At the July meeting each year, the board of trustees shall elect a president, vice president, secretary and assistant secretary.
b. It shall be the duty of the board to control and manage the pension funds, to order the payments of pension and other benefits and issue
certificates to the beneficiaries stating the amount which is being paid and the purpose of the payment. The board shall also submit an annual list
of fund payments to the village board of trustees at the close of the village's fiscal year, as provided by law.
c. The board shall be empowered to carry out all functions allowed to it as provided by law. Said powers shall include, but not be limited to: the
authority to draw pension funds from the village treasurer; invest any part of these funds, in the name of the board, as prescribed in 40 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-135; to subpoena witnesses to testify before it; to appoint a clerk and define his duties; to pay all necessary expenses; to
keep a public record of all of its proceedings; to make necessary rules and regulations and to accept donations to the fund.
C. Reports:
1. On the second Tuesday in May annually, the treasurer and all other officials of the village who had custody of any pension funds herein provided,
shall make a sworn statement to the pension board, and to the mayor and village board of trustees, of all monies received and paid out by them on
account of the pension fund during the year, and of the amounts of the fund then on hand and owing to the pension fund.
2. The board shall report to the village board of trustees on the condition of the pension fund. The report shall be made prior to the board meeting held
for the levying of taxes for the year for which the report is made. Investments should be in compliance with 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-135.
3. The board shall certify:
a. The assets in its custody at such time;
b. The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year from deductions from the salaries of police officers, and from all other sources;
and
c. The estimated amount required during the calendar year to pay all pensions and other obligations provided for in this section and to meet the
annual requirements of the fund as provided in 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-125. (Ord. 09-08-22, 8-17-2009)
ARTICLE B. FIRE DEPARTMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 36/525
1-6B-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; ORGANIZATION:
There is created a fire department, which shall be an executive department of the village. (1976 Code § 33.001)
The offices of president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of the fire department are created. Officers shall be elected by the members of the fire
department at a meeting held on or before the second Wednesday in April in every other year, and the officers shall hold their offices for the term of two (2)
years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. Officers shall have the duty to establish all needful rules and regulations with respect to the
management of the money to be paid to the treasurer. (1976 Code § 33.011)
1-6B-2: MEMBERSHIP:
A. Composition: The department shall consist of a chief, and such other officers, firefighters, probationary officers and probationary firefighters as may
from time to time be provided for by the mayor and village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 33.002)
B. Residency Requirements: Any officer or member of the fire department need not be a resident of the village at the time of appointment nor while serving
as a member of the department. However, all members shall reside within the state and within a five (5) mile radius of the village hall, and be full time
paid personnel. (1976 Code § 33.014)
C. Personnel Policies: The chief, officers, firefighters, probationary officers and probationary firefighters shall be considered as employees of the village.
Compensation to be paid to members of the fire department, and personnel policies regarding the operation of the fire department, shall be as set from
time to time by a resolution of the mayor and village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 33.004)
1-6B-3: FIRE CHIEF:
A. Appointment: The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the village board of trustees. The chief shall serve for a period of
one year from the date of his appointment or until his successor is appointed. (1976 Code § 33.003)
B. Powers And Duties: The fire chief shall have the control, subject to the order and direction of the mayor and the village board of trustees, of the fire
department and all fire equipment belonging to the village. (1976 Code § 33.005)
1-6B-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Command At Fires: In case of fire, the chief and his assistants shall rank in the order named and the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take
command of the fire department, and direct the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. When it may be necessary for the protection of
other property, and to prevent the spread of the conflagration the officer in command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the
best manner possible. (1976 Code § 33.006)
B. Fire Prevention And Suppression: It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member to extinguish accidental or destructive fires
and to prevent the occurrence or spread of these fires. (1976 Code § 33.007)
C. Spectators To Render Aid: Every person above the age of eighteen (18) years who shall be present at a fire, shall be subject to the orders of the officer
in command at the fire and shall render all assistance in his power and in such manner as he may be directed in the extinguishment of the fire, and in
the removal of and protection of property, and any person refusing to obey these orders, shall be subject to a fine as provided in the general penalty in
section 1-3-1 of this title. No person shall be bound to obey the officer, unless the officer's official character shall be made known to the person. (1976
Code §§ 33.008, 33.999; amd. 2003 Code)
D. Property: The members of the fire department shall have charge of all property removed from the scene of a fire by them to avoid loss or damage, until
it is turned over to the owner or agent of the owner. (1976 Code § 33.009)
E. Enforcement: It shall be the duty of all officers of the fire department and all police officers of the village to see that this chapter is enforced and to arrest
on view any person who shall be found violating this chapter, or who shall hinder, resist, or refuse to obey any officer in the discharge of his duty and to
that end, all officers are vested with the usual power and authority of police officers. (1976 Code § 33.010)
F. Service Outside Corporate Limits: Members of the fire department are authorized to go outside of the corporate limits of the village for the purpose of
rendering aid to other fire departments, or of extinguishing fires or rendering aid in the case of accidents. However, the fire department shall not render
service outside the corporate limits of the village except upon orders of an officer of the fire department. Where the village has undertaken by contract
to render service to property outside the corporate limits of the village, the fire department may leave the corporate limits in the fulfillment of the
contract. (1976 Code § 33.013)
1-6B-5: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY FEES:
A. Establishment Of Rate: Every corporation, company and association which is not incorporated under state law and which is engaged in effecting fire
insurance in the village, shall pay to the village treasurer or to the treasurer's designated agent, for the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire
department, a sum equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts received from fire insurance upon property situated within the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 37/525
B. Payment Of Fees: Every such corporation, company and association shall pay at the rate prescribed, upon the amount of all premiums which have
been received during the year ending July 1, for all fire insurance effected or agreed to be effected on property situated within the village by that
corporation, company or association respectively.
C. Rendering Of Account: Every person who acts in the village as agent or otherwise, on behalf of a corporation, company or association, shall render to
the village treasurer, or the treasurer's designated agent, on or before July 15, of each year, a full and true account, verified by oath, of all of the
premiums which, during the year ending on July 1, preceding the report, or received by him, or by any other person, for him on behalf of that
corporation, company or association. He shall specify in this report the amounts received for fire insurance, and he shall pay to the village treasurer, or
the village treasurer's designated agent, at the time of rendering the report, the amount as determined by the rate fixed by this chapter for which his
corporation, company, or association is accountable under this section.
D. Disbursement Of Funds:
1. The village treasurer shall pay the sums received from the insurance companies specified in this section to the treasurer of the fire department within
thirty (30) days after the funds are collected by the village treasurer.
2. The treasurer of the fire department shall receive the money paid in and shall pay out the money upon the order of the fire department for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the department.
E. Bond Of Treasurer: The treasurer of the fire department shall give a bond to the village, to be approved by the mayor and village board of trustees,
conditioned upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of his duties under this chapter. The amount of bond shall be equal to twice the amount of
funds arising from the fire insurance tax in the treasury of the fire department at the time the treasurer takes office, plus twice the aggregate to be
received on account of fire insurance taxes as provided by this section as estimated for the ensuing two (2) years. (1976 Code § 33.012)
ARTICLE C. CODE ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT
1-6C-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a code enforcement department, which shall be under the direction and control of the village administrator. This department shall
be tasked with the responsibility for enforcing the village's codes relating to the development of land and structures, the utilization of real property and
structures and the maintenance of real property and structures. (Ord. 09-08-20, 8-3-2009)
1-6C-2: STAFF MEMBERS AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE AND SERVE CODE ENFORCEMENT CITATIONS:
The following staff members shall have the authority to issue and serve code enforcement citations:
A. Planning and zoning code enforcement officer;
B. Chief building official;
C. Life safety inspector;
D. Emergency management official;
E. Village watershed development enforcement officer;
F. The director of planning, zoning and building;
G. The village administrator;
H. The village engineer. (Ord. 09-08-20, 8-3-2009)
1-6C-3: SCOPE OF AUTHORITY TO ISSUE AND SERVE CODE ENFORCEMENT CITATIONS:
The staff members designated in section 1-6C-2 of this article shall have the power to enforce all ordinances pertaining to the construction, maintenance,
and repair of structures, public property, and private premises, and are authorized and empowered to issue and serve nontraffic citations upon persons
reasonably believed to have committed violations of this code, relating to the development, utilization and maintenance of real property and structures
located in the village. Any and all such citations may require the appearance of the alleged offender in the circuit court or in any other adjudicative body
established under this code, and, upon conviction or finding of guilt, the offender may be fined under said citation pursuant to the penalties provided
elsewhere within this code, provided, however, that no jail sentence of any kind may be meted out thereunder. (Ord. 09-08-20, 8-3-2009)
1-6C-4: NONEXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 38/525
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to usurp the authority granted to the officers of the village police and fire departments to enforce the laws of the
United States, the state of Illinois or this village elsewhere in this code or set forth in state or federal law. In the event any other provision of this code shall
specifically grant sole jurisdiction to any specific staff member or public officer over a matter otherwise described generally in this article, that other
provision of this code shall be deemed to be controlling and no powers shall be granted to any other staff member hereunder. (Ord. 09-08-20, 8-3-2009)
ARTICLE D. CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
1-6D-1: STATUTES ADOPTED:
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., "code hearing departments", 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., "building code violations", and 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3, "administrative adjudication of violations of traffic regulations concerning the standing, parking or condition of vehicles", as from time
to time amended, are hereby adopted in their entirety and any person charged with the violation of a municipal ordinance may be prosecuted under and in
accordance with the provisions herein. (Ord. 10-04-09, 4-5-2010)
1-6D-2: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
A code hearing department is established as an independent agency of the municipal government to adjudicate any violation of a municipal ordinance
except for moving violations under the Illinois vehicle code, and any reportable offenses pursuant to section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 10-04-
09, 4-5-2010)
1-6D-3: COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATORS:
Individuals authorized to issue code violations are any and all police officers, all community service officers, all building code inspectors, the administrator
of planning, zoning and building and any other person appointed by the mayor to issue code violations. These individuals shall be called compliance
administrators. (Ord. 10-04-09, 4-5-2010)
1-6D-4: HEARING OFFICERS1:
The mayor, with advice and consent of the village board, shall appoint a hearing officer to hear contested hearings under this article. Prior to conducting
proceedings under this article, hearing officers shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following:
A. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will conduct;
B. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations they will administer;
C. Observation of administrative hearings; and
D. Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules of evidence and issuing final orders.
In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 10-04-09, 4-5-
2010)
1-6D-5: RULES APPLICABLE TO ALL CODE VIOLATIONS:
A. Compliance Administrator2: The village administrator shall appoint a compliance administrator(s) authorized to adopt, distribute and process parking
and other violation notices, collect money paid as fines and penalties for violation of certain ordinances, and operate an administrative adjudication
system.
B. Contesting Alleged Violation3: Any person receiving a violation shall have an opportunity for a hearing in which a party may contest the merits of the
alleged violation. Persons appearing at the hearing may be represented by counsel at their own expense. At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside
and hear testimony and accept evidence as to the existence or nonexistence of a code violation.
C. Determination Of Liability4: A final determination of liability shall occur following after a hearing officer's determination of liability and the exhaustion or
failure to exhaust the administrative review procedure provided in this article. The hearing officer's determination of liability shall become final: 1) upon
denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or 2) upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without such filing having been made.
D. Subpoenas5: At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either party, issue subpoenas for witnesses to appear and
give testimony at the hearing.
E. Failure To Appear6: If on the date set for hearing the defendant or his attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default and
shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the code violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 39/525
F. Strict Rules Of Evidence Do Not Apply7: The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this
article.
G. Findings, Decision, And Order8: At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination based upon the evidence presented.
The determination shall be in writing. The findings, decision, and order shall include: 1) the hearing officer's finding of facts; 2) a decision of whether or
not the code violation exists based on the finding of facts; and 3) an order that states the sanction imposed or dismisses the case if a violation is not
proven. A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the defendant within five (5) days after it is issued.
H. Circuit Court Review9: The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the judicial circuit court of Lake County,
Illinois. The provisions of the administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial
review of the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this article.
I. Unpaid Fines, Sanctions, Or Costs10: Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid
after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the
village of Antioch, and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a standing,
parking or compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition of that violation. (Ord. 10-04-09, 4-5-2010)
1-6D-6: INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS:
A. Code Violations Other Than Building Or Parking, Standing Or Compliance Violations: When a compliance administrator finds that a code violation
exists, that individual shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice that indicates:
1. The name and address of the alleged violator;
2. The type and nature of the violation;
3. The date and time the violation was observed;
4. The names of witnesses to the violation.
The violation form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a
hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more
than forty (40) days after the violation is reported.
One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one
copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the municipality so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code violation
for presentation at the hearing, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons
commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing11.
After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in said circuit court for purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and order.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decision, and orders against a person in such a proceeding.
Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a
certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in accordance with the applicable municipal
ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be made by any method provided for by section 2-203 of the code of civil
procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings,
decision and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order was
entered in accordance with the requirements of this article and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., and that the defendant had an
opportunity for a hearing under this article and for judicial review as provided:
1. The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order,
plus costs;
2. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for recovery of money; and
3. The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a
code violation12.
B. Building Code Violations:
1. Notice: When a compliance administrator finds a code violation while inspecting a structure or property, he or she shall note the violation on a
multiple copy violation notice indicating:
a. The name and address of the structure;
b. The type and nature of the violation;
c. The date and time the violation was observed;
d. The names of witnesses to the violation;
e. The address of the structure or property where the violation is observed.
2. Service: The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department and a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the
report and a hearing date shall be noted on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 40/525
violation is reported. One copy of the violation report shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and shall become part of the
record of the hearing. One copy of the report shall be returned to the individual issuing the code violations. One copy of the report form shall be
served by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear on the specified hearing date.
If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the
owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is found, not less than twenty (20)
days before the hearing is scheduled13.
3. Defenses To Building Code Violations: It shall be a defense to a building code violation charged if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or
representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
a. The building code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing, the violation has been remedied or removed;
b. The building code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain
the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the violations;
c. An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or his agent to all or part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the
building code violation.
4. Sanctions Applicable To Owner; Property: The order to correct a building code violation and the sanction imposed by the village as the result of a
finding of a building code violation under this article shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a building
code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner
of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this article.
C. Parking, Standing Or Compliance Notice Violations:
1. Notice: A parking, standing, or compliance violation notice shall:
a. Specify the date, time and place of violation of a parking, standing, or compliance regulation;
b. Specify the particular regulation violated;
c. Specify the fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment, when so provided by ordinance;
d. Specify the vehicle make and state registration number;
e. Specify the identification number of the person issuing the notice;
f. State that payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation;
g. Contain information as to the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits;
h. Specify the time and manner in which a hearing may be had14.
2. Service: Service of the parking, standing, or compliance violation notice may be achieved by affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully parked vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of a vehicle if he/she is present. A person authorized by ordinance to issue and
serve parking, standing, and compliance violation notices shall certify as to the correctness of the facts entered on the violation notice by signing
his/her name to the notice at the time of service or in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device, by signing a single certificate to be
kept by the traffic compliance administrator attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was under his/her control. The
original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the traffic compliance administrator, and there shall be a record kept in the ordinary
course of business. A parking, standing, or compliance violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance with this section, or a copy of the
notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. The notice or copy shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative adjudication or legal proceedings15.
Service of additional notices may be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited
vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state, or, under section 11-1306 of the Illinois vehicle code, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last
address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease. The service shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United
States mail. The notices shall be in the following sequence and shall include, but not be limited to, the information specified herein:
a. Second notice of violation. This notice shall:
(1) Specify the date and location of the violation cited in the parking, standing, or compliance violation notice;
(2) Specify the particular regulation violated;
(3) Specify the vehicle make and state registration number;
(4) Specify the fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment when so provided by ordinance;
(5) Specify the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits;
(6) Specify the time and manner in which the hearing may be had;
(7) State that failure either to pay the indicated fine and any applicable penalty, or to appear at a hearing on the merits in the time and manner
specified, will result in a final determination of violation liability for the cited violation in the amount of the fine or penalty indicated;
(8) State that, upon the occurrence of a final determination of violation liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village of Antioch.
b. A notice of final determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability. This notice shall be sent following a final determination of
parking, standing, or compliance violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review procedures taken under this section. The notice shall:
(1) State that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing the municipality;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 41/525
(2) Contain warnings that failure to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the municipality within the time specified may result in the municipality's
filing a petition in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment as provided by this section, or may result in suspension
of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more parking violations under section 6-306.5 or the Illinois
vehicle code16.
c. A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall:
(1) Be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more parking violations;
(2) State that failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the municipality notifying the
secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under section 6-306.5 of the Illinois vehicle code;
(3) State that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped
envelope to the municipality along with a request for the copy;
(4) Be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of state17.
3. Hearings On Standing, Parking, And Condition Of Vehicles: An opportunity for a hearing for the registered owner of the vehicle cited in the parking,
standing or compliance violation notice in which the owner may contest the merits of the alleged violation, and during which formal or technical rules
of evidence shall not apply; provided, however, that under section 11-1306 of the Illinois vehicle code, the lessee of a vehicle cited in the violation
notice likewise shall be provided an opportunity for a hearing of the same kind afforded the registered owner. The hearings shall be recorded, and
the person conducting the hearing on behalf of the traffic compliance administrator shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by
subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at a hearing under
this section may be represented by counsel at their expense18.
4. Final Determinations Of Violation Liability: A final determination of violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty after a
hearing officer's determination of violation liability and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures provided by
ordinance. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the
hearing officer's determination of violation liability shall become final:
a. Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or
b. Upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without a filing having been made19.
A petition to set aside a determination of parking, standing or liability may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty and shall be filed
within thirty (30) days of the finding of liability and ruled upon by the compliance administrator within thirty (30) days thereafter. The grounds for
such a petition are limited to: a) the person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued, b)
the person having already paid the fine or penalty for the violation in question and c) excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing. After the determination of violation liability has been set aside upon a showing of just cause, the person owing the unpaid fine or penalty
shall be provided with a hearing on the merits for the violation20.
5. Procedures For Nonresidents: If the alleged violator does not reside within the state of Illinois, he or she may contest the violation in writing. In such
circumstances, the hearing officer must receive a request in writing from the nonresident to contest the violation seven (7) days prior to the initial
hearing. If the hearing officer receives such a written request, the nonresident may submit his or her position, in writing, as to why the issuance of the
violation was improper21. (Ord. 10-04-09, 4-5-2010)
1-6D-7: FINES APPLICABLE TO ALL OFFENSES:
The fines that may be levied by the hearing officer are set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this title. (Ord. 10-04-09, 4-5-2010)
1-6D-8: COSTS TO BE TAXED:
In addition to any fine imposed hereunder, the hearing officer shall, upon a finding of guilty of any offense charged, tax the sum of twenty five dollars
($25.00) per offense as costs. The costs so collected shall be used to defray the expense of staffing, maintaining, administering, and providing security for
the adjudication court system. The finance director shall maintain records showing the actual costs of operation once established, and shall report
periodically to the village board on the balance between costs collected and the expense of operations so that the corporate authorities may review the
amount of costs imposed and adjust these amounts from time to time to ensure that they are as close as practicable to the actual expenses of operation.
(Ord. 10-04-09, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
1-7-1: COMPETITIVE BIDDING:
Please refer to the fiscal policy manual adopted at section 1-8-10 of this title. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
1-7-2: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
Please refer to the fiscal policy manual adopted at section 1-8-10 of this title. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
1-7-3: BIDDERS IN DEFAULT TO VILLAGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 42/525
The village shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other money due the village. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-
2016)
1-7-4: AWARD OF CONTRACTS:
Please refer to the fiscal policy manual adopted at section 1-8-10 of this title. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
1-7-5: OPEN MARKET PROCEDURES:
Please refer to the fiscal policy manual adopted at section 1-8-10 of this title. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
1-7-6: EXEMPT SERVICES:
A. Professional Services: All contracts for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, real estate appraisers and architects,
and any other profession whose ethical code involved prohibits or discourages involvement in normal bidding procedures, may be entered into by the
village without observing the bidding procedures prescribed by this chapter or by the fiscal policy manual adopted at section 1-8-10 of this title for the
award of formal contracts.
B. Employment Contracts: Regular employment contracts in the municipal service shall likewise be exempt from the provisions of this chapter or the
provisions of the fiscal policy manual adopted at section 1-8-10 of this title. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
1-7-7: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an apparent emergency that requires immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials or services, the village board shall be empowered to
secure, by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials or services regardless of the amount of
the expenditure. A finding of such an emergency shall be made in an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the village board at the time of such
emergency contract or no later than the first regular village board meeting thereafter. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
1-7-8: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The village shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the village would be
served thereby. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE POLICIES
1-8-1: DISCLOSURE OF OWNERSHIP ON APPLICATIONS:
All applications for building permits, zoning requests, subdivision requests, any type of license request, pursuant to any of the village codes where the
ownership is in a name other than the true owner, the true ownership shall be disclosed. This section shall apply to, but is not limited to, the following
provisions of this code:
Title 4, chapter 1 General Licensing
Title 4, chapter 2 Liquor Control
Title 4, chapter 3 Amusements
Title 4, chapter 5 Taxicabs
Title 4, chapter 7 Other Businesses
Section 7-1-2 Vehicle Taxes
Title 9, chapter 1 Building Code
Title 10 Zoning
Title 11 Subdivision Regulations
(1976 Code § 36.001; amd. Ord. 08-03-06, 3-17-2008)
1-8-2: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT1:
(Rep. by Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 43/525
1-8-3: INSPECTION, COPYING OF PUBLIC RECORDS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COPYING: The reproduction of any public record by means of any photographic, electronic, mechanical or other process, device or means.
PUBLIC BODY: Any legislative, executive, administrative, or advisory body of the state, counties, townships, cities, villages, incorporated towns, school
districts, and all other municipal corporations, boards, bureaus, committees or commissions of this state, and any subsidiary bodies of any of the
foregoing, including, but not limited to, committees and subcommittees which are supported in whole or in part by tax revenue or which expend tax
revenue.
PUBLIC RECORD: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the freedom of information act2. (1976 Code § 159.001)
B. Responsibility Of Village Clerk: The village clerk:
1. Shall be responsible for administering all requests for inspection or photocopying of public records. (1976 Code § 159.002)
2. Is authorized and directed to maintain and make available for inspection and photocopying a reasonably current list of all types or categories of
records under the village's control. This responsibility shall apply exclusively to information received after July 1, 1984, and shall not apply to any
records or information received prior to that date. (1976 Code § 159.010)
3. Shall not divulge or reveal to any public record applicant any records or materials which are exempt from the terms of the freedom of information act
as set forth in section 7 of that act, unless directed to do so by a court of competent jurisdiction or the village board of trustees. (1976 Code
§ 159.011)
C. Request Procedures:
1. Request Forms: All requests for inspection or photocopying of public records shall be made in written form on forms provided by the village and shall
be duly signed by the applicant. The applicant shall be required to pay to the village, at the time of the request, the estimated costs of any
photocopies requested or any other copying requested. No request shall be considered complete unless and until the amount of the estimated costs
are paid to the village. (1976 Code § 159.002)
2. Time To Respond: The village clerk shall respond to a duly filed request for inspection or photocopying of public records within seven (7) working
days of receipt of the request. The village clerk shall either provide the documents requested within seven (7) days for inspection or photocopying, or
shall deny the request if the requested information is not a public record within the meaning of the freedom of information act. In the event that the
village clerk cannot comply with the request for information within the initial seven (7) day period for any reason permitted by the freedom of
information act, the village clerk shall so inform the applicant by letter of his inability to provide that information with the reason for the delay in the
letter to the applicant. In the event that a delay beyond the seven (7) days occurs, the village clerk shall fully respond to the request for inspection or
photocopying of public records no later than fourteen (14) working days after the initial receipt of the completed application for inspection or
photocopying of public records as required by the freedom of information act. (1976 Code § 159.003)
3. Time And Place For Request For Records: Written requests for inspection or photocopies of public records may be made to the village to the
attention of the village clerk during normal office hours. All of the requests for inspection or photocopies of public records shall be personally
delivered to the village clerk, or if he is not present, any other representative of the village at the village office. (1976 Code § 159.004; amd. 2003
Code)
D. Description Of Village Approval: Section 4 of the freedom of information act requires all public bodies to display certain information and make the
information available to the public for inspection and copying. The brief description of the village, the short summary of its purpose, the block diagram
with its functional subdivisions and the amount of the operating budget, all of which is set forth in a certain pamphlet which is on file with the village
clerk dated July 1, 1984, is authorized and approved, and the village clerk is authorized and directed to make the pamphlet available to the general
public for inspection and photocopying during normal office hours. (1976 Code § 159.005)
E. Exemptions: The following documents, information or materials shall not be considered public records for the purposes of this section:
1. Information specifically prohibited from disclosure by federal or state law or rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
2. Information which, if disclosed, would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
3. Investigatory records compiled for state or local administrative law enforcement purposes or for internal matters of a public body to the extent that
disclosure would:
a. Interfere with pending or actually and reasonably contemplated enforcement proceedings.
b. Deprive a person of a fair trial or an impartial hearing.
c. Unavoidably disclose the identity of a confidential source or confidential information furnished only by a confidential source.
d. Disclose unique or specialized investigative techniques other than those generally used or known.
e. Constitute an invasion of personal privacy.
f. Endanger the life or safety of law enforcement personnel or any other person.
4. Criminal history record information obtained by state or local criminal justice agencies.
5. Records of state and local law enforcement agencies and correctional agencies that are related to the detection and investigation of crime or the
security and operations of correctional institutions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 44/525
6. Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations, memoranda and other records in which opinions are expressed or policies or actions are formulated,
and all other records in which opinions are expressed or policies or actions are formulated that has not been publicly cited and identified by the
village president.
7. Trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a person or business when the trade secrets or information are proprietary,
privileged or confidential, or where disclosure of the trade secrets or information may cause competitive harm.
8. Proposal and bids for any contract, grant or agreement which, if disclosed, would frustrate procurement or give an advantage to any person
proposing to enter into a contract with the village until an award or final selection is made.
9. Valuable formula, designs, drawings and research data obtained or produced by any public body when disclosure could reasonably be expected to
produce private gain or public loss.
10. Examination data used to administer or determine the qualifications of an applicant for a license or employment.
11. Architect's and engineer's plans for buildings.
12. Minutes of the meetings of the village which are closed to the public.
13. Communications between the village and its attorney or auditor that would not be subject to discovery in litigation or consists of materials prepared
or compiled by or for the village in anticipation of a criminal, civil or administrative proceeding upon the request of any attorney advising the village.
14. Administrative or technical information associated with data processing operations which, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security of the system
or data contained therein, or the security of materials exempt under the freedom of information act.
15. Documents or materials relating to collective negotiating matters between public bodies and their employees or representatives, except that any
final contract or agreement shall be subject to inspection and copying.
16. Drafts, notes, recommendations and memoranda pertaining to the financing and marketing transactions of the public body.
17. The records, documents and information relating to real estate purchase negotiations until those negotiations have been completed or otherwise
terminated, and documents and information relating to parcels involved in a pending or actually and reasonably contemplated eminent domain
proceeding.
18. Any and all proprietary information and records related to the operation of an intergovernmental risk management association or self-insurance
pool, or jointly self-administered health and accident cooperative or pool.
19. Information relating solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of a public body.
20. Information, the disclosure of which is restricted under the public utilities act3.
21. Manuals or instruction to staff which relate to the establishment or collection of liability for any state tax, or which relate to investigations by a public
body to determine violation of any criminal law. (1976 Code § 159.006)
F. Appeal Period:
1. Any person whose request for inspection or photocopy of public records is denied in whole or in part shall have the right to appeal the village clerk's
decision to the village president. All appeals shall be taken on the form provided by the village, which is available from the village clerk at the village
offices. Any and all appeals shall be filed with the village clerk no later than fourteen (14) days after the denial by the village clerk. In the event that
an appeal is not taken within the fourteen (14) days, the applicant shall be deemed to have acquiesced in the ruling of the village clerk and the matter
shall be deemed concluded.
2. The village president shall make a decision as to the appeal and so advise the applicant by written letter no later than seven (7) working days after
the notice of appeal is properly filed. (1976 Code § 159.007)
G. Costs: The costs for photocopies of public records shall be set by the village from time to time. (1976 Code § 159.008; amd. 2003 Code)
H. Applicability To Records Prior To July 1, 1984: The village adopts and approves the foregoing standards, except as precluded or otherwise prevented by
the operation of the local records act, for the production of public records for all records received or obtained by the village prior to July 1, 1984;
provided, however, that in addition to the foregoing costs as set forth in subsection G of this section, the village shall further charge an administrative
cost of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per hour for the time expended by the village clerk in collecting and producing any documents or records that were
received or obtained by the village prior to July 1, 1984, and such other and further costs that are actually incurred by the village in complying with any
requests for the records. (1976 Code § 159.009)
1-8-4: OFFICIAL MAP AND STANDARDS:
A. Short Title: This section shall be known and may be cited as the OFFICIAL MAP AND STANDARDS. (1976 Code § 155.001)
B. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to:
1. Adopt an official map;
2. Adopt and designate official standards for the development and redevelopment of the municipality; and
3. Provide for the filing of copies of such maps and standards in the office of the village clerk for the information of the public. (1976 Code § 155.002)
C. Adoption Of Provisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 45/525
1. Identification: The printed maps and standards, incorporated herein by reference and hereby made a part of this section, shall be identified by the
following statement marked or stamped thereon:
Adopted by reference as a part of the official map and standards ordinance passed on January 7, 1974 by the village president and board of
trustees of the village of Antioch, Illinois, approved by Robert C. Wilton, Village President, attest Marilyn J. Sterbenz, Village Clerk.
(1976 Code § 155.003)
2. Official Map: The map is incorporated by reference and adopted as a part of this section and shall be known as the official map and shall include
provisions for major streets and public grounds. (1976 Code § 155.004)
3. Official Standards: The following standards attached hereto are hereby incorporated by reference and shall be known as the official standards of the
village:
a. Pavements: Standards and specifications for the design and construction of pedestrian walks, vehicle parking areas, driveways and street
roadways, as stated in the comprehensive amendment of the subdivision regulations of the village dated February 13, 1973, revised, December
18, 1973.
b. Sanitary Sewerage: Standards and specifications for the design and construction of sanitary sewerage facilities, as stated in the comprehensive
amendment of the subdivision regulations of the village dated February 13, 1973, revised, December 18, 1973.
c. Stormwater Drainage: Standards and specifications for the design and construction of storm sewers, as stated in the comprehensive amendment
of the subdivision regulations of the village dated February 13, 1973, revised, December 18, 1973.
d. Water Supply: Standards and specifications for the design and construction of water supply and distribution facilities, including fire hydrants, as
stated in the comprehensive amendment of the subdivision regulations of the village dated February 13, 1973, revised, December 18, 1973.
e. Street Lighting: Standards and specifications for the design and construction of street name signs as stated in the comprehensive amendment of
the subdivision regulations of the village dated February 13, 1973, revised, December 18, 1973. (1976 Code § 155.005)
D. Use Of Maps And Standards In Other Ordinances: The maps and standards adopted under this section may be adopted by reference to their titles in
other ordinances which regulate the development of the municipality without further filing or publication except where the statutes require otherwise.
(1976 Code § 155.006)
E. Administration And Enforcement: Provisions of this section, including such maps and standards adopted by reference, which also may be incorporated
by reference in other regulatory ordinances, shall be administered and enforced by the officers designated in such regulatory ordinances. Those
provisions of this section not incorporated in other ordinances shall be enforced by the director of planning, zoning and building. (1976 Code
§ 155.007)
F. Availability Of Copies: The village clerk shall keep in his office at least three (3) copies of this section, including such maps and standards as are
incorporated herein by reference, and any amendment thereof, for inspection by interested persons. The village clerk shall also make available copies
of this section for purchase at ten dollars ($10.00) each, either through duplication in advance of contemplated demand or upon order as required. The
foregoing copies of this section shall be in addition to the original copy which the statutes require the village clerk to keep as a part of the official record
of enacted ordinances. (1976 Code § 155.008)
G. Penalty: Whoever violates any provisions of this section for which another penalty is not already provided, shall be fined as provided in the general
penalty in section 1-3-1 of this title. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1976 Code § 155.999; amd. 2003 Code)
1-8-5: BAD CHECK SERVICE CHARGE:
The village shall charge the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for any check returned to it by its bank or any other bank where the account of the maker of
said check was closed; or fifteen dollars ($15.00) where it had insufficient funds. Such charge shall be paid by the maker. Where such check was for
payment of water or any other services or goods not necessarily pertaining to sewer and water, the amount owed plus the check charge must be paid
before the services shall be considered paid in full. Such payment shall cover the village's administrative costs and shall not be in lieu of any criminal
penalty. (Ord. 04-01-02, 1-5-2004)
1-8-6: BONDS:
A. Whenever a bond is required as a prerequisite to holding any village office, or to securing any license or permit or enjoying any special privilege, such
bond shall have as surety a corporation licensed to do business in the state as an insurance surety company in the absence of provisions to the
contrary by ordinance.
B. Whenever any bond shall become insecure for any reason, the board of trustees may order a new bond to be filed or an additional surety to be
procured. A failure to file such new bond or procure such additional surety shall operate to discontinue the office, permit, license, or privilege to the
enjoyment of which filing the bond was prerequisite. (Ord. 04-01-02, 1-5-2004)
1-8-7: DOCUMENT RETENTION AND DESTRUCTION POLICY:
A. The village recognizes that the village clerk does not have unlimited storage capacity, and that state law allows the destruction of several categories of
routine documents after specific periods of time, and this section is designed and intended to require that these documents be kept for a sufficient
period to allow any challenges or disputes to be resolved, and yet permit the clerk to clear out old and useless documentation so that the business of
the village is not impeded by expensive and pointless document retention.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 46/525
B. All ordinances, resolutions and minutes of any board or commission of the village shall be kept in perpetuity.
C. All timecards, W-2s, W-9s and other routine financial and tax information relative to any of the village's employees shall be retained for seven (7) years.
D. All information relative to accounts payable and receivable shall be retained for seven (7) years.
E. All information relative to licenses and permits issued to any person or entity by the village shall be retained for two (2) years.
F. All general correspondence not involving matters of an ongoing nature, or which relate only generally to village business shall be retained for two (2)
years.
G. The clerk shall review the village's stored files and purge any documents that have been kept at least as long as set forth above, and which do not
appear to involve any ongoing matters, and shall cause the same to be securely destroyed.
H. The clerk shall keep a general index of all destroyed documents. (Ord. 04-01-02, 1-5-2004)
1-8-8: INDEMNIFICATION POLICY:
A. The village agrees to indemnify and hold harmless all employees, appointed village officials and elected village officials who, as a result of any claim,
lawsuit, litigation, or the like is found liable for any money damages to any person, corporation, or otherwise, whether the damages are regular,
punitive, or otherwise, so long as such claim, lawsuit, litigation, or the like arose out of, in connection with, or while in performance of the official duties
of said employee or of said appointed or elected official.
B. The village attorney shall defend any claim against any person covered by subsection A of this section. Further, the village attorney, if required, may
designate additional counsel to represent the village's interest and that of the employee or official involved. In the event of a conflict of interest between
the village attorney and the employee or official involved, the employee or official shall have the right to engage an attorney of his or her own choice,
but the rate of pay of that attorney shall not exceed the reasonable and customary rates charged by attorneys practicing in similar areas of law in Lake
County, Illinois, and in any event, the rate must be approved by the corporate authorities prior to his or her engagement or that attorney fees will not be
so indemnified. In determining the reasonable and customary rate, the village's tort liability insurer will be asked to provide a schedule of fees that it
pays to outside counsel in similar cases, and in no event shall the reasonable and customary rate that is approved exceed the highest rate on such a
schedule.
C. The provisions of subsections A and B of this section notwithstanding, the village shall not hold harmless or defend any employee or an appointed or
elected official who is found guilty of intentional torts or wilful, wanton, or fraudulent acts.
D. The village reserves the right to repeal this section at any time; however, such repeal shall only operate prospectively, and any claim arising prior to its
repeal shall be indemnified, subject to subsection C of this section. (Ord. 07-09-17, 9-4-2007)
1-8-9: SCHEDULE OF EQUIPMENT RATES:
When it is necessary for the village to charge for equipment use or, in the case of disaster or other emergency, request reimbursement for equipment
used, the current schedule of equipment rates adopted and published by FEMA (federal emergency management agency) shall be used. The current
schedule of equipment rates can be viewed through internet access at: www.fema.gov/government/grant/pa/eqrates.shtm. A printed copy of the current
schedule of equipment rates will be maintained with the village clerk and the director of emergency management.
All personnel costs associated with the operation, delivery or use of any village equipment will be billed at actual costs including straight time and overtime
salary plus any and all identifiable indirect costs including, but not limited to, any FICA contributions or employee benefits. (Ord. 09-12-45, 12-21-2009)
1-8-10: FISCAL POLICY MANUAL:
A. There is hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set out herein, the "Village Of Antioch Fiscal Policy Manual" initially adopted by resolution 15-67 on
August 3, 2015 (hereinafter "manual").
B. The village board, upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote in favor of an amendatory ordinance, reserves the right, from time to time, to revise, add to, supplement
or discontinue any of the policies, rules or requirements described in the manual.
C. The fiscal policy manual is intended to be the final statement of the intent of the village board on the matters set forth therein. Anything requiring a
variance from the procedures and policies set forth in that manual must be brought before the board for specific approval in the form of a resolution.
D. The mayor, village administrator and particularly the treasurer/chief financial officer shall be responsible for overseeing the enforcement of the policies
contained within the manual, and for the direction of the activities of all employees involved in any aspect relative to the same. If an issue arises in the
meaning and interpretation of a term within the manual, the question shall first be brought to the village administrator. If the administrator is comfortable
with issuing an opinion, his or her interpretation of any provision of the manual shall be final. If he or she is not comfortable in any respect, the matter
shall be referred to the village board for discussion and decision. (Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 47/525
1-8-11: BAD DEBT COLLECTION FEES:
Consistent with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, the village attorney, in consultation with the administrator and finance director, may
retain collection agencies and collection attorneys to collect unpaid debts and financial defaults. Any and all fees incurred by the village in respect to such
collectors shall be additional obligations of the debtors, and shall be added to the amounts subject to collection. (Ord. 16-10-25, 10-3-2016)
Chapter 9
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
1-9-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-2: SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to village procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes, and shall be
liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent
with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act1.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The mayor and village board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village treasurer is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local
tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the local
tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village not an agency
or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any local imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such
tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Antioch, Illinois. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
A. First class, express or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-5: PAYMENTS:
A. Application Of Payment: Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: 1) first to the tax due for the
applicable period; 2) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and 3) third to the penalty for the applicable period.
B. Late Payments: Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late
unless it is: 1) physically received by the village on or before the due date; or 2) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable
U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 48/525
1-9-6: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have
paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the
taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the
taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-7: AUDIT PROCEDURES:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than twenty one (21) days nor more
than sixty (60) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agree to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the sixty (60) days,
approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax collector
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of
overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to an incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local government entity
imposing such tax. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 49/525
1-9-8: APPEALS:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a
claim denial or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. The taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for
hearing may be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to
the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the
taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a
final bill due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date
of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for
filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day
period. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-9: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 1-9-8 of this chapter, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing.
The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of the tax, to be nine
percent (9%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of
five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the
tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice
of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is
imposed by the controlling ordinance.
C. Abatement: The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if
the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 50/525
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the
local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village, the
tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the calendar
year in which return for the applicable period was due, or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the local
tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the
filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless
the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax
and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid
within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCE:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet
shall satisfy the publication requirements. Upon request, copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public at the village clerk's office. (Ord.
01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
1-9-15: LIENS FOR UNPAID TAXES:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 01-02-11, 2-5-2001)
Chapter 10
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREAS INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in these registration rules, the following terms shall have the definitions set forth below:
ACT: The tax increment allocation redevelopment act, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
CLERK: The clerk of the village.
INTERESTED PARTY(IES): Any individual or organization or entity registered in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been terminated in accordance with these registration rules.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: A redevelopment project area that: a) is intended to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a "redevelopment
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 51/525
project area" under the act and b) is subject to the "interested parties" registry requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION FORM: The form appended to the ordinance codified herein or such revised form as may be approved by the village consistent with the
requirements of the act.
REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES: Each interested parties registry, and all such registries, collectively, established by the village pursuant to section 11-74.4-
4.2 of the act for any and all redevelopment project areas in the village.
VILLAGE: Village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY:
The village shall establish a single interested parties registry for all redevelopment project areas, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of these
rules or hereafter established. In any event the process of establishing the new registry must be completed prior to the deadline for sending any of the
notices required by section 1-10-10 of this chapter or any other notices required by the act with respect to the proposed redevelopment project area. (Ord.
08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-3: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The registry shall be maintained by the clerk or his or her designee. In the event the village determines that an individual other than the clerk should
maintain the registry, the village may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the registry to such other department provided that the village: a) gives prior
written notice to all interested parties not less than thirty (30) days prior to such transfer and b) publishes notice of such transfer in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-4: REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS:
An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
clerk. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-5: REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS:
An organization seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to
the clerk. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-6: DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY:
All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten (10) business days after the clerk's receipt of all such documents. The clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration interested parties shall be entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under these
rules or as otherwise required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project area. If the clerk determines that a registrant's
registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules, the clerk shall give written notice to the
registrant specifying the defect(s) and the registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-7: RENEWAL AND TERMINATION:
An interested person's registration shall remain effective for a period of three (3) years. At any time after such three (3) year period the clerk may provide
written notice by regular mail to the interested person stating that such registration shall terminate unless the interested person renews such registration
within thirty (30) days after the clerk's mailing of written notice. To renew such registration, the interested person shall, within such thirty (30) day period,
complete and submit the same registration form then required of initial registrants in the village. The registration of all individuals and organizations whose
registration form is submitted in a timely manner and complies with these registration rules shall be renewed for an additional, consecutive three (3) year
period. If the clerk determines that a registrant's renewal registration form is incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules, the clerk shall
give written notice to the registrant at the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The
registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form within thirty (30) days after receipt of the clerk's notice. If all defects
are not corrected within thirty (30) days after the interested person's receipt of the clerk's notice, the interested person's registration shall be terminated.
Any interested person whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a first time registrant. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-8: AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the clerk by certified mail of any of the following: a) change in address for notice
purposes; b) in the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact person; and c) a termination of registration. Upon receipt of such notice, the
clerk shall revise the applicable registry accordingly. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-9: REGISTRY AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION:
The registry shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone number of
each interested person and for organizations, the name and phone number of a designated contact person. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 52/525
1-10-10: NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area:
A. Pursuant to subsection 11-74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of the availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including how to obtain
this information; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public hearing for the
proposed redevelopment plan;
B. Pursuant to subsection 11-74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of changes to proposed redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels of property to
the proposed redevelopment project area, 2) substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the redevelopment plan, 3) substantially change the
nature of or extend the life of the redevelopment project, or 4) increase the number of inhabited residential units to be displaced from the
redevelopment project area, as measured from the time of creation of the redevelopment project area, to a total of more than ten (10); such notice shall
be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days following the village's adoption by ordinance of such changes;
C. Pursuant to subsection 11-74.4-5(c) of the act, notice of amendments to previously approved redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels
of property to the redevelopment project area, 2) substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment plan, 3) substantially change the
nature of the redevelopment project, 4) increase the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan by more than five
percent (5%) after adjustment for inflation from the date the plan was adopted, 5) add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of
redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan, or 6) increase the number of inhabited residential units to be displaced from the
redevelopment project area, as measured from the time of creation of the redevelopment project, to a total of more than ten (10); such notice will be
sent by mail not later than ten (10) days following the village's adoption by ordinance of such amendment;
D. Pursuant to subsection 11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the act, for redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten (10) or
more inhabited residential units or that contain seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of the annual report
described by subsection 11-74.4-5(d) of the act, including how to obtain the annual report; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period
of time after completion of the certified audit report;
E. Pursuant to subsection 11-74.4-6(e) of the act, notice of the preliminary public meeting required under the act for a proposed redevelopment project
area that will result in the displacement of residents from ten (10) or more inhabited residential units or which will contain seventy five (75) or more
inhabited residential units; such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of such preliminary public meeting.
(Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-11: NONINTERFERENCE:
These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for receipt of
information to which they are entitled under the act. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
1-10-12: AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES:
These registration rules may be amended by the village subject to and consistent with the requirements of the act. (Ord. 08-09-22, 9-15-2008)
Chapter 11
CODE OF ETHICS
1-11-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
A. The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsive to the people
they serve; government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; public office not be used for personal gain
or to advance the interests of family or relatives; and the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of such goals, there is
established a code of ethics for all village public officials, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, and for village employees. The purposes of this
code of ethics are to establish ethical standards of conduct for all such public officials and public employees by setting forth the acts or actions which
are incompatible with the best interests of the village and its inhabitants and by requiring disclosure by public officials and public employees of private
financial or other interests in matters affecting the village.
B. This code of ethics is founded upon the principle that no individual shall receive any impermissible financial or other gain by reason of their serving as a
public official or public employee of the village, and that no private person or taxpayer, including public officials or public employees, or their family
members, should receive any benefits from village action beyond that which is available to any other private person or taxpayer due to their relation to
or as a result of privileged information or support provided by any public official or public employee.
C. It is the legislative intent of the corporate authorities for this chapter to be liberally construed to accomplish the policy and purposes herein expressed to
the greatest extent permitted by law. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 53/525
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this code of ethics, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS ENTITY: Any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership, person in a representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or
corporation.
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities:
A. Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
B. Relating to collective bargaining, or
C. That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a
vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in the Illinois public labor relations act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 315/3.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or public employees whose hours
are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when
the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1.4.
DOING BUSINESS: Engaging in an activity for profit or gain, or that requires a license or permit by an agency.
EMPLOYER: The village of Antioch.
FAMILY MEMBER: A spouse, children and grandchildren, and their spouses, parents and the parents of a spouse, and brothers and sisters and their
spouses. All relations which arise by action of law or marriage shall be included within the meaning of family member, including step relatives, adoptees
and half siblings. For the purpose of this chapter the word spouse shall include a life partner.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee given without consideration or expectation of return.
INTEREST: Any material direct or indirect benefit accruing to a public official or employee, or their family members, whether in the public official's or
employee's own name, or the name of any person, from which the official or employee is entitled to receive any financial benefit as a result of a contract or
transaction which is or which is known will become the subject of an official act or action by or with the village, except for such contracts or transactions
which, by their terms and the substance of their provisions, confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all other citizens of
the village. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any interest permitted or prohibited under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10 shall be permitted
or prohibited under the same circumstances and conditions as therein set forth.
INTEREST IN REAL PROPERTY: Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. Legal or equitable title;
B. A beneficial interest in any trust, including a land trust;
C. Any assignment of any interest from a beneficiary or any other party of an interest;
D. A power to direct conveyance;
E. A right to receive rents or proceeds from property;
F. The obligation to pay rent;
G. A lien;
H. A tax sale certificate;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 54/525
I. An option; or
J. Any other financial interest, real or personal, direct or indirect, in such property, including status as a nominee or undisclosed principal.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL GIFT: Any gift given to a public official or public employee by a public official or public employee of another governmental entity.
INTRAGOVERNMENTAL GIFT: Any gift given to a public official or public employee from another public official or public employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive:
A. Compensation for employment,
B. Service credit towards pension benefits, and
C. Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
LOBBYIST: Any person:
A. Who, for compensation or on behalf of any person other than himself, undertakes to influence any legislative or administrative action; or
B. Any part of whose duties as an employee of another includes undertaking to influence any legislative or administrative action.
OFFICIAL ACT OR ACTION: Any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of any public official or public employee of the village, or any
agency, board, committee or commission thereof.
OFFICIAL VILLAGE BUSINESS: Attendance at ribbon cutting ceremonies, business receptions, business and restaurant openings, community events,
fundraising events, other public events and/or appearances or ceremonies and the like.
PERSON: Any individual, entity, corporation, proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, firm, association, trade union, syndicate, committee, trust, estate or
group, as well as any parent or subsidiary of any of such entities, whether or not operated for profit, doing business with or participating in a transaction
with or before the village or any commission or agency thereof.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include
activities:
A. Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action;
B. Relating to collective bargaining; or
C. That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code, 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-3, but only with
regard to those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event;
B. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser,
political meeting, or other political event;
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution;
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question;
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question;
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question;
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort
to get voters to the polls;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 55/525
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question;
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office;
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires;
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for
elective office or for or against any referendum question;
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question;
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question;
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention; or
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by the village, whether on a full or part time basis or pursuant to contract, who is compensated for
services as an employee and not as an independent contractor and who:
A. Is, or functions as, the head of a department, division, bureau, authority or other administrative unit within the village or exercises similar authority
within the village;
B. Has direct supervisory authority over or direct responsibility for the formulation, negotiation, issuance or execution of contracts entered into by the
village;
C. Has authority to approve licenses and permits to be issued by the village, not including inspectors and plan reviewers;
D. Adjudicates, arbitrates or decides any judicial or administrative proceeding, or reviews the adjudication, arbitration or decision of any judicial or
administrative proceeding within the authority of the village; or
E. Has authority to issue or promulgate rules and regulations within areas under the authority of the village.
Acts of any family member of a public official or public employee, when done with the knowledge and express, implied or tacit consent of the public
official or public employee, shall be deemed to be acts of such official or public employee for purposes of applying the prohibitions and restrictions of
this code of ethics.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL: Any person elected or appointed to the village board or persons appointed to any other village board, including, but not limited to, the
zoning board of appeals, plan commission or appearance commission, whether paid or unpaid.
TRANSACTION: Any matter upon which a public official or public employee performs an official act or action including, but not limited to, contracts, work
or business with the village, the sale or purchase of real estate by the village and any requests for zoning amendments, variations, planned development
approval or special permits pending before the village. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-3: FIDUCIARY DUTY:
Public officials and public employees, at all times in the performance of their public duties, owe a fiduciary duty to the village and the citizens thereof. (Ord.
09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-4: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
A. No public official or public employee shall perform or participate in an official act or action with regard to a transaction in which he has or knows he will
thereafter acquire an interest for profit, without full public disclosure of such interest.
B. Whenever the performance of an official act or action of a public official or public employee shall include deliberation, voting or the rendering of a
decision on his part on any matter in which he has or knows he may acquire an interest, he shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest
and disqualify himself from participating in the deliberation and the decision making process, as well as in the voting. In order to avoid the appearance
of impropriety, the public official or public employee who has disqualified himself from participation under this subsection shall not be present in the
same room during which the decision making process, the deliberations or voting on the issue may occur.
C. No public official or public employee, or family member of a public official or public employee, or paid consultant of the village shall represent any
person in any action or proceeding against the interests of the village in any litigation in which the village is a party.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 56/525
D. Any contract entered into, permit, ruling, determination or other official action of the village board, a committee or other subdivision thereof, or of the
plan commission, zoning board of appeals or appearance commission, or of any village department, agency, board, commission or other body, applied
for or in any other manner sought, obtained or undertaken in violation of any of the provisions of this code of ethics shall be void, invalid and without
any force or effect whatsoever.
E. No public official or public employee, or family member of a public official or public employee, or paid consultant of the village shall appear on behalf of
or represent any person or organization at any proceeding before any board or commission of the village, except on behalf of himself or a member of
his household, or on behalf of an eleemosynary organization, when zoning, permits or the expenditure of village funds are not an issue. (Ord. 09-04-10,
4-20-2009)
1-11-5: GIFT BAN:
A. Except as permitted in subsection B of this section, no public official or public employee, as the case may be, and no family member, shall solicit or
accept any gift from any person.
B. Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the following exceptions which are mutually exclusive and independent of every other exception:
1. An award publicly presented in recognition of public service;
2. Commercially reasonable loans made in the ordinary course of the lender's business;
3. Complimentary copies of trade publications;
4. Holiday greeting cards;
5. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public;
6. Anything for which the public official or public employee or family member pays the fair market value;
7. Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate;
8. Educational materials;
9. A gift from a "relative", meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great
uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or
grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee;
10. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances,
the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not
because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
a. The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between
those individuals;
b. Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and
c. Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other
public officials or public employees or family members;
11. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that
are not connected to the official duties of a public official or public employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the
official position or employment of the public official or public employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances;
12. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts;
13. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death;
14. Reasonable hosting, and food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day, furnished
to the public official or public employee in connection with official village business, if furnished by the sponsor of the event relating to the official
village business and the hosting, and food or refreshments are consumed on the premises from which they were purchased, prepared, or catered.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this subsection, no public employee shall attend any event referred to herein unless and until the village
administrator determines that no permit or substantial issue regarding village regulations is outstanding and/or undetermined with respect to the host
and/or sponsor of such event, and the village administrator authorizes the public employee's attendance at the event. The burden is on the public
employee to request authorization from the village administrator to attend any event referred to herein; or
15. Any item or items from any one person during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
C. The foregoing regulations in this section are intended to be no less restrictive than the state gift ban act1 and represent the rules required to be adopted
thereby, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
D. If the state supreme court declares the state gift ban act2 unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 57/525
action by the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional by the state supreme court.
If the state supreme court declares part of the act3 unconstitutional, but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act or does not address the
remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, the part of this section
relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
E. Any mandatory amendment to the state gift ban act4 that becomes effective after the passage of the ordinance(s) from which this code of ethics is
derived shall be incorporated into this code of ethics by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall be incorporated into this code of ethics by reference only after formal
action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-6: SOLICITATION OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ADVICE OR ASSISTANCE:
No public official or employee, or any of their family members, shall solicit or accept any money or other thing of value, including, but not limited to, gifts,
favors, services or promises of future employment, in return for advice or assistance on matters concerning the operation, business of or any transaction
pending before the village; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prevent a public official or employee, or the spouse of a public official or
employee from accepting compensation for services wholly unrelated to the public official's or employee's village duties and responsibilities and rendered
as part of his nonvillage employment, occupation or profession. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-7: DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION:
No public official or employee, with respect to any transaction which is or which is reasonably expected to become the subject of an official act or action,
shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the village or use such
information to advance the interest of such public official or employee, or his family members. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-8: PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No public official or employee shall request or permit the use of village owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal use, convenience or
profit, except as allowed by administrative order of the village administrator. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-9: SPECIAL CONSIDERATION, TREATMENT OR ADVANTAGE OF OTHERS:
No public official or public employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any person or business entity beyond that which is
available to every other citizen. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-10: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall intentionally
use any property or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.
B. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
1. As part of that officer's or employee's duties,
2. As a condition of employment, or
3. During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
C. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being
awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any
prohibited political activity.
D. Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that
are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this section.
E. The foregoing regulations in this section are intended to be no less restrictive than section 5-15 of the state ethics act5 and represent the rules required
to be adopted thereby, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
F. If the state supreme court declares section 5-15 of the state ethics act6 unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date
that the supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without
further action by the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional by the state supreme court.
If the state supreme court declares part of the act7 unconstitutional, but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act or does not address the
remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, the part of this section
relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 58/525
G. Any mandatory amendment to section 5-15 of the state ethics act8 that becomes effective after the passage of the ordinance(s) from which this code of
ethics is derived shall be incorporated into this code of ethics by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts. However,
any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall be incorporated into this code of ethics by reference only after
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-11: WHISTLE BLOWER PROTECTION:
A. No public official, employee or agency shall discharge, threaten or otherwise discriminate against a complainant, or public official or employee acting on
behalf of a complainant, regarding compensation, terms, conditions, location or privileges of employment because:
1. The complainant, or public official or employee acting on behalf of the complainant, reports or is about to report, verbally or in writing, a violation or a
suspected violation of this code of ethics; or
2. A complainant, or public official or employee acting on behalf of the complainant, is requested to participate in an investigation, hearing or inquiry, or
any related court action.
B. This section shall not apply to a complainant, or public official or employee acting on behalf of a complainant, who knowingly makes a false report.
C. A court, in rendering judgment in an action brought pursuant to this section, shall order, as the court considers appropriate, reinstatement of the
complainant, public official or employee acting on behalf of the complainant, the payment of back wages, full reinstatement of fringe benefits and
seniority rights, actual damages or any combination of such remedies. A court may also award the complainant all or a portion of the costs of litigation,
including reasonable attorney fees and witness fees, if the court determines that the award is appropriate. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-12: DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST:
Any public official or employee who has, or whose family members have, an interest in a transaction which is the subject of an official act or action shall
disclose on the record of the board or commission which performs such official act or to the village administrator, in the case of public employees, the
nature and extent of such interest. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the village, any public official or employee to participate in any transaction
or do business with the village following such disclosure if it is otherwise prohibited by law. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-13: ANNUAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS:
All public officials and public employees shall file a statement of economic interests with the village clerk before entering upon the duties of office or
employment and annually thereafter at the same time that the public official or public employee is required to file a disclosure of economic interests with
the county clerk in conformance with the Illinois governmental ethics act, or at such time as may otherwise be established by the village clerk. (Ord. 09-04-
10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-14: INCOMPATIBLE EMPLOYMENT:
No public official or public employee, or family member of such public official or public employee, shall engage in private employment with, or render
services for, any private person who has business transactions with the village unless such public official shall first make full public disclosure of the nature
and extent of such employment or services. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-15: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
No public official or public employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction, disclose any confidential information
concerning any other public official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the village. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-16: POSTEMPLOYMENT RESTRICTIONS:
A. No former public official or public employee shall assist or represent any person other than himself or any family member in any judicial or
administrative proceeding against the interests of the village or any of its agencies for a period of one year after the termination of the public official's or
public employee's term of office or employment, if the public official or public employee was counsel of record or participated personally in the
proceeding during his term of office or employment.
B. No former public official or public employee, or paid consultant of the village shall, for a period of one year after the termination of the public official's
term of office, or of the employee's employment, or of the consultant's services, assist or represent any person, other than himself or any family
member, in appearing before any board or commission of the village, or doing business with the village or any of its departments, if the official,
employee or consultant participated personally in the subject matter of the transaction during his term of office or employment. Such public official,
employee or consultant may be released from the terms of this subsection after review of the relevant facts of his case by the village administrator on
the application of such former public official, former employee or consultant. The village administrator shall make a recommendation to the village
board as to whether or not the former public official, former employee or consultant shall be released from the terms of this subsection, and thereafter,
the village board shall render its decision, taking into consideration the recommendation of the village administrator. The decision of the village board
shall be final.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 59/525
C. No former elected public official of the village shall, for a period of two (2) years after the termination of the public official's term of office be eligible for
employment by the village of Antioch in any capacity except as a volunteer or paid on call firefighter. Such public official may be released from the
terms of this subsection after review of the relevant facts of his case by the village administrator on the application of such former public official. The
village administrator shall make a recommendation to the village board as to whether or not the former public official shall be released from the terms of
this subsection, and thereafter, the village board shall render its decision, taking into consideration the recommendation of the village administrator. The
decision of the village board shall be final. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-17: ACCOUNTING FOR BENEFITS OBTAINED IN VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
Any current or former public official or employee shall, upon demand of the village administrator, account for all benefits accruing to such public official or
employee as a result of any violation of this code of ethics. Any current or former public official or employee receiving any such benefits in violation of any
of this code of ethics shall return such benefits and, in addition to any other penalty provided in this code of ethics, shall be subject to a penalty equal to
two (2) times the amount of such benefits or the maximum amount permitted by law, whichever is less. If any such public official or employee refuses to
account for benefits received in violation of any of this code of ethics, the village attorney may seek an accounting in a court of equity. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-
20-2009)
1-11-18: ETHICS ADVISOR:
A. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the village trustees, shall designate an ethics advisor for the village. The duties of the ethics advisor may be
delegated to an officer or employee of the village unless the position has been created as an office by the village board.
B. The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and public employees of the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the
provisions of this code of ethics and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the village board.
(Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-19: COMPLAINTS:
All complaints for violations of this code of ethics shall be processed and adjudicated in the same manner as like crimes, offenses and ordinance
violations, as may be applicable. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-20: ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY WITHIN A TAX INCREMENT FINANCING DISTRICT:
A. The provisions of this section hereby specifically incorporate the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-4(n), as now or hereafter
amended, the same as though each were specifically set forth herein.
B. If the public official, employee or family member fails or refuses to disclose his interest in any real property within a TIF project area or otherwise
violates any of the provisions of this section, the public official or employee shall be subject to penalties and sanctions as otherwise provided under this
code of ethics or the village code, as may be applicable. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-21: FAILURE TO ATTEND MEETINGS; FINE:
A. In the event of there being less than a quorum at any regular meeting of the village board of trustees, the members of the corporate authorities present
may have served a summons on any absent members, such summons being served by any police officer of the village, and may demand the
immediate presence of such member at the meeting if he is able to attend. Any member who shall ignore such a notice, or who shall wilfully fail to
attend any regular or special meeting of the village board without good cause, may be fined an amount equal to one-twenty fourth (1/24) of such
officer's annual salary, on a majority vote of all of the trustees elected to office.
B. Any member of the corporate authorities who fails to attend eighteen (18) regular or special meetings of the village board during any fiscal year, without
good cause, may, after a due process hearing before the village board, be fined an amount equal to one-twenty fourth (1/24) of such officer's annual
salary on a majority vote of all of the trustees elected to office. Each subsequent unexcused absence after the seventh absence shall be considered a
separate and additional violation of this provision for which an additional fine may be assessed.
C. Participation in any regular or special meeting by electronic means shall not be considered an absence for the purposes of this section. (Ord. 09-04-10,
4-20-2009)
1-11-22: HIRING OF RELATIVES/NEPOTISM:
A. The employment of relatives in the same division or department of an organization may cause serious conflicts and problems with favoritism and
employee morale. In addition to claims of partiality in treatment at work, personal conflicts from outside the work environment can be carried into day to
day working relationships. The village is committed to monitoring situations in which family members work in the same division or department. In case
of actual or potential problems, the village will take prompt action. This can include reassignment or, if necessary, termination of employment for one or
both of the individuals involved.
B. An individual shall not occupy a position where he or she reports to or is supervised by his or her family member. This constitutes a "prohibited
employee relationship".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 60/525
C. Family members of elected or appointed village officials shall not become employed in any capacity with the village after the commencement of the
elected or appointed official's term. This provision is not intended to require any action to address an existing employment relationship which began
prior to an elected or appointed official first beginning to serve.
D. Family members of department directors and the village administrator shall not be employed in any capacity with the village.
E. The provisions of this policy shall not apply to any full time or regular part time employee of the village hired before the effective date of this revised
policy. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-23: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this code of ethics or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity does
not affect other provisions or applications of this code of ethics which can be given effect without the invalid application or provisions, and, to this end,
each such invalid provision or invalid application of this code of ethics is severable, unless otherwise provided by this code. It is hereby declared to be the
legislative intent of the village that this code of ethics would have been adopted had any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid provision or application
not been included. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
1-11-24: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. A person who is found guilty of intentionally violating any provision of section 1-11-10, "Prohibited Political Activities", of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class A misdemeanor.
B. A person who is found guilty of intentionally violating any provision of section 1-11-5, "Gift Ban", of this chapter shall be guilty of a business offense and
may be fined at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
C. Any person who is found guilty of intentionally making a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement
authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
D. A violation of section 1-11-5 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the village attorney.
E. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable hereunder, a public official who is found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any
provision of section 1-11-5 or 1-11-10 of this chapter, or subsection C of this section, after a due process hearing before the village board, may be
subject to discipline, or removal from office as otherwise may be authorized by law.
F. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable hereunder, a public employee who is found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating
any provision of section 1-11-5 or 1-11-10 of this chapter, or subsection C of this section may be subject to discipline and/or dismissal as may otherwise
be determined by the village administrator.
G. The penalties provided in subsections A through F of this section are not exclusive and are in addition to any other regulations relating to public official
or public employee sanctions or disciplinary procedures as may otherwise be authorized in the village code or Illinois municipal code for violation of this
code of ethics or analogous statutory provisions. (Ord. 09-04-10, 4-20-2009)
Chapter 12
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
1-12-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of Public Act 100-0554 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in this chapter), are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the
elected officials, officers and employees of the Village to the extent required by the Act. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-2: POLICY ADOPTED:
As required by the Act, the following policy provisions set forth in this chapter are hereby adopted, and are expressly applicable to all elected officials,
officers and employees of the Village. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-3: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under title
VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual
harassment is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy of the Village of Antioch to prohibit
harassment of any person by any Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or Municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 61/525
Municipal officials, Municipal agents, Municipal employees and Municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person,
regardless of any employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-4: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
This chapter adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
A. Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when:
1. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment,
2. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
3. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
B. Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes, but is not necessarily limited to:
1. Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
2. Non-Verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering, obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking" or
"kissing" noises.
3. Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature, viewing pornographic material or websites.
4. Physical: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
5. Textual/Electronic: "Sexting" (electronically sending messages with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some forms of sexual harassment
are subtler and depend, to some extent, on individual perception and interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person". The Village administration, in enforcing this chapter will utilize that same standard. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-5: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s) as
directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
However, persons wishing to make a report of sexual harassment and who are uncomfortable with reporting it within the ordinary chain of command may
(for this sole purpose) ignore the chain of command and make the report with any supervisory person described in this section, and may do so
anonymously. This provision is specifically intended to include, but is not limited to, instances where the alleged harasser holds a supervisory position over
the reporting person.
Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual harassment, including the following:
A. Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly express
her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
B. Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or intimidated
by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a Director of
Human Resources, an Ethics Officer, the Village Administrator, or the Mayor.
The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are
no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible officer, the Municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the
harassment.
C. Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this chapter is to establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every report
and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the Municipality. However, all Municipal employees have the right to contact the Illinois
Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A
complaint with the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days.
Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited to,
written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the Municipality.
However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the questions of
credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-
2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 62/525
1-12-6: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
A. No Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or Municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any Municipal
employee due to a Municipal employee's:
1. Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this chapter,
2. The provision of information related to or testimony before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of this
chapter, or
3. Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, retaliatory action means the reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or change in
the terms or conditions of employment of any Municipal employee that is taken in retaliation for a Municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this chapter.
C. No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will be protected
from retaliation.
D. Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act1 provides whistleblower protection from
retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
1. Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or other
State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
2. Provides information to or testifies before any public body conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law, rule, or
regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State employee, or
3. Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
E. Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act2, an employer may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative hearing,
or before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information
discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for disclosing
information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a violation
of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation3.
F. According to the Illinois Human Rights Act4, it is a civil rights violation for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire, to retaliate against a
person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she
has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
G. An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge - due within one hundred eighty (180) days (IDHR) or three hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-
11-2017)
1-12-7: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee
handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this chapter or the Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the
Municipality and any applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a
separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the Municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an Ethics Commission and any
fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a State or Federal agency. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-8: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to an
Ethics Commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a State's Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics Commission may levy an administrative fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who
intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-9: EXISTING ORDINANCES OR POLICIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 63/525
This chapter shall be deemed to supersede any and all existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of Village elected officials, officers or
employees, but only to the extent of the regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-10: FUTURE AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be
applicable to the regulated activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated
into this chapter by reference without formal action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village. (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-11: FUTURE ACTS DEEMED UNCONSTITUTIONAL:
A. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme
Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the Village if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
B. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address
the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this chapter
relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village. (Ord.
17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
1-12-12: PENALTY:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is specified shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 17-12-48, 12-11-2017)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
COMBINED PLANNING COMMISSION AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-1-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a planning and zoning board for the village, which shall essentially function as both the plan commission and the zoning board
of appeals, and may also be referred to as:
Planning and zoning board
Combined planning and zoning board
The PCZBA
Combined planning commission and zoning board of appeals
P and Z board
(1976 Code § 34.015)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP:
A. Number; Terms:
1. Appointment: The membership of the planning and zoning board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor, on the basis of their
particular fitness for their duty on the planning and zoning board, by and with the consent of the village board of trustees.
2. Terms: The members of the planning and zoning board shall serve respectively for the following terms or until their respective successors are
appointed and qualified:
2 members for 1 year
2 members for 2 years
2 members for 3 years
1 member for 4 years
Thereafter, each new member appointed pursuant to this section shall serve a three (3) year term. Terms of office shall commence May 1 and expire
on April 30 of the appropriate year.
3. Vacancies: All vacancies occurring during the year shall be filled as soon as practicable, and shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member
whose seat has become vacant, in the manner herein provided for and by the statutes of the state. The appointment of any new member shall be by
the mayor with the consent of the board of trustees. (1976 Code § 34.017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 64/525
B. Removal Of Members:
1. The mayor shall have the power to remove any member of the planning and zoning board for cause after written charges have been filed and after a
public hearing has been held, if such hearing is demanded by the member so charged. (1976 Code §§ 34.017, 150.017)
2. Any member missing three (3) consecutive meetings shall be reprimanded or dismissed from the planning and zoning board by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the village board of trustees after a public hearing as set forth herein. A new member shall hereafter be appointed as
prescribed in this section. (1976 Code § 150.017)
C. Organization: Immediately following their appointment, the members of the planning and zoning board shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may
deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter, rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with village ordinances and state
laws. (1976 Code § 34.025)
One of the members of the combined planning and zoning board shall be designated by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the village board of
trustees, as chair of the combined planning and zoning board, and shall hold that office for not more than a total of three (3) 3-year terms, and shall be
limited to no more than a total of three (3) consecutive terms of office (i.e., not to exceed 9 consecutive years) as chair. The chair shall appoint a clerk
for the board who shall make and keep a record of all its meetings and official acts. (1976 Code § 150.017)
D. Compensation: The members of the planning and zoning board shall be paid forty dollars ($40.00) per meeting attended. (1976 Code § 34.017)
2-1-3: MEETINGS AND HEARINGS:
The planning and zoning board shall adopt its rules of procedure not in conflict with this code, village resolutions and ordinances or Illinois statutes, and
may select or appoint such other officers as it deems necessary. The planning and zoning board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. (1976 Code § 150.017)
A. Meetings:
1. Regular: Meetings shall be regularly scheduled one weekday evening each month at a time and place as designated by the planning and zoning
board; and in addition, the planning and zoning board shall hold meetings at the call of the chair and at such other times as the planning and zoning
board or the corporate authorities may determine.
2. Cancellation And Adjournment: The combined planning and zoning board may, for cause, at any regularly scheduled monthly meeting or special
meeting, adjourn or cancel a future regularly scheduled monthly meeting or a special meeting by a favorable vote of a majority of the members
attending said regular or special meeting.
In the alternative, if it becomes apparent to the chair of the planning and zoning board that prior to any regular scheduled meeting or special meeting
that a quorum will not be present at said meeting or there are no petitions, motions, applications, etc., ready for a regularly scheduled meeting or
special meeting, the chair of the combined planning and zoning board may unilaterally cancel said future meeting by either a written notice to the
members or, if time does not permit, by telephone notice to the members.
B. Hearings:
1. All hearings required to be conducted by the board shall be open to the public. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing, either in person or
by duly authorized agent or attorney. All testimony shall be given under oath. The chair or vice chair, or his designee, shall administer oaths and may
compel the attendance of witnesses.
2. No hearing shall be held without a quorum of the planning and zoning board, consisting of a majority of the members, being present. (Ord. 99-10-22,
10-18-1999)
3. Any formerly absent member who certifies in writing that he has read the file on any pending proceedings and any written transcript thereof, may
vote upon any question presently before the board.
4. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the planning and zoning
board shall be immediately filed in the office of the village clerk and shall be a public record.
5. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the planning and zoning board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of an administrative official, or to decide in favor of an applicant regarding any matter upon which it is required to pass under this code
or to affect any variation or to recommend any variation or modification to the zoning ordinance or to make a text amendment pursuant to section 10-
15-4 of this code. (1976 Code § 150.017)
C. Records: The board shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection, and shall also file an annual
report with the mayor and village board of trustees, setting forth its transactions and recommendations. (1976 Code § 34.025)
2-1-4: JURISDICTIONS:
The combined planning and zoning board shall have jurisdiction as to planning as set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-4 through 5/11-12-12,
and section 2-1-5 of this chapter; and shall have jurisdiction sitting as the zoning board of appeals as set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1
through 5/11-13-20, 5/11-14-1 through 5/11-14-4, 5/11-15-1 and 5/11-15.1-1 through 5/11-15.1-5, and title 10 of this code. (1976 Code §§ 34.016, 34.018)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 65/525
A. Authority:
1. The planning and zoning board hereby created shall have the powers and duties designated by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-4 through 5/11-
12-12, and as more particularly specified in this section. These references relate to the planning portion of the combined plan commission and
zoning board of appeals.
2. In addition, as to the zoning powers and duties of the combined plan commission and zoning board of appeals, they are to be found in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 through 5/11-13-20, 5/11-15-1 and 5/11-15.1-1 through 5/11-15.1-5, and title 10 of this code. (1976 Code § 34.016)
B. General: The planning and zoning board shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees a comprehensive plan of public improvements, looking to the present and future
development and growth of the village. Such a plan, after its adoption by the village board of trustees, will be known as the official plan of Antioch
and shall include reasonable requirements in reference to streets, alleys and public grounds within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory
outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits, and not included in any municipality, said requirements to be
effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such plan.
2. To prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees from time to time, such changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed
necessary by the village board of trustees or by the plan commission.
3. To prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees from time to time, plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance
of the official plan.
4. To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of such improvements and generally promote the realization of the official plan.
5. To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
6. To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
7. To exercise such powers germane to the powers granted under authority of an act of the general assembly of the state of Illinois entitled the Illinois
municipal code1, as may be conferred by the village board of trustees.
C. Recommendations:
1. All recommendations and findings of the planning and zoning board shall be forwarded to the village board in a timely manner as dictated by the
appropriate procedural sections of the zoning ordinance and subdivision code and this chapter. Such recommendations are advisory only and are not
binding upon the corporate authorities.
2. The planning and zoning board shall submit such recommendation in writing to the mayor and village board within fifteen (15) days of public meeting
where such recommendation is required. The village clerk shall keep written records of the board's proceedings, which shall be available at the
village hall for public inspection during ordinary business hours. (1976 Code § 34.026)
D. Land Subdivisions: Following the adoption of an official plan in the manner as herein prescribed, no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record,
affecting land within the corporate limits of the village or in contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from
such limits and not included in any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for streets,
alleys and public grounds in conformity with any requirements applicable thereto of such official plan. (1976 Code § 34.027)
E. Improvements: The village clerk shall furnish the plan commission for its consideration a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature. The plan commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report necessary or advisable for the consideration of the
village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 34.028)
2-1-6: EXPENDITURES:
The planning and zoning board may, at the discretion of the village board of trustees, employ necessary help whose salaries, wages and other necessary
expenses shall be provided for by adequate appropriation made by the village board of trustees from the public funds. If said plan commission shall deem
it advisable to secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the village board of trustees and appropriations by the village board
of trustees therefor. (1976 Code § 34.024)
Chapter 2
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
2-2-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby established the board of local improvements for the village, which shall consist of the mayor and all the members of the village board of
trustees. (1976 Code § 34.001)
2-2-2: DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 66/525
The board of local improvements shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it by statute or ordinance1. (1976 Code § 34.002)
Chapter 3
PARK COMMISSION
2-3-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
In order that adequate provisions may be made for the acquisition, maintenance and use of parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities in the village, a
park commission, a department of the village government, is hereby established. (1976 Code § 34.005)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP:
A. Appointment: The park commission shall consist of seven (7) members, including a chair. Additionally, there shall be two (2) alternate members. The
chair, members and alternates shall be appointed by the mayor on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the park commission, subject to
the approval of the village board of trustees.
B. Residency Requirements: The members shall reside within the corporate limits of the village or within territory contiguous to the village and not more
than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included within any other municipality.
C. Organization: The members of the park commission shall appoint a secretary from their members or may appoint a secretary to assist them, with the
secretary's compensation to be established as set forth on the schedule maintained by the administrator. This appointment shall be by a majority vote
of the park commission.
D. Term Of Office: Each member of the commission shall serve for a period of five (5) years, or until their successors are appointed and have qualified;
provided that the members of the commission first appointed, shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member shall expire annually
thereafter. If a vacancy occurs in the office of any commission member, the mayor shall appoint a successor, with the approval of the village board of
trustees, to serve for the unexpired term. Alternates shall also serve for five (5) year terms, staggered by initially appointing one alternate to a three (3)
year term and the other to a full five (5) year term and all appointments being for five (5) year terms thereafter.
E. Compensation: Members shall receive compensation at the rate established in the schedule maintained by the administrator. (Ord. 14-08-19, 8-18-
2014)
2-3-3: PROCEDURES:
A. Organization: Immediately following their appointment, the members of the park commission shall meet, organize, elect a secretary and adopt, and later
change or alter, rules and regulations of organization and procedures consistent with village ordinances and state laws.
B. Records And Reporting: The commission shall keep written records of these proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The
commission shall also file an annual report with the mayor and village board of trustees, setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
C. Alternates: Alternate members shall have the right to attend all meetings and functions of the park commission. They may speak in turn at all meetings
in the same manner as a regular board member. In the event one of the regular members should not attend a scheduled meeting, the first alternate
appearing for the meeting shall be entitled to vote and participate in the same fashion, and to the same effect as a regular board member. If a second
regular member should not appear, then his or her seat shall be filled by the second alternate to appear at the meeting, with similar powers and effect.
D. Late Arrivals: In the event a member shall not be able to attend a meeting, he or she is required to inform the parks director as soon as possible. If the
meeting must start in his or her absence following such notice, an alternate member shall take his or her place, and once the regular member arrives,
the alternate shall sit through the then pending discussion, vote on that topic, then cede the seat to the regular member. If the regular member fails to
notify the parks director, then he or she shall not be entitled to participate in the meeting and shall not receive compensation therefor. (Ord. 14-08-19,
8-18-2014)
2-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Budget: Prior to March 15 of each year, the park commission shall submit to the village board of trustees a budget for the following fiscal year showing
expected revenues and expenditures, and recommending an appropriation by the village board of trustees for park purposes.
B. Expenditures: Upon majority vote of its members, the park commission is authorized to expend funds without prior approval of the village board of
trustees; provided, that the expenditures are within the budget of the park commission as finally approved by the village board, and further provided,
that no single expenditure in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be made without having first obtained approval of the village
board of trustees.
C. Employees: Upon majority vote of its members, the park commission is authorized to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 67/525
1. Hire employees, subject to the approval of the village board of trustees within thirty (30) days after the date that any employee commences his
employment.
2. Suspend any employee without pay for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days without prior approval of the village board of trustees. Should the park
commission desire to fire any employee, a recommendation shall be made to the village board of trustees, and the action taken thereon by the
village board of trustees shall be final. (1976 Code § 34.009)
D. Purchase Property: The park commission shall not make any expenditure, either directly or indirectly, for the purchase of any real estate within the
village or contiguous to the village limits. The purchase of any real estate shall lie within the sole discretion of the village board of trustees. (1976 Code
§ 34.010)
Chapter 4
REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-4-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
A. Membership; Duration: The village redevelopment commission is hereby established to consist of not less than seven (7) regular members and seven
(7) alternate members. Membership and the duration of the commission shall be determined by the mayor and village board of trustees. (1976 Code
§§ 34.040, 34.041, 34.045)
B. Rules Of Operation: The redevelopment commission shall promulgate rules and regulations relative to its operation, its compensation, if any, and any
other rules and regulations necessary and proper for the administration of the commission. (1976 Code § 34.045)
C. Meetings: Meetings, places, dates and times shall be determined by the redevelopment commission, with special meetings being called at the regular
meetings or by notice posted at the village hall twenty four (24) hours before any special meeting called by the chair of the commission. (1976 Code
§ 34.042)
2-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the redevelopment commission is advisory in nature and as such all acts of the commission, other than administerial acts, shall be by
approval of the mayor and village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 34.044)
2-4-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Redevelopment Projects: The redevelopment commission shall be charged with the function of determining a redevelopment project area and working
closely with the village engineer, village planners and the village board towards completion of a redevelopment project. (1976 Code § 34.043)
B. Activities: The redevelopment commission shall take no final action relative to the expenditure of money, the condemnation of property, the selection of
a developer, the purchasing of property or any other actions necessary toward the implementation of a development project without the prior approval
of the village board. (1976 Code § 34.044)
Chapter 5
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-5-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
A. Election To Establish: At the municipal election held on April 4, 1989, the voters of the village approved the adoption of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/10-2.1-1 et seq., for the appointment of a board of fire and police commissioners. Since that time, the village's population has grown beyond the
threshold set forth in the said statute, and the establishment of the board is required by the statute.
B. Oath, Bond And Compensation: Each member of the village board of fire and police commissioners shall take oath or affirmation and give bond in the
same manner as other appointed officers of the village. Members shall receive compensation for time spent in fulfilling their duties in amounts to be
determined by the village board of trustees from time to time.
C. Secretary Of The Board: If the board of fire and police commissioners appoints a secretary to assist them, the rate of compensation shall be established
by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 09-08-22, 8-17-2009)
2-5-2: REPORTS AND BUDGET:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall annually submit to the mayor a report of its activities, said report to be filed no later than the end of the
village's fiscal year. The board of fire and police commissioners shall, at a time established by the village administrator, submit a budget request for the
upcoming fiscal year, subject to final approval of the village board. (Ord. 09-08-22, 8-17-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 68/525
2-5-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. General: The powers and procedures of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be as set forth in state law1. Those powers shall be expressly
limited to the matters set forth in that statute, and the village board of trustees reserves all other authority to itself. Likewise, the board of fire and police
commissioners shall have the authority as set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-5 to establish rules governing only the conduct of
examinations for original appointments, for promotions and to the conduct of hearings on charges brought against a full time employee of the police or
fire department, the village board of trustees having exercised its discretion not to delegate other authority to the board of fire and police
commissioners. Any such delegation of authority by the village board of trustees in the future shall be effective only if set forth by resolution approved
by majority vote.
B. Police And Fire Department Appointments:
1. Order And Rank: The village board of trustees shall establish for the board of fire and police commissioners the order of rank and classification in the
fire department and police department. By statute, the board of fire and police commissioners has authority over full time positions in these
departments. The order of rank and classification in the fire and police departments shall be as set forth elsewhere in this code.
C. Probationary Periods: The length of applicable probationary periods shall be as established by the police department and fire department, respectively,
including rules and procedures pertaining to such periods. (Ord. 09-08-22, 8-17-2009)
Chapter 6
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-6-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
A. Purpose: There is hereby established a citizens commission which shall be known as the Antioch economic development commission. The purpose of
the commission is to promote sound economic development programs by conducting research, inventorying of resources and preparation of industrial,
commercial, retail and business profiles to be used as presentations to prospective persons, partnerships, corporations or other legal entities who are
considering expansion or location into the Antioch area. The commission shall make its findings and recommendations to the mayor and village board
of trustees in the manner prescribed herein. (1976 Code § 34.070)
B. Advisory Body: The commission is an advisory board only and will make no statement, claim, contract or pledges, either orally or in writing, that would
in any way bind the village, its agents, employees, contractors, trustees, mayor, successors or assigns without the prior formal approval of the village
board of trustees. (1976 Code § 34.076)
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
A. Membership: The membership of the economic development commission shall be composed of from nine (9) to thirteen (13) voting members, one of
which shall be appointed chair by the mayor, and one nonvoting member who shall be the community development director. The membership shall
consist of residents of the village as well as nonresident individuals who represent organizations and businesses located in the village. The
appointments to this commission shall be made by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 34.071)
B. Terms Of Office:
1. The terms of office for this commission shall be for periods of three (3) years. Members appointed at the onset shall be for the following terms:
5 members for a three (3) year term
4 members for a two (2) year term
4 members for a one year term
2. Successors are to be appointed for three (3) year terms. In addition to the nine (9) to thirteen (13) appointed voting members (including the chair)
and the community development director (nonvoting member of the commission), the mayor, one village trustee and the chair of the planning and
zoning board shall serve as ex officio members of the commission. (1976 Code § 34.072)
2-6-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following general powers, duties and functions:
A. Implement Plans: To adopt and amend bylaws and regulations necessary for the commission to implement a plan.
B. Promote Economic Development: To promote economic development with activities, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Developing and implementing a business retention/expansion program.
2. Developing and implementing a marketing program to attract new business and industry, and to market present business and industry.
3. Monitoring business activity and trends on the local, state and national levels.
4. Establishing a focal point for businesses to approach and discuss issues that affect them.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 69/525
5. Assisting businesses through mechanisms such as seminars and university programs.
6. Advising the mayor, village board of trustees and relevant boards and commissions on matters relating to economic development.
7. Annually, but not later than the beginning of the fiscal year, submit to the village board for approval a statement of its goals and objectives and
procedures for accomplishing them. (1976 Code § 34.073)
C. Special Provisions And Amendments: As the commission deems appropriate, special provisions and amendments to the ordinances can be submitted
to the village board of trustees for approval. (1976 Code § 34.075)
2-6-4: FUNDS:
The economic development commission is prohibited from pledging or expending municipal funds other than those appropriated and approved by the
mayor and the village board of trustees. The economic development commission may request from the village board of trustees such funds as needed and
handle such financial responsibilities as outlined below:
A. At least sixty (60) days prior to May 1 of each year, the commission shall submit its annual budget showing administrative and other expenses
anticipated for the following fiscal year.
B. In the alternative, should the commission require nonbudgeted appropriations during the fiscal year, they may come directly to the village authorities for
expenditure of funds on a need basis.
C. All funds budgeted and appropriated for the committee shall be paid through the village treasurer upon properly submitted invoices. (1976 Code
§ 34.074)
Chapter 7
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
2-7-1: COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP:
A. Membership: There is created a commission to be known as the electrical commission of the village, which shall consist of six (6) members as follows:
the superintendent of electricity or the chief electrical inspector of the village shall be member and ex officio chair of the commission; of the other five
(5) members, one shall be a registered professional engineer, one an electrical contractor, one a journeyman electrician, one a representative of an
inspection bureau maintained by the fire underwriters, if such a representative resides in the village and if no such representative resides in the village
then the chief of the fire department, and one representative of an electricity supply company. If there is not a person residing in the village who is
qualified under any one of those descriptions, the mayor may appoint some other person to fill that position. All members of the electrical commission
shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the village board of trustees.
B. Compensation: The electrical inspector and fire protection representative shall serve without additional compensation and all other members of the
commission shall receive such compensation as may be provided. (1976 Code § 34.080)
2-7-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The electrical commission shall recommend sage and practical standards and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment
designed to meet the necessities and conditions of the particular locality, reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits by the
electrical inspection department, and reasonable fees to be paid for the inspection by the inspection department of all electrical equipment installed or
altered within the village. The standards, specifications, rules, regulations and fees so recommended shall not become effective until adopted by ordinance
by the village board of trustees. All fees so adopted shall be paid into the village treasury. (1976 Code § 34.081)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 8
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-1: POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
A. Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of significant size and destructiveness resulting from fire, flood, earthquake, or other natural or
manmade causes, and in order to ensure that this village will be prepared to and will adequately deal with any such disasters, preserve the lives and
the property of the people of this village and protect the public peace, health, and safety in the event of such a disaster; it is found and declared to be
necessary:
1. To create a village emergency management agency, as required by 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/10(c).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 70/525
2. To confer upon the village mayor the extraordinary power necessary to preserve the public health, peace and safety during and after a disaster.
3. To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency management
operations.
B. It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the village that all emergency management programs of this village be
coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of the federal, state, and county governments, including their various departments
and agencies, of other municipalities and localities, and private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be
made of manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-2: LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
A. Interfere with the course of conduct of a private labor dispute, except that actions otherwise authorized by this chapter or other laws may be taken when
necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health or safety;
B. Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but any communications facility or organization (including, but not limited to, radio and
television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested to transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or instructions
in connection with a disaster;
C. Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of any personnel therefor,
when on active duty; but state and local emergency operations plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance of functions related
to disaster emergencies;
D. Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the village mayor and the village board to exercise any other powers vested in them under the constitution,
statutes, or common law of this state, independent of or in conjunction with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the definitions hereinafter ascribed:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR: The person assigned as assistant to the emergency management director, with the duty of carrying out the requirements of this
chapter, in the absence of the director. The deputy director will complete, within the prescribed time, all training required by the Illinois emergency
management agency.
DIRECTOR: The person assigned as emergency management director with the duty of carrying out the requirements of this chapter. The director will
complete, within the prescribed time, all training required by the Illinois emergency management agency.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause,
including, but not limited to: fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or leak, other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action. "Disaster" includes, but is not limited to, all occurrences and threats
thereof, which are contemplated by the concept of "emergency management operations".
DISASTER OPERATIONS: The functions created in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to be performed by the village in cooperation with other
political subdivisions to alleviate the effects of disaster.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of this village, its departments and other private and public organizations, to develop, plan, analyze, conduct,
provide, implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN: The written plan of this village describing the organization, mission, and functions of the government and supporting
services for responding to and recovering from disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The preparation for and carrying out of such functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be necessary
or proper to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, earthquake, or other manmade or
natural causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency aviation services, medical and health services,
rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken or
threatened areas, emergency assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and functions related to civilian
protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life or property.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Any county, city, village, or incorporated town or township, or other taxing body. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-4: ESTABLISHED; DIRECTOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 71/525
A. There is hereby created the Antioch emergency management agency (AEMA), a director of the Antioch emergency management agency, herein called
the "director", who shall be the head thereof, and a deputy director, herein called the "deputy director", who shall be the head thereof in the absence of
the "director". The director shall be a civilian of the village with the required professional expertise and shall be appointed by the village mayor. The
deputy director shall be a civilian of the village with the required professional expertise and shall be appointed by the village mayor. As conditions may
dictate, the village mayor may appoint a new Antioch emergency management agency director, with the advice and consent of the village board of
trustees.
B. The Antioch emergency management agency shall obtain, with village board approval, such technical, clerical, stenographic and other administrative
personnel, and may make such expenditures within their appropriation thereof as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of his/her duties.
C. The director, subject to appointment by the village mayor with approval of the village board, shall designate Antioch emergency management agency
members to assist in the performance of his/her duties.
D. The director, subject to the administrative direction of the village mayor, shall be the executive head of the Antioch emergency management agency,
and shall be responsible under the direction of the village mayor for carrying out the program for emergency management operations of this village.
The director shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency management operations within this village and shall maintain liaison, and
cooperate with the civil defense and emergency management agencies and organizations of Antioch, other counties and municipalities, and federal
and state government.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve by the director, the deputy director or any persons designated by the village mayor
shall be and act as director until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
E. The Antioch emergency management agency shall take an integral part in the development and revision of the local emergency operations plan.
F. In the development of the emergency operations plan, the Antioch emergency management agency shall interrelate with business, labor, industry,
agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations, and community leaders.
G. The Antioch emergency management agency shall:
1. Determine the requirements of Antioch for food, clothing and other necessities in the event of an emergency;
2. Develop an emergency operations plan that meets the standards promulgated by the Illinois emergency management agency;
3. Review and revise the local emergency operations plan every other year;
4. Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills in emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery;
5. Establish a register of government and private response resources available for use in a disaster;
6. Prepare, for issuance by the village mayor, ordinances, proclamations and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters;
7. Cooperate with the federal, state and county government and any public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this chapter and in
implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response, and recovery;
8. Initiate and coordinate planning for the establishment of an emergency operations center, and ensure the emergency operations center is maintained
and ready for use immediately when needed;
9. Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the implementation of this chapter.
H. The village mayor is authorized to designate space in a village building, or elsewhere, for the Antioch emergency management agency as its office and
as an emergency operation center. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-5: POWERS OF THE VILLAGE MAYOR:
A. The Antioch village mayor shall have the general direction and control of the Antioch emergency management agency, and shall be responsible for the
carrying out of the provisions of this chapter.
B. In performing the duties under this chapter, the village mayor is authorized to cooperate with state and federal governments and with other
municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to emergency management operations defined in this chapter.
C. In performing the duties under this chapter, the village mayor is further authorized:
1. To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and regulations of the local emergency operations plan to carry out the provisions of
this chapter within the limits of the authority conferred upon him.
2. To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the emergency management of this village which plan and program shall be
integrated into and with emergency plans of the county, state and federal governments and of other political subdivisions, and which plan and
program may include:
a. Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by disaster;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 72/525
b. Prompt and effective response to disaster;
c. Emergency relief;
d. Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
e. Recommendations for zoning, building and other land use controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures and other preventative
preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters and their impact;
f. Assistance to other local officials in designing local emergency operations plans;
g. Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate danger, damage or
loss from flood, conflagration or other disaster;
h. Organization of village manpower and chains of command;
i. Coordination of local emergency management activities;
j. Other necessary matters.
3. In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency management of this village, and out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to
procure and pre-position supplies, medicines, materials and equipment to institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all
other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency management organizations in advance of actual disaster to ensure the
furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster operations.
4. Out of the funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this village as may
be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the village for the emergency management phases of mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery,
and to plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof.
D. The village mayor is authorized to designate space in a village building, or elsewhere for the Antioch emergency management agency as its office(s).
E. The village mayor is authorized to designate space in a village building, or elsewhere for the Antioch emergency operation center. In addition, the
director, with approval shall be able to designate vehicle(s) or other space(s) to be used as a field operations post(s), if such emergency or disaster
dictates such designation. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-6: FINANCING:
A. It is the intent of the village board and declared to be the policy of the village that every effort shall be made to provide funds for disaster emergencies.
B. It is the village board's intent that the first recourse shall be to funds regularly appropriated to the agency. If the village mayor finds that the demands
placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are unreasonably great, and the governor has proclaimed the village a disaster, the village
mayor may make application for funds from the state disaster relief fund. If the monies from the fund are insufficient, and the village mayor finds that
other sources of money to cope with the disaster are not available or are insufficient, the village mayor may issue a call for an immediate session of the
village board for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the board may deem necessary to transfer and expend monies appropriated for other
purposes, to borrow monies from the United States government or other public or private sources. If less than a quorum of the members of the board is
capable of convening in session to enact such ordinances for the transfer, expenditure or loan of such monies, the village mayor is authorized to carry
out those decisions until such time as a quorum of the board can convene.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the village mayor's authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts, or payments in
aid of disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response or recovery.
D. The village mayor may, on recommendation of the village director, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the village in a position to
combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
E. In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the village director is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment,
or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or obligations, as authorized by 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes. However, if the mayor meets with the
board of trustees at this time he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-7: LOCAL DISASTERS:
A. A local disaster may be declared only by the village mayor or the successors as described in this chapter. When declared by the village mayor, any
disaster declaration shall not be continued for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the village board. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity, and shall be filed promptly with the village
clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 73/525
B. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local emergency operations
plans and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
C. During a local disaster, the village mayor may suspend the provisions of any village ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of village
business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any village agency, if strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation would in
any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency, as authorized by "the Illinois emergency management agency act",
provided that, if the village board meets at such time, the village mayor shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the body. (Ord.
04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-8: STATE EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state of
Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Antioch
emergency management agency to cooperate fully with the Illinois emergency management agency and with the governor in the exercise of emergency
powers as provided by law. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-9: TESTING OF WARNING DEVICES:
The testing of disaster warning devices including outdoor warning sirens shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
(Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-10: MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The director for emergency management operations may, in collaboration with other public agencies within his immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be
developed mutual aid arrangements with other political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic within this state for reciprocal disaster
response and recovery in case a disaster is too great to be dealt with unassisted. The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and until approved
by each of such political subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies of politic as are parties thereto, in the manner provided by law, and unless and until
filed with and approved in writing by the state director. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state and local emergency management operations
plan and program, and in the event of such a "disaster" as described in section 2-8-3 of this chapter, it shall be the duty of each local department for
emergency management operations to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-11: COMMUNICATIONS:
The Antioch emergency management agency shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster emergencies.
The agency shall consider the desirability of supplementing these communications resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or
network. In studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the agency shall evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof for
general village and local governmental purposes. The agency shall make recommendations to the village mayor or the village board as appropriate. (Ord.
04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-12: IMMUNITY:
Neither the village, the agency or any member thereof or any person acting at their direction, engaged in any emergency management operations or
disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter or any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter is liable
for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a result of such activity. This section does not, however, affect the right of any person to
receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this act, under the workers' compensation act or the workers' occupational diseases act, or
under any pension law, and this section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of congress.
(Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-13: PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS:
If such "disaster" as is described in section 2-8-3 of this chapter occurs in this village and the services of persons who are competent to practice any
profession, trade or occupation are required in this village to cope with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons licensed or
registered in this village to practice such profession, trade or occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are licensed
elsewhere to practice any such profession, trade or occupation may, if a member of another political subdivision rendering aid in this village pursuant to the
order of the head of that political subdivision and upon request of the village, or if otherwise requested so to do by the village mayor or the director of this
village, during the time the disaster condition continues, practice such profession, trade or occupation in this village without being licensed or registered in
this village. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 74/525
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-14: APPROPRIATIONS FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS:
The village board may make an appropriations for emergency management operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the
ordinary expenses of such political subdivision. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-15: AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS:
Whenever the federal, state or local governments or any agency or officer thereof, or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the village
services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency management, the village, acting through the village
mayor or through the village board, may accept such offer and upon such acceptance to the village mayor or the village board may authorize any officer of
the village to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the village. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-16: ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The village mayor or the village board shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and any amendment thereof made by him pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter in the office of the village clerk. No such rule, regulation or order, or any amendment upon the declaration of such a disaster
emergency by the village mayor as is described in section 2-8-7 of this chapter, the provision relating to the effective date of any rule, regulation, order
or amendment issued pursuant to this chapter and during the state of such disaster emergency, is abrogated, and said rule, regulation, order or
amendment shall become effective immediately upon being filed with the village clerk, accompanied by a certificate stating the reason for the
emergency.
B. The Antioch emergency management agency established pursuant to this chapter, and the director thereof, shall execute and enforce such orders,
rules and regulations as may be made by the governor under authority of the Illinois emergency management act. The Antioch emergency
management agency shall have available for inspection at its office all orders, rules and regulations made by the governor, or under this authority. The
Illinois emergency management agency shall furnish such orders, rules and regulations to the agency. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-17: UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES AND PERSONNEL:
In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the village mayor and the director of the emergency management agency are directed to utilize the services,
equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the village to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers and
personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed, upon request, to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
director and the emergency management agency. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-18: NO PRIVATE LIABILITY:
A. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or otherwise
permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual or
impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for
negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under license, privilege or other permission, or for
negligently causing loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
B. Any private person, firm, or corporation and employees and agents of such person, firm or corporation in the performance of a contract with, and under
direction of, the village under the provisions of this chapter, shall not be civilly liable for causing death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any
property except in the event of wilful misconduct.
C. Any private person, firm, or corporation, and any employee or agent of such person, firm or corporation, who renders assistance or advice at the
request of the village, shall not be civilly liable for causing the death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property except in the event of wilful
misconduct. The immunities provided in this subsection C shall not apply to any private person, firm, corporation, or to any employee or agent of such
person, firm, corporation whose act or omission caused in whole or in part such actual or impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable
therefor. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-19: SUCCESSION:
In the event of the death, absence from Antioch or other disability of the village mayor preventing him from acting under this chapter or for any other village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 75/525
purpose, and until the office is filled in the manner prescribed by law, the following village officials shall succeed to the duties and responsibilities of the
village mayor outlined in sections 2-8-5, 2-8-6 and 2-8-7 of this chapter:
A. Senior trustee of the village board.
B. AEMA director.
C. Chief of police.
D. Chief of fire. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-20: COMPENSATION:
The village board by its annual appropriations ordinance, may provide for the payment of the salary of the director and such other staff and personnel, as
may be expressly provided for in this chapter. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any member of the agency from receiving compensation from the
state of Illinois emergency management agency under any provisions of that agency. Members of the Antioch emergency management agency who are
paid employees or officers of the village, shall receive for the time spent the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held. Members who are not
village employees or officers shall receive compensation as may be established by the village mayor.
The village treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the emergency management agency as prescribed by the state director of the Illinois emergency management agency, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the village in response to a call by the government or state director of
the Illinois emergency management agency, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to the emergency management
agency activities as provided by law. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-21: OATH REQUIRED:
Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity with the Antioch emergency management agency,
shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before the director of the Antioch emergency management agency or before a person
authorized to take oaths in this village, which oath shall be filed with the director of the Antioch emergency management agency, and which oath shall be
as delineated in 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/20.
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Antioch emergency management agency organization shall, before entering upon his duties,
subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the director:
I , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the
Antioch Emergency Management Agency organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-22: AGENCY MEMBERS:
There shall be not less than six (6) members of the Antioch emergency management agency to assist the Antioch emergency management agency
director in the performance of his duties. Said members shall be appointed by the village mayor upon recommendation of the director. The director shall
designate his deputy director. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-23: TAX FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER OPERATIONS:
The board of trustees may annually appropriate and levy, for "emergency services" and "disaster operations" as defined in this chapter and the Illinois
emergency management act, a tax not to exceed 0.05 percent of the full fare cash value, as equalized or assessed by the department of revenue, of all of
the taxable property in the village for the current year. However, the amount collectable under a levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per
capita. The annual tax shall be in addition to the amount authorized to be levied for general corporate purposes. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-24: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 76/525
A. All or any member of the Antioch emergency management agency may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the director of
the Illinois emergency management agency as provided by law.
B. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the director of the Antioch emergency management agency.
C. Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director, shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-03-08 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Go to new ordinance.
2-8-25: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect such other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 04-09-34, 9-7-2004)
Chapter 9
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
2-9-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
A. Membership; Duration: The village environmental commission is hereby established to consist of five (5) regular members. The members, including one
specifically designated to serve as chairperson, and two (2) alternates shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the village board to
staggered terms. Each March, the members of the commission shall submit a suggestion to the mayor for the person they believe would be the best
choice for chairperson of the commission and the mayor shall give due weight to their suggestion for nomination. Initially, two (2) members and a
chairperson shall be appointed to two (2) year terms, and two (2) members shall be appointed to four (4) year terms. All subsequent appointments shall
be for four (4) year terms unless the appointment is to fill an existing vacancy to complete an unexpired term. Each term shall commence on May 1 of
the year of appointment and shall expire on April 30 of the last year of the term.
B. Rules Of Operation: The chairperson shall preside at all meetings unless absent, in which case, a temporary chair of the meeting shall be designated by
motion of the members present. A quorum shall consist of at least three (3) members and no action shall be taken except in the presence of a quorum.
Alternate members shall have the right to attend all meetings and functions of the environmental commission. They may speak in turn at all meetings in
the same manner as a regular member. In the event one of the regular members should not attend a scheduled meeting, the first alternate appearing
for the meeting shall be entitled to vote and participate in the same fashion, and to the same effect as a regular member. If a second regular member
should not appear, then his or her seat shall be filled by the second alternate to appear at the meeting, with similar powers and effect.
In the event a member shall not be able to attend a meeting or will be arriving late, he or she is required to inform the commission chairperson as soon
as possible. If the meeting must start in his or her absence, an alternate member shall take his or her place and receive compensation in place of the
late arriving member.
The village clerk shall serve as the clerk of the commission, and shall appoint such person(s) as the clerk may deem appropriate to fulfill the duties of
secretary of the commission charged with attending the meetings, taking the minutes and returning the same to the clerk for maintenance of all official
meeting minutes and records with the other official records of the village. The commission shall further promulgate such other rules and regulations
relative to its operation and any other rules and regulations that it deems necessary and proper for the administration of its assigned tasks and
responsibilities so long as the same are consistent with the provisions of this chapter, and it shall timely present such rules and regulations to the
village board for its ultimate approval prior to implementation.
C. Meetings: Meetings, places, dates and times shall be at times and places convenient to the public as determined by the commission, and a schedule of
such meeting shall be posted at village hall and on the village's website. Special meetings may be called at the regular meetings or may be called by
the chair of the commission with written notice posted at the village hall and on the village website not less than forty eight (48) hours before any
special meeting. While an advisory board is not technically required to meet the requirements of the Illinois open meetings act1, the commission shall
make every effort to comply with the provisions thereof and all of its meetings shall be open and accessible to the public.
D. Compensation: The members of the environmental commission (or alternates as described in subsection B of this section) shall be paid twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per meeting attended. The secretary shall receive forty dollars ($40.00) per meeting attended. (Ord. 15-12-22, 12-21-2015)
2-9-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the environmental commission is advisory in nature and as such, all acts of the commission, other than its internal administerial acts, shall
be by action of the mayor and village board of trustees. The primary focus of the commission's activities shall be to research, investigate, consider, report
on and assist the village board in taking actions or adopting ordinances and policies which foster environmentally sound activities, whether in the area of
conservation or improvement of the greater Antioch environment. (Ord. 10-11-27, 11-1-2010)
2-9-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 77/525
A. Projects: The commission shall be charged with the following specific tasks, and it is encouraged to take these tasks and expand them as necessary or
appropriate to provide sound guidance to the village board on environmental issues:
1. Identify areas in need of environmental action;
2. Recommend courses of action to be taken to improve or preserve the local environment;
3. Research and recommend courses of action to save tax dollars through conservation and reduction of energy usage by the public body;
4. Recommend action that will enhance the natural beauty of Antioch or restore areas which have become degraded over time or through manmade
forces;
5. Recommend methods of providing educational opportunities and information to local citizens on environmental topics and conservation;
6. Suggest that the village board consider any grants or other funding opportunities for environmental projects that the commission may learn of,
detailing any positive and negative aspects of applying for or accepting any such funds that it may have knowledge of. It shall not, however, be the
responsibility of the commission to actively seek grants or to serve as a grant writing body.
B. Activities: The commission shall take no final action relative to the expenditure of money, the hiring of personnel, the condemnation of property, the
purchasing of property or any other actions necessary toward the implementation of an environmental project unless specifically directed to do so by
formal act of the village board. The commission shall coordinate and work with such volunteers that may be interested to work on such projects and
activities that the village board shall approve, provided that any such activities shall be coordinated with the village administrator to ensure that all
necessary or desirable equipment and safety protocols are in place. (Ord. 10-11-27, 11-1-2010)
Title 3
MUNICIPAL TAXES AND REVENUES
Chapter 1
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION AND USE TAXES
3-1-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code1. (1976 Code § 115.001)
B. Report Filed: Every person engaged in such business in the village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the Illinois
department of revenue required by section 3 of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property
to purchasers for use or consumption", approved June 28, 1933, as amended2. (1976 Code § 115.002)
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue the amount of tax imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (1976 Code § 115.003)
3-1-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in this village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by these servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate
as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal code3. (1976 Code § 115.005)
B. Report Filed: Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of this village shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the Illinois department of revenue required by section 9 of the service occupation tax act, approved
July 10, 1961, as amended4. (1976 Code § 115.006)
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue the amount of tax imposed. (1976 Code
§ 115.007)
3-1-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on the privilege of using in the village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside of the state of
Illinois, at retail, from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of the state of Illinois. (1976 Code § 115.010)
B. Rate Of Tax: The tax imposed herein shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of the tangible personal property, as selling price is
defined in the Illinois use tax act, approved July 14, 1955, as amended.5. (1976 Code § 115.011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 78/525
C. Payment Of Tax: The tax imposed herein shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue on behalf of the village, and shall be paid before the
title or certificate of registration is issued for such personal property. (1976 Code § 115.012)
3-1-4: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this village, at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the gross receipts from the rentals made in the course of the business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-8-7. (1976 Code § 115.020)
B. Report Filed: Every person engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the
report to the state department of revenue required by sections two and three of "an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property to purchasers for use or consumption", approved June 29, 1933, as amended6. (1976 Code § 115.021)
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time the report referred to in subsection B of this section is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the
amount of tax imposed by subsection A of this section on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (1976 Code § 115.022)
3-1-5: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside the state and which
is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of the automobile while
this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-8. (1976 Code § 115.030)
B. Collection Of Tax: The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is
given as being in this village. (1976 Code § 115.031)
C. Payment Of Tax: The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois department of revenue. (1976 Code § 115.032)
3-1-6: HOTEL AND MOTEL USE TAX:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for rent, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
HOTEL ROOM: A room within a structure offered for rental on a daily basis and containing facilities for sleeping.
MOTEL: See definition of Hotel.
MOTEL ROOM: See definition of Hotel Room.
OWNER: Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation of a hotel or motel, or receiving the consideration for the rental of
such hotel or motel room.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupies or has rented any hotel or motel room for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
RESIDENT EMPLOYEE: Any person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel. (1976 Code § 115.040)
B. Tax Imposed; Payment And Collection:
1. Tax Imposed; Exemptions: A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting, leasing or letting a hotel or motel room within
the village, at a rate of five percent (5%) of the room rental rate (not including taxes or other nonroom rental charges added to the hotel or motel bill)
for each hotel or motel room rented for every twenty four (24) hour period or any fraction thereof. The tax hereby imposed shall not apply to
permanent residents or resident employees. (1976 Code §§ 115.041, 115.044)
2. Incidence Of Tax: The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is to be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying the
hotel or motel room, such person hereinafter referred to as rentor.
3. Payment Of Tax: The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner of every hotel
or motel to secure the tax from the rentor of the hotel or motel room and to pay the tax over to the village treasurer under the procedures prescribed
by the village treasurer, or as otherwise provided in this section.
4. Collection: Every person required to collect the tax levied by this section shall secure the tax from the rentor at the time he collects the rental
payment for the hotel or motel room. The amount due under the tax provided in this section shall be stated separately upon the invoice, receipt or
other statement or memorandum given to the rentor at the time of payment. (1976 Code § 115.041)
C. Books And Records; Inspections; Contents:
1. The village treasurer, or any person certified by him as his deputy or representative, may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection of
books and records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this section and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 79/525
2. No person shall prevent, hinder or interfere with the village treasurer or his duly authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of his duties
under this section.
3. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records, to which the village treasurer or his duly authorized deputy or
representative shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
a. The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty four (24) hour period, including multiple rental of the same hotel or motel room where
such shall occur; and
b. The actual hotel or motel receipts collected for the date in question. (1976 Code § 115.042)
D. Filing Reports, Payments:
1. Quarterly Reporting:
a. The owner or owners of each hotel or motel room within the village shall file quarterly tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect to
each hotel or motel room during each three (3) month quarterly reporting period. The beginning date for the reporting quarters shall be the January
1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year. The returns shall be due on or before the fifteenth day of the calendar month next following the end of
the quarterly filing period. All returns shall be for full calendar quarters as provided herein.
b. In addition, the owner of each hotel or motel within the village that has collected ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more of the tax herein
imposed and levied during its fiscal year shall provide the village treasurer with a statement from an independent auditor within ninety (90) days
following the end of such hotel's or motel's fiscal year, showing the amount of this tax which was due, collected and paid to the village during the
fiscal year.
2. Transmittal Of Tax: The tax shall be due on the day the quarterly return is due as provided herein. At the time of filing such returns, the owner shall
pay to the village treasurer all taxes, interest and penalties, if any, due for the period to which the return applies; provided, however, the
establishment making the quarterly return may retain an amount of money equal to three percent (3%) of the tax due as compensation for services
rendered in the collection and payment of such tax.
3. Delinquency: Any owner who for the preceding quarterly period has failed to file a proper return or to pay the proper amount of tax to the village
treasurer, may be required by the village treasurer, in his discretion, to file subsequent returns and pay the tax herein imposed on a monthly basis, in
which case payments of the tax shall be made to the village treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the month next following the month for which
the tax was due.
E. Confidentiality Of Information: Except as provided in this section, all information received by the village clerk from returns filed under this section, or
from any investigation conducted under the provisions of this section, shall be confidential, except for official purposes with the accounts and finances
department or pursuant to official procedures for collection of any state tax or enforcement of any civil or criminal penalty or sanction imposed by this
section. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the village clerk from publishing or making available to the public the names and addresses of
persons filing returns under this section and the number of rooms covered in the return, or from publishing or making available reasonable statistics
concerning the operation of the tax wherein the contents of returns are grouped into aggregates in such a way that the information contained in any
individual return shall not be disclosed. The village clerk may make available to the secretary of the treasury of the United States, or a proper official of
the state, or a delegate of any other state imposing a tax upon a motel or hotel room, for exclusively official purposes, information received by the
village clerk in the administration of this section. (1976 Code § 115.043)
F. Acts Of Agents Or Employees: Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this section, by any officer,
director, manager or other agent or employee of an owner, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such owner, and the owner shall be liable and
punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by the owner personally. (1976 Code § 115.045)
G. Penalties:
1. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty, at the rate of one percent (1%) per thirty (30) day period, or any portion thereof, shall be
added and collected. (1976 Code § 115.046)
2. Any owner or person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
punished, upon conviction thereof, as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. A separate and distinct offense shall he deemed
committed each day upon which the violation shall continue. (1976 Code § 115.046; amd. 2003 Code)
H. Disposition Of Tax Proceeds:
1. The amounts collected by the village pursuant to this section shall be expended by the village solely to tourism and conventions within the village, or
otherwise to nonresident overnight visitors to the village.
2. No funds received pursuant to this section shall be used to advertise for or otherwise promote new competition in the hotel business. (1976 Code
§ 115.047)
Chapter 2
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 80/525
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when
paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination point within this municipality and charges for the
portion of the interoffice channels provided within this municipality. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel connecting two (2) or more channel
termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of this municipality, shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying
an amount equal to the total charge for the interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that are
located within the jurisdictional boundary of the municipality and the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points connected by
the interoffice channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include any of the following:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this chapter, 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act, 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code, 4) 911 surcharges, or 5) charges added to
customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to
customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such municipality;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic opportunity;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this chapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunication devices; or
I. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
J. Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable, 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or invoice, and 3) the retailer can reasonable identify the nontaxable charges
on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross
charge from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services of telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable
services or telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a
receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created
by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to
the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a
permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in
this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The permit may be
revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this
state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 81/525
or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems,
and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act.
For air to ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer
exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of
mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, "private line" means a dedicated
nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels,
from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component
part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications. Carrier
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used
as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling
arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this section, "prepaid
telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupation tax act. (Ord. 09-11-34, 11-16-2009)
3-2-2: TAX IMPOSED:
Effective July 1, 2010, a tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
A. The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent
(6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multimunicipal taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that
event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and
paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax.
B. The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent
(6%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate or multimunicipal taxation of the
act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or
municipality in this state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the
amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in another municipality in this state which was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
C. The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes
of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality. (Ord. 09-11-34, 11-16-2009)
3-2-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
A. The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be remitted by
such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax collected by such retailer
and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer
by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed
by the department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at
law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be
required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department.
B. Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications. (Ord. 09-11-34, 11-16-2009)
3-2-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
On or before August 31, 2010, and on or before the last day of every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication retailers
shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax
act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the act. (Ord. 09-11-34, 11-16-
2009)
3-2-5: RESELLERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 82/525
A. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized
by this chapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require.
B. Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax free
when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales.
C. Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made tax free on the
ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in
connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 09-11-34, 11-16-2009)
Chapter 3
MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS TAX
3-3-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A. A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling natural gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
B. No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling natural gas, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section
for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by
section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
C. Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer as compensation for the
use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereupon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 09-11-35, 11-16-2009)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling natural gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as
the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however, that
"gross receipts" shall not include: a) any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois municipal
code and b) that portion of the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling natural gas to school districts or units of local
government within the corporate limits of the village.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other
representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 09-11-35, 11-16-2009)
3-3-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
A. On or before the last day of February 2010, each taxpayer shall make a return to the village treasurer for the month of January 2010, stating:
1. His name;
2. His principal place of business;
3. His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the village treasurer for a corresponding one month
period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village treasurer, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of
later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 83/525
B. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
C. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount. (Ord. 09-11-35, 11-16-2009)
3-3-4: ACCOUNT MAINTENANCE:
The village clerk is hereby directed to send copies of this chapter to all utility companies affected by this chapter and to provide to all utility companies
affected by this chapter the names and addresses of all owners of properties within the corporate limits of the village (which shall also include the names
and addresses of each school district and unit of local government which own facilities within the corporate limits of the village), and to keep the list so
provided as current as practicable. (Ord. 09-11-35, 11-16-2009)
3-3-5: PENALTIES:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in
addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due, together with all attorney fees and costs of collection thereof. (Ord. 09-11-35, 11-16-2009)
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL ELECTRICITY TAX
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
EXEMPT PURCHASER: A purchaser who has applied for and received a resale number for the resale of electricity from the village.
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of transmitting the messages without any deduction on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service costs or any other expenses.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation, facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business
or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or
qualified to do business in this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use
of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code1, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or
sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, other than an
exempt purchaser.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser. (Ord. 09-11-36, 11-17-2009; amd. Ord. 16-01-02, 1-18-2016)
3-4-2: TAX IMPOSED UPON THE CONSUMPTION OF ELECTRICITY:
A. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code2 and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates, calculated
on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
1. For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.610 cents per kilowatt hour;
2. For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.400 cents per kilowatt hour;
3. For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.360 cents per kilowatt hour;
4. For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.350 cents per kilowatt hour;
5. For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.340 cents per kilowatt hour;
6. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.320 cents per kilowatt hour;
7. For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.315 cents per kilowatt hour;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 84/525
8. For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.310 cents per kilowatt hour;
9. For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month: 00.305 cents per kilowatt hour; and
10. For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt hours in a month: 00.300 cents per kilowatt hour.
B. The tax imposed by this chapter is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state of Illinois or any other
political subdivision of the state.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate
the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 09-11-36, 11-17-2009)
3-4-3: TAX IN ADDITION TO OTHER PAYMENTS:
The tax authorized by this chapter shall be in addition to the payment of money or value of products or services furnished to this village by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes
or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 09-11-36, 11-17-2009)
3-4-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
A. The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this chapter and any
such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity provided
that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed a credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as
uncollectible and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person
delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to
the municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay
the tax directly to the municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this section
shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this chapter. In the event a purchaser shall make
only a partial payment of any bill supplied to him, her or it by the supplier, any such partial payment not specifically identified by the purchaser to be
applied to the tax imposed by this chapter shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.
B. On or before the last day of February 2010, each tax collector shall make a return to the village treasurer for the month of January 2010, stating:
1. His name;
2. His principal place of business;
3. His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each tax collector shall make a like return to the village treasurer for a corresponding one month
period.
The tax collector making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village treasurer, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the tax collector may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of
later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
C. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of fact
or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer or tax collector who
made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so
credited.
D. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount. (Ord. 09-11-36, 11-17-2009)
3-4-5: ACCOUNT MAINTENANCE:
The village clerk is hereby directed to send copies of this chapter to all utility companies affected by this chapter and to provide to all utility companies
affected by this chapter the names and addresses of all owners of properties subject to the tax within the corporate limits of the village, and to keep the list
so provided as current as practicable so that the collection of the taxes is accomplished fairly and equitably toward all property owners and taxpayers.
(Ord. 09-11-36, 11-17-2009)
3-4-6: PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 85/525
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in
addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due, together with all attorney fees and costs of collection thereof. (Ord. 09-11-36, 11-17-2009)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSING
4-1-1: TITLE; SCOPE:
This chapter shall be known as the general licensing chapter of the village and, unless otherwise specifically provided for, shall cover general licensing for
permits and licenses for all kinds of businesses and manufacturing endeavors. (1976 Code § 110.001)
4-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this chapter license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or
engaging in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or
partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts
to perform any part of such business or occupation in the village. (1976 Code § 110.003)
4-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Unless otherwise provided, applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made in writing to the village clerk in the absence of
provision to the contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time
covered and the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the village
officials in the issuing of the permit or license applied for. (1976 Code § 110.002; amd. 2003 Code)
4-1-4: FORMS AND SIGNATURES:
Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk, and each license or permit issued shall
bear the signatures of the mayor and the village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (1976 Code §§ 110.004, 110.005)
4-1-5: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances of the village necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the village clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within seven (7) days of the time of
such receipt. It shall be the duty of every person applying for such license to permit such examination or inspection to be made. The officer charged with
the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or
a copy thereof. The health officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection in regard to such licenses in the connection of the care and handling of
food and the preventing of nuisances and the spread of disease, for the protection of health; the building inspector shall make or cause to be made any
such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All other investigations except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the
chief of police or by some other officer designated by the mayor. (1976 Code § 110.006)
Within ten (10) days after receipt of a license application, the village clerk shall issue said license, or notify the applicant, in writing, that said application
has been denied and state the reason for denial. (1976 Code § 110.013)
4-1-6: FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance, in cash, cashier's or certified check, at the
time application therefor is made to the village clerk. Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a part of the general fund. Annual license
fees for the following listed businesses shall be as follows:
Business and manufacturing establishments:
With 4 or less employees $15.00
With 5 or more employees 25.00
Restaurants 25.00
Itinerant restaurants 25.00
(1976 Code § 110.007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 86/525
4-1-7: LICENSE TERMS:
A. All annual business licenses, including liquor licenses, vending machine licenses and video licenses, shall terminate on May 31 of each year and their
renewals shall commence on June 1 of each year. (Ord. 10-03-06, 3-15-2010)
B. The village clerk shall mail to all licensees of the village a statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual license,
three (3) weeks prior to the day of such expiration. However, a failure to send out such notice or failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse the
licensee from a failure to obtain a new license or a renewal therefor, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a license. (1976 Code
§ 110.008)
4-1-8: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Posting License: It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business at all times. For convenience and to better carry out this requirement, license tags, plates, cards or other evidence
may be provided by the village clerk to be carried by the persons licensed, or attached to the vehicle or other article or thing to be used in or about the
business so licensed. (1976 Code §§ 110.016, 116.007)
B. Building And Premises:
1. Building And Zoning Regulations: No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing or act, if the
premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the village. No such license or permit shall be issued
for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance of the village1. (1976 Code
§ 110.009)
2. Sanitary Conditions: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate or conduct any business or occupation for which a license may be
granted hereunder in an unsanitary condition or a condition detrimental to health. An unsanitary condition shall be deemed to exist when any drugs,
medicines, foods, beverages or any articles and things intended for or used for human consumption in the process of production, preparation,
storing, selling or distribution shall not be securely protected from dust, dirt, flies or other foreign substance or injurious contamination or if refuse, dirt
or waste are allowed to accumulate in or about the premises so licensed or measures, containers, utensils or apparatus of any kind or character
used in or about the business, so licensed, are not kept clean or if the clothing of operatives or employees in handling or conducting the business is
not clean. All businesses or occupations licensed hereunder shall be so conducted as not to be injurious to the health of the public or of the particular
individuals engaged in the business or affected thereby. (1976 Code § 116.005; amd. 2003 Code)
C. Change Of Location And Assignment: The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act may not be changed nor any license
issued hereunder be assigned without the prior approval of a majority of the members of the parks, license and civic activities committee of the village
board of trustees. (1976 Code § 110.010)
D. Compliance Required: Any failure on the part of any licensee to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the offender to having the
license revoked by the mayor. (1976 Code § 116.008)
E. Condition Of Merchandise:
1. Tainted, Etc., Prohibited: No person licensed hereunder shall sell, offer for sale or keep for sale any food, condiment, confection, beverage or any
article or thing intended for or used for human consumption which is unclean, unwholesome, tainted, putrid, decayed, adulterated, poisonous,
infected or in any other manner rendered unsafe and unwholesome for human consumption. For purposes of this chapter, any such article shall be
deemed unwholesome for human consumption if the same has been contaminated by flies or other insects, vermin, dust, dirt or other foreign
contamination, or if they contain any poisonous or adulterous or injurious ingredient in kind and quantity so as to render same injurious or detrimental
to health or if they contain in whole or in part any food product which has not been inspected or any food product which has not passed inspection.
(1976 Code § 116.010)
2. Merchandise Containing Drugs: No person shall expose for sale, sell or offer for sale to any person, directly or indirectly, any cigars, cigarettes or
tobacco containing opium, morphine or any other deleterious or poisonous drug or drugs and it shall be the duty of the persons licensed to sell
tobacco to furnish upon such inspection, samples of such products to be analyzed under the direction of the village. (1976 Code § 116.011)
4-1-9: INSPECTIONS:
A. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of
the village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
B. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee to give to any authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient samples of such
material or commodity for such analysis upon request. (1976 Code § 110.012)
4-1-10: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1976 Code § 110.011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 87/525
4-1-11: REVOCATION:
A. Revocation Authorized: Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the mayor at any time during the life of such license or permit for any
violation by the licensee or permittee of the ordinance provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the
premises occupied, by giving written notice to the licensee or permittee, or an agent, employee or partner thereof, stating the reason for said revocation
and the date when said revocation shall be effective, which date shall not be less than three (3) days after the date of the notice of revocation. (1976
Code § 110.014)
B. Hearing On Revocation:
1. Upon receipt of a notice of revocation, or a notice denying the issuance of a license, the licensee, permittee or applicant, as the case may be, shall
have three (3) days from the date of said notice within which to file a written request for a hearing with the village clerk. In the case of a, license or
permit revocation, upon the filing of said request for hearing, the effective date of said revocation shall be stayed until a written decision is rendered
pursuant to said hearing.
2. In the absence of any provision to the contrary, all hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the parks, license and civic activities
committee of the village board of trustees.
3. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the village clerk shall deliver the same to the chair of the parks, license and civic activities committee of the
village board of trustees, and said chair shall notify the party requesting said hearing of the time and place of said hearing, provided that a hearing
shall not be held less than three (3) days nor more than fourteen (14) days after the date of request.
4. All such hearings shall be open to the public and any interested party may present evidence at said hearing. Within five (5) days after said hearing,
the parks, license and civic activities committee shall render the decision of the majority of its members, and if the parks, license and civic activities
committee after such hearing determines that the license or permit shall be revoked, or the application for same denied, the committee shall state the
reason for such determination and a written order of revocation or denial and shall serve a copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the
licensee or applicant or an agent, employee or partner thereof.
5. If the parks, license and civic activities committee affirms the revocation of a license, the licensee shall cease to engage in the business for which the
license was issued upon receipt of the order of revocation. (1976 Code § 110.015)
4-1-12: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1976 Code § 110.999; amd. 2003 Code)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
4-2A-1: MAYOR DESIGNATED AS LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The mayor is hereby designated as the Antioch liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2A-2: POWERS, FUNCTIONS, AND DUTIES OF COMMISSIONER:
The Antioch liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers, functions, and duties:
A. To administer the appropriate provisions of this chapter, all other ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the board
of trustees, and all legislation as may become applicable within the village with respect to the sale or use of alcoholic liquor.
B. To issue or renew local liquor licenses in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a local liquor license to any applicant that the liquor control commissioner has determined to be
ineligible therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. To suspend for cause for not more than thirty (30) days, or to revoke for cause, any local liquor license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
E. To receive and act on complaints from citizens that any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other applicable rules or regulations have been or are
being violated, and to act on such complaints in the manner provided in this chapter.
F. To enter, or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter, at any time any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of
this chapter or any other applicable rules or regulations have been or are being violated, and at the time of such entry to examine such premises in
connection with such determination.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 88/525
G. To notify the Illinois secretary of state when a club incorporated under the Illinois general not for profit corporation act, 805 Illinois Compiled Statutes
105/101 et seq., or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in Illinois under a certificate of authority issued under that act has violated the Illinois
liquor control act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquor without a retailer's license.
H. To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local liquor license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee on whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served as provided by law, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant
or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof of information in the performance of his or her duties; and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which
shall be effective in any part of the state.
I. To keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses issued under this chapter and to furnish the village clerk with a copy thereof; and, on the
issuance of any new license, or the revocation or suspension of any existing license, to give notice of such action to the village clerk within three (3)
days after such action.
J. To report whenever requested by the board of trustees all of his or her acts taken to enforce this chapter and all acts taken in regard to the collection of
liquor license fees.
K. To require, one set of fingerprints of any applicant for a new local liquor license, to deliver to the Illinois department of state police, and for purposes of
obtaining such fingerprints to collect from the applicant and properly deliver such fee as may be required by the Illinois department of state police. In
the case of a close held corporation applying for a new liquor license, the principal shareholder of shall be required to provide fingerprints. In the case
of a publicly held corporation applying for a new liquor license, the designated manager of the store, restaurant or tavern shall be required to provide
fingerprints.
L. To levy fines in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for violations of the state liquor control act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes, any applicable
rule or regulation established by the state liquor control commission, or any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2A-3: COMPENSATION:
The Antioch liquor control commissioner shall serve without compensation beyond the salary and compensation provided to the mayor generally by other
provisions of this code. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2A-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following phrases shall have the meanings specifically ascribed to them:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one
percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume if dispensed by a licensed pharmacy pursuant to a medical prescription.
APPLICANT: The person or business entity (such as a partnership, corporation, LLC, LLP or similar entity) which operates, or will operate, the licensed
business.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors kept, used and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building
or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests; provided that such club files with the mayor, at the time of its application for a license under this chapter, a list of names and
addresses of its officers, board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meetings.
CORPORATION: Unless specified more definitively herein, a corporation shall mean any business entity other than a sole proprietorship or common law
partnership. It shall include, without limitation, businesses incorporated under the Illinois business corporation act, any duly licensed foreign corporation,
any LLC, any LLP and any similar enterprise whether in existence at the date of adoption hereof or at any future date.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where food may be actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which
twenty five (25) or more rooms are used for sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are
served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection therewith and
such building or buildings, structure or structures, being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
INTOXICATED: To affect temporarily with diminished physical and mental control by means of alcoholic liquor, specifically to excite or stupefy with said
liquor.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container, whatsoever used, corked or capped, sealed
and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
OUTDOOR CAFE: A dining area located partially or wholly on a public sidewalk or parkway, and operating adjacent to and in conjunction with a
restaurant.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever and includes all sales made by any person, whether principal,
proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any picnic, outing, festival, wedding, or similar special occasion intended to host a gathering of persons for the purpose of said
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 89/525
occasion.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of "alcoholic liquor" as herein defined. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
ARTICLE B. LIQUOR LICENSES
4-2B-1: UNLICENSED SALE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person not having a current, valid license, authorized and issued pursuant to this chapter, to sell or offer for sale in the village
any alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-2: SALE IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or dispense in the village any alcoholic liquor except in the manner authorized by and in
compliance with the terms and restrictions of a license issued pursuant to this chapter and except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any instance when alcoholic liquor is sold, dispensed, possessed, stored, distilled, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a valid license if
required by the Illinois liquor control act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., and a valid license if required by this chapter is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-4: APPLICATION FOR LIQUOR LICENSE:
A. Application Generally: Each application for a license hereunder shall be made to the Antioch liquor control commissioner, in writing, signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by one of the partners on behalf of all partners if a partnership, or by the duly authorized agent thereof on behalf of all
officers, directors, and managers if a club or corporation, verified by an oath or affidavit. Each application shall specifically identify the applicant in the
form to which a license would be issued (i.e., a corporation, partnership, LLC, LLP, etc.).
B. Background Information: Each application shall include the following background information:
1. The name, age and address of the applicant, including the following, as applicable:
a. In the case of a partnership, all of the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof;
b. In the case of a corporation for profit or a club, all of the officers and directors and persons controlling in the aggregate more than five percent
(5%) of the voting shares of stock.
2. The citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization. In the case that a
corporation or other business entity is the applicant, the person furnishing this information shall be the same person required to provide fingerprints
by subsection 4-2A-2K of this chapter.
3. The character of business of the applicant and, in the case of a club or corporation, the place of incorporation and the objects for which it was
formed.
4. The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of the character specified in response to subsection B3 of this section or, in case of a
club or corporation, the date on which its charter was issued.
5. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license and the specific name of the business,
including any assumed or trade name.
6. The specific class of license for which the applicant is applying.
7. The names of each governmental body from which the applicant has received a liquor license within ten (10) years immediately prior to the date of
the present application.
C. Statements Required: Each application must include the following statements:
If the applicant is a partnership, then each partner shall provide all statements required below pertaining to an individual applicant; provided, however,
that if the applicant is organized as a limited partnership, then the statement concerning active involvement provided in subsection C13 of this section
shall be required only of all general partners.
If the applicant is a corporation, then each officer, manager or director thereof (or authorized representative if no officer, manager or director) and any
stockholder or stockholders controlling in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the voting stock of such corporation shall provide all statements
required below pertaining to an individual applicant; provided, however, that the statement concerning village residency provided in subsection C10 of
this section and the statement concerning active involvement provided in subsection C13 of this section shall not be required of such officers,
managers, directors, and five percent (5%) aggregate stockholders.
1. A statement as to whether the applicant qualifies for or has a current license issued by the Illinois liquor control commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 90/525
2. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
3. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance concerning the
manufacture, possession, sale or dispensation of alcoholic liquor, or has ever forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any
such violation.
4. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any state or federal law or regulation.
5. A statement as to whether the applicant has had revoked a similar license issued under state or federal law or under the ordinances of any
municipality within ten (10) years immediately prior to the date of the present application.
6. A statement as to whether the applicant has had suspended more than once a similar license issued under state or federal law or under the
ordinances of any municipality within one year immediately prior to the present application.
7. A statement as to whether the applicant is a law enforcing official of the village or any other government or governmental agency.
8. A statement as to whether the premises for which a license is sought comprises a store or other place of business where the majority of customers
are under the age of twenty one (21) years or where the principal business transacted consists of the sale of schoolbooks, school supplies, food,
lunches or drinks for such customers.
9. A statement as to whether the retail sale of alcohol on the premises for which a license is sought will violate any provision of the Antioch zoning code
or this code and as to whether such premises are within one hundred feet (100') of the property of any school, hospital, senior citizen housing,
daycare center, orphanage, transitional service facility, nursing or personal care facility, home for veterans and their spouses or children, or any
military or naval station or within one hundred feet (100') of the nearest part of any church building used for worship or educational purposes.
10. A statement as to whether the applicant is a permanent resident of the village, except in the case of a corporation.
11. A statement as to whether the applicant beneficially owns the premises for which a license is sought or has a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued. For the purposes of this subsection only, a lease that is conditioned only upon the grant of a liquor license shall be
considered a lease that satisfies this provision.
12. A statement as to whether the applicant is the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed.
13. A statement as to whether the applicant will be personally, actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed.
14. A statement as to whether the business is or will be managed by a manager or agent and, if so, statements from every such manager or agent to
the same extent as required from every individual applicant.
15. A statement as to the nature of the business and the amount of anticipated alcoholic liquor sales as a percentage of gross annual sales of the
business.
16. A statement that the applicant is not disqualified from receiving a license by reason of any matter or item contained in the laws of the state of
Illinois, this chapter or any other code or ordinances of the village of Antioch.
17. A statement that the applicant will not violate any federal or state of Illinois laws, or this chapter, or any other code or ordinances of the village in the
conduct of the applicant's business.
18. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, whether it is qualified under the Illinois business corporations act, 805 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1.01 et
seq., to transact business in Illinois.
19. A statement that, if the business to be operated pursuant to the license is operating under an assumed name, then the applicant has complied with
the Illinois assumed business name act and other applicable laws.
20. A statement acknowledging that the applicant shall hire and retain on premises at all times during operation of a licensed premises, and during the
entire term of any license, at least one employee who is currently certified in the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training
("BASSET") program. For purposes of this subsection, "currently certified" shall mean that the employee possesses a BASSET certification that is
not more than five (5) years old. Failure to retain such a BASSET certified employee during all such times shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
BASSET certifications shall not apply to licensees where alcoholic beverages are not being served on the premises, except in the case of samplings
or tastings. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-5: INVESTIGATION AND DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION CONTAINED IN APPLICATION; WAIVER OF CLAIMS:
By applying for a license pursuant to this chapter, each applicant thereby authorizes any person to disclose, and the village to investigate, all information
pertaining to such applicant's application. Each applicant thereby waives any and all claims against the village and thereby agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the village and its elected and appointed officials, officers, boards, commissioners, attorneys, employees and agents from any and all claims
resulting from, or arising out of, or alleged to result from or arise out of the aforesaid activities. Each applicant shall consent to and sign any written
authorization, waiver and indemnification agreement as the village may require in connection with the aforesaid activities. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-6: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license of any kind shall be issued or renewed to:
A. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, if the Antioch liquor control commissioner determines, after investigation,
that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
B. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of
alcoholic liquor or shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 91/525
C. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any state or federal law or regulation.
D. A person whose liquor license issued under state law or any municipal ordinance has been revoked for cause within ten (10) years immediately prior to
the date of the present application.
E. A person whose liquor license issued under this chapter has been suspended more than once for cause within one year immediately prior to the
present application if the Antioch liquor control commissioner determines that the applicant is no longer worthy of the public trust.
F. Any law enforcing village employee or law enforcing official or the village mayor or any member of the board of trustees; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a bona fide not for profit private club or charitable or educational organization owned and operated by
its members, one or more of which members is a village employee or law enforcing public official or the village mayor or a member of the board of
trustees.
G. A person applying for a license with respect to any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are under the age of twenty one
(21) years or where the principal business transacted consists of the sale of schoolbooks, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such customers.
H. A person applying for a license with respect to premises on which the retail sale of alcoholic liquor will violate any provision of the Antioch zoning code
or this code or which premises are within one hundred feet (100') of the property of any church, school, hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare center,
orphanage, transitional service facility, nursing or personal care facility, home for veterans and their spouses or children, or any military or naval station,
except only as allowed by state law. The following standards apply to these prohibitions:
1. In measuring the distance from a church, the nearest part of any building for worship or educational purposes is used rather than property
boundaries.
2. No distance is required with respect to a state university or other institution of higher learning.
3. This subsection H does not apply to any application for renewal of a license when any church, school, hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare
center, orphanage, transitional service facility, nursing or personal care facility, home for veterans and their spouses or children, or any military or
naval station has been established within one hundred feet (100') of the licensed premises after the issuance of the original license.
4. The one hundred foot (100') limitation in this subsection H does not prohibit the issuance of a class G NFP single special event license to any
church, school, hospital, senior citizen housing, daycare center, orphanage, transitional service facility, nursing or personal care facility, home for
veterans and their spouses or children, or any military or naval station.
I. A person who is not a permanent resident of the village, except in the case of a corporation.
J. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
K. A person who is not the beneficial owner of the business to be licensed.
L. A person who will not be personally, actively involved in the operation of the business to be licensed.
M. A person whose place of business is managed by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the qualifications required of an
individual licensee.
N. A partnership, unless all members thereof shall be qualified to obtain a license; provided, however, that the requirement of active involvement in
subsection L of this section shall apply only to one such partner.
O. A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders controlling in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of
the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible, except by reason of the village residency requirement in subsection I of this section or the
requirement of active involvement in subsection L of this section, to receive a license hereunder.
P. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business corporations act, 805
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1.01 et seq., to transact business in Illinois.
Q. A person who is not of good character and reputation.
R. Any applicant that is not in current compliance with any applicable rules and regulations of the Illinois department of health or the Lake County health
department.
S. Any applicant whose premises are currently out of compliance with any building or occupancy code of the state of Illinois or the village of Antioch or who
currently owes delinquent taxes or overdue assessments to the village of Antioch. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-7: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 92/525
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned on the acquisition and maintenance in good standing by the applicant of a license issued
by the Illinois liquor control commission. No license shall authorize the retail sale of any alcoholic liquor until proof of acquisition of such Illinois license is
furnished to the Antioch liquor control commissioner. If any license is refused, suspended or revoked by the Illinois liquor control commission, then any
license issued or conditionally issued under this chapter shall immediately become null and void without further action by the village or the Antioch liquor
control commissioner. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-8: ENFORCEMENT OF STATE ORDERS:
The Antioch liquor control commissioner, on complaint of the state of Illinois department of revenue, shall refuse the issuance or renewal of any license, or
suspend or revoke any license, for any of the following violations of any tax act administered by the Illinois department of revenue:
A. Failure to make a tax return.
B. Filing of a fraudulent return.
C. Failure to pay all or any part of any tax or penalty finally determined to be due.
D. Failure to keep proper books and records.
E. Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificate of registration.
F. Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the state of Illinois department of revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability. (Ord.
09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-9: TERMS OF LICENSES:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter other than class G licenses are operative and valid, unless terminated, revoked, or suspended, for one year
commencing on June 1 of each year and terminating on May 31 of that same year. The licenses that are excluded from the one year term are operative
and valid for the period of time specified in the license. (Ord. 10-01-01, 1-4-2010)
4-2B-10: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
The classes of liquor licenses in the village are those classes set forth in this section. There are no other classes of liquor licenses in the village. No liquor
license of any class may be issued by the village unless a license is authorized by section 4-2B-14 of this article and has not already been issued. No
liquor license may be issued by the village until after the applicable fee for the license has been paid in full.
A. Class A: Restaurant full service license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors by restaurants when such sales are incidental to and
complementary to the sale and service of food, for consumption on the premises where sold. Sales of food must comprise at least forty percent (40%)
of the annual gross revenues of the restaurant to qualify for this license or for its renewal.
1. Class A-1: Restaurant outdoor cafe full service license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption at an outdoor cafe
accessory to a restaurant that holds a class A license. This license requires the specific prior approval of the Antioch liquor control commissioner,
who may establish standards for the service of alcoholic liquors at the outdoor cafe as a condition for issuance of this license.
B. Class B: Restaurant limited service license. This license authorizes the retail sale of beer and wine by restaurants when such sales are incidental to and
complementary to the sale and service of food, for consumption on the premises where sold. Sales of food must comprise at least forty percent (40%)
of the annual gross revenues of the restaurant to qualify for this license or for its renewal.
1. Class B-1: Restaurant outdoor cafe limited service license. This license authorizes the retail sale of beer and wine for consumption at an outdoor
cafe accessory to a restaurant that holds a class B license. This license requires the specific prior approval of the Antioch liquor control
commissioner, who may establish standards for the service of alcoholic liquors at the outdoor cafe as a condition for issuance of this license. (Ord.
10-04-10, 4-19-2010)
2. Class B-2: Limited restaurant wine license. This license authorizes the retail sale of bottled wine by a restaurant with a class B license, in original
package form, for consumption off the premises where sold. (Ord. 16-09-23, 9-19-2016)
C. Class C: Retail package sales. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors, in original package form, for consumption off the premises
where sold. This license shall further authorize "sampling", "tasting", and "expanded sampling" of alcoholic beverages strictly in accordance with the
following definitions:
EXPANDED SAMPLING: Due to the fact that certain wines, liquors and craft beers are highly expensive and/or are available only in very limited
quantities sporadically, rendering them difficult to market, larger package goods stores shall be permitted to engage in expanded sampling as
follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 93/525
1. Expanded sampling is available only to packaged liquor stores of not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in sales floor;
2. Sales by expanded sampling shall not exceed more than two percent (2%) by dollar value of all store sales;
3. Products dispensed under this classification may be sold for consumption on premises, provided that not more than thirty two (32) ounces of
any craft beer, four (4) ounces of any spirit or twelve (12) ounces of any wine may be sold to any customer in any one sales session;
4. Due to the unique nature of such sales, this license shall not be deemed a "pouring license" that authorizes or allows the store to install or
operate any video gaming. In the unanticipated event the State Gaming Board determines that such a license does authorize video gaming, this
license shall become null and void.
SAMPLING: A product sample, offered in connection with a sales promotion, consisting of no more than the following amounts: distilled spirits onefourth
(1/4) ounce, wine one ounce, beer two (2) ounces. Only products registered with the State Liquor Commission may be sampled.
TASTING: A supervised presentation of alcoholic products to the public for the purpose of disseminating product information and education, with
consumption of alcoholic products being an incidental part thereof. Only products registered with the State Liquor Commission may be tasted in the
following amounts: distilled spirits one-fourth (1/4) ounce, wine one ounce, beer two (2) ounces. Notice of tasting may be advertised. Tasting must be
supervised by the licensee and/or an authorized representative of the licensee. (Ord. 14-04-07, 4-21-2014)
D. Class D: Gas station convenience store license. This license authorizes the retail sale of spirits, beer and wine in a gas station convenience store, in
original package form, for consumption off the premises where sold. The amount of display floor space allowed for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall
not exceed the greater of thirty three percent (33%) of the space or six hundred (600) square feet. (Ord. 18-02-06, 2-12-2018)
E. Class E: Bar and tavern license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors by bars and taverns for consumption on the premises where
sold as well as other retail sale of packaged liquor in its original containers for consumption off premises. This license shall further authorize "sampling"
and "tasting" of alcoholic beverages strictly in accordance with the following definitions:
SAMPLING: A product sample, offered in connection with a sales promotion, consisting of no more than the following amounts: distilled spirits onefourth
(1/4) ounce, wine one ounce, beer two (2) ounces. Only products registered with the State Liquor Commission may be sampled.
TASTING: A supervised presentation of alcoholic products to the public for the purpose of disseminating product information and education, with
consumption of alcoholic products being an incidental part thereof. Only products registered with the State Liquor Commission may be tasted in the
following amounts: distilled spirits one-fourth (1/4) ounce, wine one ounce, beer two (2) ounces. Notice of tasting may be advertised. Tasting must be
supervised by the licensee and/or an authorized representative of the licensee.
1. Class E-1: Bar and tavern outside service license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors by bars and taverns for consumption in
outdoor seating areas adjoining the principal business. (Ord. 10-04-10, 4-19-2010)
2. Class E-2: Wine shop license. This license is equivalent to a class E license in all respects, except that the alcoholic products that may be sold or
offered for tasting or sampling are strictly limited to wines and beers. (Ord. 10-06-21, 6-7-2010)
F. Class F: Club license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors by clubs organized under the laws of Illinois that are not for pecuniary
profit, that are supported by their members' dues and that are for charitable, service, or fraternal purposes, for consumption on the premises where
sold only.
G. Class G: Single special event license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors only by a person or organization at one picnic, outing,
festival, wedding or other similar special occasion for consumption only on the premises or in the area specifically identified in the license. No class G
single special event license is valid for more than ninety six (96) hours unless specifically stated in the license. The Antioch liquor control commissioner
may make the issuance of the license subject to any condition that the commissioner determines is appropriate to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, including, without limitation, restrictions on the location and hours for sales of alcoholic liquors, the type of alcoholic liquors that may be sold
pursuant to a particular license, and the type of activities that may be conducted as part of the event for which the license is sought. (Ord. 10-04-10, 4-
19-2010)
H. Class H: Hotel license. This license authorizes the sale of all types of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises only. A class H license is
available only to a motel or hotel with sixty five (65) rooms or more, which has meeting or banquet facilities seating not less than eighty five (85) guests,
with a minimum square footage for those facilities of not less than one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square feet. A class H license allows for
service at a bar, in a banquet facility or meeting room and to individual hotel rooms as delivered by room service.
1. Class H-1: Hotel outdoor cafe full service license. This license authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption at an outdoor cafe
accessory to a hotel that holds a class H license. This license requires the specific prior approval of the Antioch liquor control commissioner, who
may establish standards for the service of alcoholic liquors at the outdoor cafe as a condition for issuance of this license. (Ord. 11-12-22, 12-19-
2011)
I. Class I: Winery license. This license authorizes the sale of bottled table wines for consumption on or off premises. The licensee may sell wine for
consumption on the premises by the glass, in smaller samples commonly known as "flights" or by the bottle at the serving table or bar.
1. The licensee shall be permitted to sell wine on premises and/or offer tastes or samples only during the following days and times:
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 10:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M.
All other days 10:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 94/525
2. All tastes and samples must be offered or provided only inside a building;
3. The licensee may ship bottled products at other times consistent with its state of Illinois license.
4. The winery is authorized to permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption. A partially
consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises shall be securely sealed by the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal
from the premises, and placed in a transparent, onetime use, tamperproof bag. Before any patron may leave the premises with his/her/their
previously opened bottle, an explanation of applicable traffic laws shall be given. (Ord. 14-07-13, 7-21-2014)
J. Class J: Nonrestaurant BYOB license:
1. License Required: No person shall allow alcohol to be carried in for consumption on the premises of an establishment without first having a BYOB
license from the village of Antioch.
2. Application Requirements: Applications for such a license shall be made in writing, to the mayor, and shall contain the following information:
a. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; if a corporation, the name and address of the duly authorized agent who
signed the application.
b. The name, location and a description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated with a permit authorized pursuant to this
section.
c. A letter from the property owner (if different than the applicant) granting permission to obtain such a license for the premises.
d. A certificate of insurance reflecting a policy in force for the full period for which the license is to be issued that provides general liability coverage in
the amounts of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury or death (combined single limits).
e. Acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to save and hold harmless the village of Antioch from any and all claims arising out of consumption of
alcoholic liquor on the premises, and that the applicant will follow the village of Antioch liquor control ordinance, including the prohibition against
allowing minors to consume and the hours of consumption.
f. Each application shall be reviewed by the village board of trustees and either approved or denied by a majority vote.
3. License Terms: In addition to the terms and conditions stated in article C of this chapter, all nonrestaurant BYOB licenses shall be subject to the
following:
a. The license holder shall not allow any alcoholic beverages other than wine or beer to be consumed on the licensed premises.
b. No licensee, nor any employee or staff member of the licensee is permitted to open and pour the wine or beer.
c. No storage of beer or wine is permitted.
d. No opened bottles of beer or wine may be brought in or removed from the premises, and shall be disposed of before the customer leaves.
e. No license of this class shall be granted to an existing business possessing a restaurant, food dealers, or liquor license. (Ord. 16-11-32, 12-5-
2016)
K. Class K: Ancillary food service license. This license authorizes the sale of beer and wine for consumption on premises only. Sales shall be strictly in
compliance with the following regulations:
1. Licensees shall be full service grocery stores with a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of sales floor;
2. Sales shall be conducted only at a cordoned area of the store and that area shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet in size, calculated
using only the service area, tables, booths and bar and not food preparation or kitchen areas;
3. Patrons shall not be permitted to move out of the cordoned area within the store while carrying any beer or wine;
4. The sales of beer and wine shall only be permitted at such times as the store offers food service within the cordoned area;
5. If the licensee also holds a class C license which allows sampling, it may offer the sampling within the cordoned area. (Ord. 17-01-01, 1-16-2017)
4-2B-11: LICENSE FEES:
A. Standard Fees: Every applicant for a license or license renewal for the sale of alcoholic liquor in the village must pay to the village, at the time the
application for a license is submitted, the following fees:
1. Administrative Processing Fee: For new applications only, a nonrefundable fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) immediately, plus, at the time of
license issuance, a fee sufficient to cover all additional village costs in processing the application. No such fee is required for a class G license.
2. Base Fee: All fees shown in the chart below are annual unless otherwise noted. The years noted commence with licenses issued on and after May.
(Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009; amd. Ord. 11-12-22, 12-19-2011)
License
Class Fee 2011 Fee 2012
Fee 2013
(And Thereafter)
A $ 950.00 $1,425.00 $1,900.00
A-1 250.00 250.00 250.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 95/525
B 700.00 1,050.00 1,400.00
B-1 250.00 250.00 250.00
B-2 250.00
C 1,000.00 1,500.00 2,000.00
D 650.00 975.00 1,300.00
E 1,000.00 1,500.00 2,000.00
E-1 500.00 500.00 500.00
E-2 1,000.00 1,500.00 2,000.00
F 200.00 200.00 200.00
G $30.00/event $45.00/event $60.00/event
H $1,000.00 $1,500.00 $2,000.00
H-1 250.00 500.00
I 2,000.00 2,000.00
J 250.00
K (with a class C license) 250.00
K (stand alone) 1,400.00
(Ord. 17-01-01, 1-16-2017)
B. Discount For Early Fee Payment: For license classes other than class G, the annual fee will be discounted by five percent (5%) if the fee is paid on or
before May 15 of the year in which the applicant seeks the license issuance or renewal for the next year. There is no discount given for class G
licenses. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
C. Expanded Sampling Fee: Package goods stores qualifying for and engaging in expanded sampling as permitted by class C licenses shall pay an
additional two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) annual fee to the village as a condition of that specifically limited sales opportunity. (Ord. 14-04-07, 4-21-
2014)
4-2B-12: NO WAIVER OR PRORATION OF FEES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the fee to be paid for licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be waived or discounted, for
any reason except for early payment as provided in subsection 4-2B-11B of this article, or upon resolution of the village board adopted upon a motion duly
made and seconded at a regular open meeting thereof. Nor shall any such fee be reduced in proportion to the number of calendar months which have
expired in the license year prior to the issuance of the license. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-13: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
If a license applied for is denied, then any fee submitted, except the nonrefundable two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fee provided in subsection 4-2B-11A
of this article, shall be returned to the applicant. If a license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other fund
as shall have been designated by the board of trustees. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-04-15 – CLASS A AND A1 LIQUOR LICENSES. Go to new ordinance.
4-2B-14: NUMBER OF LICENSES/LICENSE CREATION PROCESS:
A. Existing Licenses:
1. The village clerk, serving as the administrative assistant to the liquor commissioner, shall maintain a current list of all authorized licenses, and shall
report to the village board promptly at any time there is any change in the number of such licenses, irrespective of the reason for the change.
2. In the event any license(s) shall be revoked by final administrative action of the liquor commissioner, and any appeals to the Illinois liquor
commission or the courts of this state shall have been exhausted, such license(s) shall be automatically void and the village clerk shall decrease the
number of authorized licenses by the number of such revoked license(s).
3. In the event any license(s) shall be allowed to lapse through nonrenewal, relinquishment or otherwise, such license(s) shall be automatically void
and the village clerk shall decrease the number of authorized licenses by the number of such revoked license(s).
B. License Creation:
1. The village board has the sole power to create licenses upon such terms and conditions as it deems fit, pursuant to law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 96/525
2. A person or corporation seeking to have a license created shall submit a sworn petition on a form to be supplied by the village clerk.
3. An applicant shall be required to submit not less than twelve (12) copies of the following documents:
a. A lease, deed, or other document demonstrating that the applicant has, or will have, the right to establish the proposed business in a properly
zoned location;
b. A site drawing showing the exterior of the proposed location, together with parking and all necessary site improvements to meet applicable exterior
codes, such as ADA and the Illinois accessibility code;
c. A drawing of the interior of the proposed location, at a minimum in planar view, but preferably accompanied by concept drawings showing the
interior and a general idea of the layout, decoration, seating, bathrooms, kitchen (if applicable) and the like;
d. For restaurants, a proposed menu showing not only representative food choices, but reasonably anticipated price points;
e. An application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall be nonrefundable, but which shall be applied toward the initial license fees in the
event a license should be created by the village board and the applicant awarded the license by the local liquor commissioner.
4. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the creation of class G special event licenses shall be allowed by a simplified process consisting of a letter request by
the applicant. No fee shall be charged to any applicant seeking the creation of a class G license, although other fees set forth in this code may apply
to such licenses. (Ord. 16-05-13, 5-16-2016)
4-2B-15: BOND REQUIRED:
Before any license may be issued, the applicant shall furnish a surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the village. Such bond
shall be forfeited automatically on revocation of the license for which the bond was furnished if revocation was for cause. This bond shall not be required
for any class G license. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-16: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license may be issued, the applicant shall furnish a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state certifying that
the applicant has an insurance policy in force for the full period for which the license is to be issued that provides general liability coverage in the amounts
of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury or death (combined single limits), and that provides dramshop liability coverage at least to the
maximum amount recoverable under applicable Illinois statutes, as such may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-17: EMPLOYEE GUIDELINES REQUIRED:
Before any initial license may be issued, the applicant shall adopt a copy of a written employee policy manual together with a certificate from the applicant
that it shall require all employees involved in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or package goods to know and to abide by the procedures and
policies contained in the manual. The manual shall contain mandatory procedures and policies in a form acceptable to the village, including, but not limited
to, procedures and policies regarding service to intoxicated patrons, disturbances on the licensed premises, checking required identification, withholding
service of alcoholic liquor to persons under the age of twenty one (21) years, reporting violations to appropriate authorities and the like. This requirement
shall not apply to applicants for a class G license. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2B-18: LICENSE IS PERSONAL PRIVILEGE ONLY:
A license issued under this article shall be purely a personal privilege to expire on May 31 next following the issuance thereof and shall not constitute
property. Nor shall any such license be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution. Nor shall any such license be alienable or transferable, voluntarily
or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. No such license shall descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution but every
such license shall, except as provided in section 4-2B-19 of this article, cease on the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the
estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue
the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt
licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but no longer than six (6) months after the
death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009; amd. Ord. 10-01-01, 1-4-2010)
4-2B-19: CHANGES IN PERSONNEL:
A. Reporting; Fee; Qualifications: Any changes in a partnership or in officers, directors or persons holding directly or beneficially more than five percent
(5%) of the stock of a corporation or ownership interest, or managers, of establishments licensed under this article shall be reported in writing to the
Antioch liquor control commissioner within ten (10) days after the change. All new persons shall fill out a new application and meet all of the standards
of this chapter and shall otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the liquor control
commissioner.
B. Termination If Partnership Change: When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership
interest by any person who is not eligible to hold a liquor license, the license shall terminate immediately.
C. Termination If Corporate Change: When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in the corporate manager or in the
officers, directors or stockholders of more than five percent (5%) of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of stock by any person
who is not eligible for a license, the license shall terminate immediately.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 97/525
D. Termination If Individual Change: When a license has been issued to an individual who is or becomes not eligible for a license, the license shall
terminate immediately. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
ARTICLE C. SALES
4-2C-1: SALES RESTRICTED TO AUTHORIZED PREMISES; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in or from the premises described in the application and license and only in the manner therein
authorized and in compliance with the terms thereof. Such location may be changed only after the issuance of a written permit to make such change
issued by the Antioch liquor control commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state, this chapter, and other codes and ordinances of the village. All sales, pourings and distributions must be
made indoors of the licensed premises. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-2: DISPLAY OF LICENSE; BASSET CERTIFICATE:
A. Every licensee shall cause his or her current alcoholic liquor license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
B. Every licensee shall maintain copies of the BASSET certification for each of his or her BASSET certified employees on the licensed premises and, on
the request of an Antioch police officer, or the Antioch liquor control commissioner or his or her designee, shall produce such copies for inspection.
(Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-3: DISPLAYING OF BIRTH DEFECTS WARNING SIGN:
Every licensee shall cause a sign at least eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") in size to be framed and hung in plain view which shall
read as follows:
GOVERNMENT WARNING: ACCORDING TO THE SURGEON GENERAL, WOMEN SHOULD NOT DRINK ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING
PREGNANCY BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF BIRTH DEFECTS.
Every licensee shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Illinois liquor control commission and the Illinois department of alcoholism and substance
abuse regarding this requirement. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-4: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
A. Consumption On The Premises: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor for consumption on any premises in the village
except between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. the following morning on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday; and it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor for consumption on any premises in the village except between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) A.M. the following morning on any Friday, Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. It shall be
unlawful to serve or to consume alcoholic liquor in, or to admit the public to, any premises in or on which alcoholic liquors are sold at retail during the
hours within which the sale of such alcoholic liquors is prohibited. Other business or social functions of restaurant, club, hotel and motel establishments
may continue beyond such hours, provided that no alcoholic liquors are sold to, offered for sale to, served to or consumed by the public, patrons,
employees or membership during such hours. Sale hours for outdoor cafes are provided in subsections 4-2C-5I and 4-2C-6I of this article.
The hours applicable to legal holidays as set forth hereinabove shall further apply to the following days: July 3 and the Wednesday immediately before
Thanksgiving. (Ord. 15-01-01, 1-5-2015)
B. Consumption Off The Premises: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in its original package for consumption off the
premises in the village except between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on any day. Other business functions,
such as retail sales of other products at any store or gas station convenience store may continue during hours that alcohol sales are prohibited.
C. Service During Restaurant Operation: In restaurants with class A or class B licenses, it shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or dispense any alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises at any time when the food service operations of the restaurant are not operating. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-5: SALES AT OUTDOOR CAFES:
Sale of alcoholic liquor at restaurants for consumption at tables and chairs placed outdoors pursuant to a class A-1 or B-1 license, whether on private
property or on public property, is permitted only if all of the following conditions are met in addition to every other applicable provision of this chapter:
A. Description Of Premises: The licensee shall provide an accurate description of the location of each table and chair placed outdoors in the form of a site
plan or reasonably legible and intelligible sketch.
B. Incidental Use Only: The use of a sidewalk shall be permitted only incidentally to the operation of a restaurant on private property contiguous to such
sidewalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 98/525
C. Insurance: If any part of the outdoor cafe is located on public property, then the licensee shall furnish to the village evidence of public liability insurance,
including the village as an additional party insured and insuring the village against any and all liability resulting from the uses permitted under this
section, in an amount of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, combined single limits.
D. Indemnification: If any part of the outdoor cafe is located on public property, then the licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the village from all
liability, lawsuits and costs and shall furnish such an indemnification agreement to the village in a form approved by the village attorney.
E. Open Space: In no event shall a use permitted by this section on a public sidewalk reduce the open portion of such sidewalk to less than six feet (6') in
width. For the purposes of this subsection, "open portion" shall be defined as that area of sidewalk lying between the outermost restaurant table or
chair placed in its normal position for use by restaurant patrons and the curb or, if closer, the nearest obstruction including, but not limited to, any
parking meter, traffic sign, tree well, bicycle rack or other natural or manmade object located on the sidewalk.
F. Cordoned Area: The area in which tables and chairs are set outdoors shall be cordoned off from abutting areas by decorative ropes, chains or other
suitable barriers.
G. Clean And Safe Condition: The applicant shall maintain the outdoor cafe areas in a clean and safe condition at all times.
H. No Outdoor Music: No outdoor music or other noisemaking activity shall be permitted when such music or activity constitutes a nuisance or can clearly
be heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the property line of the premises or more.
I. Hours Limited: No sales or service of alcoholic liquor shall be conducted or provided for consumption at an outdoor cafe except during the hours that the
establishment is allowed to sell or serve alcoholic liquor inside the principal building.
J. Food Service: The offer to serve food in the outdoor seating area must coincide with the alcohol consumption.
K. Building Codes: The licensee shall abide by any and all applicable building codes, including, by way of example and not limitation, ADA accessibility,
code enforcement, sidewalk use, etc.
L. Supervision: Outdoor areas shall be continuously supervised by employees of the establishment.
M. Premises: Beverages may not be removed from the outdoor seating area, except to the interior of the establishment.
N. Dispensing: All dispensing of alcoholic beverages from their containers, taps, coolers and similar devices must be indoors.
O. Other Conditions: The liquor control commissioner may impose any other condition judged by the commissioner as necessary to protect the general
welfare and to assure that any class A-1 or B-1 license issued pursuant to this chapter shall benefit the general public. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-6: OUTDOOR SALES AT TAVERNS AND BARS:
Sale of alcoholic liquor at taverns and bars for consumption outdoors pursuant to a class E-1 license, whether on private property or on public property, is
permitted only if all of the following conditions are met in addition to every other applicable provision of this chapter:
A. Description Of Premises: The licensee shall provide an accurate description of the location of each table, chair, bench or other seating, game or service
area placed outdoors in the form of a site plan or reasonably legible and intelligible sketch.
B. Incidental Use Only: The use of a sidewalk shall be permitted only incidentally to the operation of a tavern or bar on private property contiguous to such
sidewalk.
C. Insurance: If any part of the outdoor service area is located on public property, then the licensee shall furnish to the village evidence of public liability
insurance, including the village as an additional party insured and insuring the village against any and all liability resulting from the uses permitted
under this section, in an amount of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, combined single limits.
D. Indemnification: If any part of the outdoor service area is located on public property, then the licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the village from
all liability, lawsuits and costs and shall furnish such an indemnification agreement to the village in a form approved by the village attorney.
E. Open Space: In no event shall a use permitted by this section on a public sidewalk reduce the open portion of such sidewalk to less than six feet (6') in
width. For the purposes of this subsection, "open portion" shall be defined as that area of sidewalk lying between the outermost table, bench or chair
placed in its normal position for use by the licensee's patrons and the curb or, if closer, the nearest obstruction including, but not limited to, any parking
meter, traffic sign, tree well, bicycle rack or other natural or manmade object located on the sidewalk.
F. Cordoned Area: The area in which tables, benches, chairs and activities are set outdoors shall be cordoned off from abutting areas by decorative ropes,
chains or other suitable barriers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 99/525
G. Clean And Safe Condition: The applicant shall maintain the outdoor cordoned areas in a clean and safe condition at all times.
H. Outdoor Music: No outdoor music or other noisemaking activity shall be permitted when such music or activity constitutes a nuisance or can clearly be
heard at a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the property line of the premises or at the nearest residence, whichever is farther.
Notwithstanding the general application of this subsection, if the licensee has a special event license in effect at any time, the provisions of the special
event license shall be deemed to supersede the provisions of this subsection during the term of the said special event license.
I. Hours Limited: No sales or service of alcoholic liquor shall be conducted or provided for consumption at an outdoor service area except during the hours
that the establishment is allowed to sell or serve alcoholic liquor inside the principal building.
J. Games: Outdoor recreation games of a generally passive nature, and which do not involve betting or gambling, such as beanbag tossing, horseshoes or
other noncontact sports shall be permitted in any cordoned area during the hours of outdoor liquor service operation.
K. Building Codes: The licensee shall abide by any and all applicable building codes, including, by way of example and not limitation, ADA accessibility,
code enforcement, sidewalk use, etc.
L. Supervision: Outdoor areas shall be continuously supervised by employees of the establishment.
M. Premises: Beverages may not be removed from the outdoor cordoned area, except to the interior of the establishment.
N. Dispensing: All dispensing of alcoholic beverages from their containers, taps, coolers and similar devices must be indoors.
O. Other Conditions: The liquor control commissioner may impose any other condition judged by the commissioner as necessary to protect the general
welfare and to assure that any class E-1 license issued pursuant to this chapter shall benefit the general public. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-7: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times and kept in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, regulations, rules and other provisions governing the condition
of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-8: HEALTH OF EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any contagious,
infectious or venereal disease under such conditions where a serious or substantial risk of transmission is presented. It shall be unlawful for any person
who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or engage in any way in
the handling, preparation or distribution of such products under conditions presenting such a risk. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-9: SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS:
A. Intoxicated Persons: No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee, shall sell, give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor to any person who is, or who appears to be, intoxicated.
B. Secondary Transfer Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver such
alcoholic liquor to an intoxicated person or to an apparently intoxicated person. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-10: FREE DISPENSATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to give away or otherwise dispense free of charge within the village, by individual drink or in any other manner, any alcoholic
liquor with the intent of promoting the sale of any alcoholic liquor, except sampling or tasting specifically allowed under a class C license. (Ord. 09-11-33,
11-16-2009)
4-2C-11: RETAIL SALES FROM ORIGINAL PACKAGES ONLY:
No licensee shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor. No
person shall have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, except original packages.
(Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-12: SALES TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS:
A. Sales Prohibited: No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee, shall sell, give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 100/525
B. Secondary Transfer Prohibited: No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years in the performance of a religious ceremony or service, and provided further, however, that this provision shall
not prevent the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in his or her own home pursuant to the condonation and supervision of his or her parent or
legal guardian.
C. Identification Required: If a licensee or his or her officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee believes or has reason to believe that a
sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient may be under the age of twenty one (21) years, then that person
shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand adequate written evidence of age. For the purpose of preventing a violation of this section, any
licensee, or his or her agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is twenty one (21) years of age or older. "Adequate written evidence of age and identity" of the person
means a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, or subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor
vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal selective service act, or an identification card issued to a member of the
armed forces. Proof that the licensee, or his or her officer, associate, member, representative, employee or agent, demanded, was shown and
reasonably relied on such written evidence in any transaction forbidden by this section is an affirmative defense in any proceeding for the suspension
or revocation of any license based on the occurrence of such forbidden transaction. However, it shall not be an affirmative defense if the licensee,
officer, associate, member, representative, employee or agent accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
D. Warning Required: In any place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold or distributed, there shall be displayed at all times, in a prominent and
conspicuous place, a printed card measuring not less than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") in not less than 24-point arial or
helvetica bold font reading substantially as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21:
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $500 UNDER THE LAW OF THE VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
OR IF YOU MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
(Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-13: PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS:
A. Purchase Or Acceptance Prohibited: No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have
alcoholic liquor in his or her possession, and no person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall have any alcoholic liquor in his or her possession
on any street or highway or in any public place or in any place open to the public; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit the
consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years in the performance of a religious ceremony or service, and provided
further, however, that this provision shall not prevent the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in his or her own home pursuant to the condonation
and supervision of his parent or legal guardian, and provided further, however, that this provision shall not apply to possession by a person under the
age of twenty one (21) years making a delivery of alcoholic liquor in pursuance of the order of his or her parent or legal guardian or in pursuance of his
or her employment.
B. Misrepresentation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose
of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
present or offer to any licensee, or his or her agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age or identity which is false, fraudulent
or not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure the
serving of any alcoholic beverage, or to have in his or her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of age or identity.
C. Transfer, Alteration Of Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to transfer, alter or deface an
identification card or to obtain an identification card by means of false information, when such card may enable such person to circumvent the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Conveyance Of Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or to sell, give or furnish to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years evidence of age and identification of any other person. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2C-14: PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS IN LICENSED PREMISES OR MIXING DRINKS:
A. Presence Prohibited: No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee, shall suffer or permit any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be or remain on any licensed premises, or in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to any
licensed premises; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is accompanied
by his parent or guardian or to any licensed premises in which the principal business involves the sale of services or commodities other than alcoholic
liquor, and provided further, however, that this subsection shall not apply to establishment employees at least sixteen (16) years of age whose duties do
not include the handling or serving of alcoholic liquors or to establishment employees at least eighteen (18) years of age whose duties are limited to
serving of alcoholic liquors and food.
B. Handling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to pour, mix or otherwise prepare alcoholic liquors for
sale or distribution on any licensed premises.
C. Package Sales Limitations: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to sell packaged alcoholic liquors to any person.
This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, ringing or scanning transactions at a retail store's cash register. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 101/525
4-2C-15: SOCIAL HOSTING:
A. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply specifically to this section, provided that the definitions set forth in the Illinois liquor control act of 19351
are not intended to be superseded hereby, but supplemented herewith.
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains onehalf
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the transportation of persons or property.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit an event or gathering.
ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including drugs prescribed by a physician that are in the possession of or used
by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
1. As a natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
2. As a legal guardian; or
3. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
REASONABLE STEPS: Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the event or gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at
the event or gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the event or gathering by inspecting driver's licenses or other government issued
identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the event or gathering; and supervising the activities of minors
at the event or gathering, calling for police assistance in the event people under twenty one (21) are in possession of alcohol at the event or gathering
or advising law enforcement in advance of departing one's residence that the owner will be away and no underage person is authorized to be present
and consume alcohol at the owner's residence.
RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona
fide rite or religious ceremony.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual less than twenty one (21) years of age.
B. Certain Events And Gatherings Prohibited:
1. It is unlawful for any person to host, permit, allow, or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an event or gathering at any residence or premises, or
on any other property whether private or public, or in any conveyance, over which that person has control or a reasonable opportunity for control
where illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages are present when that person knows or reasonably should know that an underage person will or does
consume or possess any illicit drugs or alcoholic beverage.
2. It also is unlawful for any person to fail to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by an
underage person at any such event or gathering. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to
be in violation of this subsection B.
C. Other Responsible Persons:
1. A person is responsible for violating subsection B of this section if that person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, conspires with, or solicits
another person to commit a violation of subsection B of this section.
2. A person is responsible for violating subsection B of this section if that person knows or should have known about the committing of a prohibited act
and failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the prohibited act.
D. Exceptions:
1. A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation of this chapter if he or she undertakes one of the following steps before any other
person makes a complaint about the event or gathering:
a. Seeks assistance from the Antioch police department or other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the host's
performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 102/525
b. Terminates the event or gathering because the host has been unable to prevent underage persons from consuming illicit drugs or alcoholic
beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so.
2. This section does not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or that is exclusively between an
underage person and his or her parent, as permitted by Illinois state law.
E. Fines; Penalties: Any person who violates or assists in the violations of any provision of this section shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense
and shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such violation. Each day on which, or during which, a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense.
1. The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
2. A second violation of this section by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
3. A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
ARTICLE D. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-2D-1: CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES:
Except as permitted by license issued by the village pursuant to this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, consume or possess open
containers of alcoholic liquor or nonalcoholic beer on any village park property, or in any village building, or on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public
place in the village; provided, however, that the sale, consumption and possession of open containers of alcoholic liquor specifically authorized by a
license issued pursuant to this chapter and confined to the premises for which such license is issued is authorized. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2D-2: PROHIBITED ACTIVITY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, while intoxicated, any act or activity that creates, causes, continues, or maintains a public nuisance on
any park, street, sidewalk, alley, or other public property within the village.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition in any private house or place to the disturbance of any other person. (Ord. 09-11-33,
11-16-2009)
ARTICLE E. VIOLATIONS; DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
4-2E-1: VIOLATION DETERMINED BY COMMISSIONER:
A. The Antioch liquor control commissioner may suspend, for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke any license issued by the commissioner if the
commissioner determines that there has been: 1) any violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor; 2) any violation of any
provision of this chapter; 3) any violation of any applicable rules or regulations established by the commissioner or the Illinois liquor control
commission; or 4) a failure to pay any license cost or fee or any tax imposed on alcoholic liquor or the sale of alcoholic liquor. In addition to any
suspension of a license, the commissioner may levy a fine for such violations and failures, which fine shall not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
B. The liquor control commissioner shall not suspend or revoke any liquor license or fine any licensee except after a public hearing, which public hearing
shall commence not sooner than three (3) days after written notice affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend has been transmitted to
the licensee at the licensed premises by United States postal service certified mail or by hand delivery.
C. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection B of this section, if the liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation
of any particular licensed premises will threaten the welfare of the community, then the commissioner, on the issuance of a written order stating the
reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, may order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days pending a hearing
on the suspension or revocation of the license therefor. Such order shall contain notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing, which hearing, giving
the licensee an opportunity to be heard, shall commence not less than three (3) days after the date of service, and shall be served personally or by
certified United States mail on the licensee or his or her agent or any employee thereof in charge of the licensed premises. If the licensee also is
engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, the initial closing order shall not be applicable to such other
business or businesses.
D. The liquor control commissioner shall hold any hearing pursuant to this section at the date, time, and place set forth in the notice for such hearing, and
the commissioner shall make a decision in the form and within the time specified by law. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2E-2: APPEAL FROM COMMISSIONER:
Appeals from the decision of the Antioch liquor control commissioner shall be taken to the Illinois liquor control commission in the manner provided by law.
Every review by the Illinois liquor control commission shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the Antioch liquor control
commissioner. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 103/525
4-2E-3: VIOLATION DETERMINED BY COURT:
A. Conviction Of Licensee: Whenever any licensee shall be convicted in court of any violation of state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or of
any provision of this chapter, or of any applicable rules or regulations established by the Antioch liquor control commissioner or the Illinois liquor control
commission, or of any law or regulation pertaining to liquor license fees or taxes, then the license of said licensee may in the discretion of the Antioch
liquor control commissioner be immediately revoked. Such revocation need not be preceded by notice or a hearing for such licensee. Such licensee
shall have a right to a public hearing before the liquor control commissioner for the purpose of showing cause for reissuing the revoked license by
petitioning for such a hearing within fifteen (15) days after the revocation of such license. The hearing shall be held within a reasonable time and shall
allow the licensee an opportunity to be heard. The liquor control commissioner shall make his or her decision within the time specified by law.
B. Conviction Of Other Person: Whenever an officer, director or manager or other employee of any licensee under this chapter shall be convicted of any
violation of any law, ordinance or provision as provided in subsection A of this section while engaged in the course of his or her employment or while on
the premises described in said license, said license may be immediately revoked in the discretion of the Antioch liquor control commissioner, subject to
a subsequent hearing as provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2E-4: COMPLAINTS:
Any person may file a complaint with the Antioch liquor control commissioner alleging that any licensee has been or is violating state law pertaining to the
sale of alcoholic liquor, or the provisions of this chapter, or the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be in writing, in the form
prescribed by the liquor control commissioner, and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular law,
provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail on which such belief is based. If the liquor control commissioner is
satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation and finds probable cause to believe the same, then the liquor control commissioner shall set
the matter for hearing and shall serve notice on the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charges in the complaint, such
hearing to take place not sooner than five (5) days after the date on which such notice is mailed to the licensee at the address of the licensed premises, by
United States mail. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2E-5: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
4-2E-6: SEPARATE OFFENSES:
Each day on which or during which any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter, and each separate act or transaction in violation of this
chapter, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2E-7: VICARIOUS LIABILITY:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any employer or licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer and licensee, and such employer and licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done by that employer or licensee personally. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2E-8: BASSET TRAINING:
In addition to any other penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter, any person who violates any regulation of this chapter may be required to complete the
beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training ("BASSET") program. Failure to complete the BASSET program when so required shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
ARTICLE F. GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-2F-1: SEVERABILITY:
The sections, subsections and paragraphs of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and the invalidity of any provision of this chapter shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2F-2: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
All of the provisions of the Illinois liquor control act, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations issued by the Illinois liquor
control commission pertaining to local control of alcoholic liquor, as the same may be amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated into and
declared to be a part of this chapter as if expressly set forth herein, except only those provisions that are specifically contrary to or inconsistent with
applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-2009)
4-2F-3: COMPLIANCE WITH ALL REGULATIONS REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 104/525
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or release the owner, proprietor, licensee or person in charge of any licensed premises in the village from compliance
with the restrictions and requirements of any other provision of any federal, state of Illinois or village code, ordinance or regulation. (Ord. 09-11-33, 11-16-
2009)
Chapter 3
AMUSEMENTS
4-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. License Fees: All shows, circuses, traveling troupes, street shows in open air, medicine shows and merry-go-rounds are required to pay into the village
a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day of operation. (1976 Code § 112.010)
B. Deposit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct or attempt to conduct any of the above mentioned shows without first having
deposited with the village treasurer the license fee as specified in subsection A of this section. (1976 Code § 112.011)
4-3-2: COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
A. Definition: For purposes of this section, "coin operated amusement device" or "device" means any amusement machine or device operated by means of
the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for the purpose of amusement or skill, and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not
include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin operated mechanical
musical devices or food and tobacco vending machines. For the purpose of this chapter, a coin operated amusement device shall not include billiards
tables, which are separately regulated and licensed under section 4-3-3 of this chapter, nor shall it include a video gaming terminal as defined in 230
Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5, which are separately licensed in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 12-09-17, 9-17-2012)
B. License Requirements:
1. Operator's License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any coin operated amusement device without having
first obtained a village license for each such device.
2. Applications For License: Applications for license shall be made to the village clerk.
3. Fee: The license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per coin operated amusement device per year, or any portion of a year. (Ord. 08-04-10,
4-21-2008)
4. Term: See subsection 4-1-7A of this title. (Ord. 10-03-06, 3-15-2010)
5. Issuance: No license shall be issued to any person who has: a) had an operator's license suspended or revoked by the village or any other local
government; or b) been convicted of any crimes or offenses involving moral turpitude; within the past twenty four (24) months. Upon receipt of the
application and the payment of the license fee(s), the village clerk shall issue a stamp bearing a notation, "Village of Antioch license for the calendar
year 20 ". One license shall be issued for each device, and it shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the device so licensed, and affixed so that it
cannot be transferred from one machine to another.
C. Location Of Devices: All licensed coin operated amusement devices shall be at all times kept and placed in plain view of any visitor or invitee of the
premises in areas which are made generally accessible to the public.
D. Zoning Regulations:
1. Zoning Districts: Coin operated amusement devices, as set forth in this section, shall be allowed in B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1 or M-2 business districts in the
village.
2. Number Of Devices Allowed:
a. All premises located within the B-1, B-2 and B-3 business districts shall be allowed to install and operate amusement devices at a rate of one
device for every five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, not to exceed ten (10) coin operated amusement devices per premises within the
village, but only if such devices are operated as an accessory to a permitted use, such as a hotel, restaurant or tavern. Calculated floor area shall
exclude all service areas, closets, restroom facilities, and all portions of the premises not generally accessible to the public.
b. Additional devices above the ten (10) device limit as outlined in subsection D2a of this section may be permitted in the B-2, B-3, M-1, or M-2
zoning districts if the principal use is considered an amusement arcade, which shall in turn be subject to:
(1) The terms of a special use permit issued in accordance with title 10, "Zoning", of this code;
(2) A two thousand dollar ($2,000.00) annual arcade registration fee, which shall cover the administration of the regulations and inspection of the
premises and registered devices; and
(3) An annual registration fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) per device.
(4) The allowable square footage rates for amusement devices described in subsection D2a of this section.
3. Inspection: The licensed premises shall be subject to annual inspection and each operator's license to annual renewal by the director of planning
and zoning or its designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 105/525
E. Nuisance: No amusement device or amusement arcade shall be operated in such a manner as to become a nuisance or impair the health, safety, or
welfare of the public.
F. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The corporate authorities shall have the right, following an evidentiary hearing affording the licensee due
process, to suspend or revoke an operator's license if the devices are used for gambling, or the premises is found to be used on two (2) or more
occasions for immoral purposes or as the congregating place of criminals, felons or persons heretofore convicted of crimes or offenses involving moral
turpitude.
G. Labeling; Ratings: In the event the manufacturer or distributor of any device has adopted a system of rating such devices based on the content thereof
or intended age of the user, the licensee shall be required to prominently affix evidence of such rating on the side of the device which faces the user
thereof. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to deface or remove the evidence of such rating once it is affixed to a device.
H. Tax: All devices shall be subject to the state of Illinois' coin operated amusement device and redemption machine tax act1. (Ord. 08-04-10, 4-21-2008)
4-3-3: BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES; BOWLING ALLEYS:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BILLIARD ROOM: Any public place where the game of billiards is permitted to be played.
BILLIARDS: Any of the several games played on a table surrounded with elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall
include all forms of the games known as carom billiards, pocket billiards, pool, three-cushion billiards and English billiards.
BOWLING OR PIN AND BALL ALLEY: Shall include bowling alleys, pin and ball alleys, box ball alleys, skeet ball alleys and all alleys of similar
character. (1976 Code § 112.016)
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required: No person shall open, conduct, maintain or operate a billiard room or bowling or pin and ball alley within the village unless such
person shall have first been duly licensed for such purpose and shall have obtained a permit therefor; provided, however, that the provisions of this
section shall not apply to private residences or schools. (1976 Code § 112.015)
2. Term; Fees: See subsection 4-1-7A of this title. All license fees shall be due and payable in advance of the license term. (Ord. 10-03-06, 3-15-2010)
a. The annual license fee for each billiard hall without coin operated pool tables shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year. Pool tables that are
coin operated shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year per pool table.
b. The annual license fee for a business whose main purpose is the operation of a bowling alley shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year. (1976
Code § 112.017; amd. 2003 Code)
C. Conditions Of License:
1. Operational Rights: The license required herein shall confer upon the licensee the right to operate for hire, billiard tables and bowling or pin and ball
alleys upon the premises designated in the license and upon no other premises, and said license shall be personal to the licensee to whom the same
is issued and shall not be sold, assigned or transferred except upon the consent in writing of the mayor. (1976 Code § 112.018)
2. License To Be Posted: Every licensee under this section shall keep his license posted in a conspicuous place in the billiard room or bowling alley.
(1976 Code § 112.022)
D. Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
1. Gambling: It shall be unlawful and no form of gambling shall be permitted in any billiard room or bowling alley. (1976 Code § 112.020)
2. Profanity: The business shall be carried on in an orderly manner and no obscene or profane language shall be allowed upon the premises. (1976
Code § 112.021)
E. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: Licenses granted under the provisions of this section may, in the discretion of the mayor, be suspended or
revoked on the violation of any of the ordinances of the village or of any rules or regulations with respect to the operation of billiard rooms and bowling
alleys. Licenses when so suspended or revoked may be reissued on satisfactory evidence that the cause from which the same resulted has been
removed. (1976 Code § 112.023; amd. 2003 Code)
4-3-4: PICTURE SHOWS:
A. License Required: No person shall operate, conduct, show or give any picture show or moving picture show or exhibition where pictures are shown on a
screen in any opera house, building or canvas or tent without first procuring a license to do so. (1976 Code § 112.030)
B. Application For License: Application for license shall be made to the village clerk and the license shall issue over the signature of the mayor on proper
compliance and after thorough inspection of each building or premises wherein the show is to operate. (1976 Code § 112.032)
C. License Fees; Term:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 106/525
1. License Fees: A license fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year shall be due and payable in advance of the license term.
2. Term: See subsection 4-1-7A of this title. (Ord. 10-03-06, 3-15-2010)
4-3-5: AMUSEMENT RIDES AND ATTRACTIONS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
AMUSEMENT ATTRACTION: Any building or structure around, over or through which people may move or walk without the aid of any moving device
integral to the building or structure that provides amusement, pleasure, thrills or excitement, including those of a temporary or portable nature which are
assembled and reassembled or which are relocated from place to place.
AMUSEMENT RIDE: A mechanical device which carries or conveys passengers along, around or over a fixed or restricted route or course for the
purpose of carnival rides and fair rides which are relocated from place to place.
B. License Required:
1. Any person, organization or business wishing to operate or sponsor the operation of an amusement ride or attraction shall be required to apply for an
amusement ride and attraction license before being allowed to operate. The application shall include:
a. The name of the person, organization or business operating the amusement ride or attraction and, if sponsored, the person, organization or
business sponsoring the operation.
b. The name and date of birth of all employees working on or at the amusement ride or attractions for the entire duration of the license.
2. Before any such applicant is granted a license, the applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village, compliance with the following
conditions:
a. Proof of liability insurance obtained from an insurer authorized to do business in the state of Illinois in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate for each amusement ride or attraction location insuring the owner or operator against liability for injury suffered
by persons riding the amusement ride or by persons in, on, under or near the amusement attraction.
b. Proof that all amusement rides and attractions to be in operation during the duration of the license have satisfied all applicable federal, state and
county safety requirements.
3. All required information shall be submitted before the issuance of a license and no license shall be issued less than seven (7) days before any
amusement ride or attraction is operated in the village.
C. Bond:
1. No such license shall be issued unless and until the applicant has filed with the village clerk a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)
conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or because of the transportation, assembly,
operation or disassembly of any amusement ride or attraction. (Ord. 06-06-23, 6-19-2006)
4-3-6: INSPECTIONS:
The chief of police shall periodically inspect or cause to be inspected the premises in which any amusement device is operated to determine that the
provisions of this chapter are being complied with. (1976 Code § 112.998; amd. Ord. 06-06-23, 6-19-2006)
4-3-7: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1976 Code § 112.999; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 06-06-23, 6-19-2006)
Chapter 4
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them:
PEDDLER: A. Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, exchange any pictures, photographs, goods, wares, merchandise, vegetables, meats,
poultry, fruits of any kind, other than books, periodicals or other publications, traveling from place to place on, along or upon the streets or alleys of the
village, or at doors of houses or apartments or who shall sell and deliver such articles from any vehicle going from place to place, or who shall go about in
the village selling and delivering such articles or offering the same for sale and carrying the article offered with him or who shall set up a stand or other
similar apparatus at a set location, except for long established permanent stands.
B. The above definition shall not apply to established dairy, bakery or grocery routes or trucks which carry a food license under other ordinances of the
village1.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 107/525
SALESPERSON: Any person who demonstrates any article, merchandise, mechanical device or other article or thing, or who offers for sale any insurance,
stocks, bonds or thing tangible or intangible, without having made a definite appointment for that purpose with the customer previous to the time of going,
either by telephone, letter or at the request of the customer.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes about the village offering for sale or taking orders for any books, pictures, photographs, goods, wares or merchandise,
magazines, mechanical devices, furniture, hardware or any other article or thing whatsoever, shall be deemed to be a solicitor. (1976 Code § 116.060)
4-4-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: Every person who desires to operate as a salesperson, peddler or solicitor shall procure a license therefor before engaging in such
work. (1976 Code § 116.061)
B. Application For License:
1. Every person desiring such license shall make application in writing therefor to the village clerk during regular hours giving full information as may be
required upon the application blank, to be furnished by the village clerk, and shall state the full name, residence, age, type of work the applicant
expects to engage in, for whom the applicant is selling and a character reference. The applicant shall deposit a license fee as required for the
particular form of license issued.
2. Before said license shall be issued, such applicant must go to the police department of the village giving the same information to said department,
and said department shall record the fingerprints of each applicant together with the photograph to be furnished by such applicant. No license shall
be issued before the expiration of three (3) days, unless the police department shall sooner be able to check the character, qualifications and record
of such applicant. If same is found to be in proper order, the department shall then approve a card, to be furnished by the village clerk, bearing a
photograph of the applicant similar to the one on file in the police department, such license shall be signed by the village clerk and the chief of police
of the village. (1976 Code § 116.062; amd. 2003 Code)
C. Fees:
1. At the time of the filing of the application, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid to the village clerk to cover the cost of the investigation.
2. The license fee for peddlers shall be as follows: fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each applicant. (1976 Code § 116.063)
D. Investigations: The chief of police may make such investigation of each and every applicant as he may deem proper and if, in his opinion a longer time
than is provided for in this chapter is required, he shall be at liberty to refuse to issue such license until such investigation is completed; however, the
village shall act to approve or deny any application within twenty one (21) days of the date of receipt of application. (1976 Code § 116.066)
4-4-3: PERMITS:
A. Permit Carried: Upon satisfactory evidence being submitted to the chief of police that applicant is a fit, proper person to engage in such business as a
salesperson, peddler or solicitor and upon the payment of the fee as provided in subsection 4-4-2C of this chapter, there shall be issued to the
applicant a permit in a form to be approved by the village clerk and the chief of police. Such form shall bear the signatures of these officers and a
photograph of said person to whom the permit is issued. The applicant shall then be permitted to engage in his business in the village for such time as
is provided for in his permit, not exceeding five (5) days in the case of a salesperson or a solicitor. (1976 Code § 116.064)
B. Exhibiting Permit: Every holder of a permit under this chapter shall exhibit the same at the request of any police officer or any citizen of the village, and
shall immediately upon making contact with a prospect in the village exhibit such permit and properly identify himself. (1976 Code § 116.065)
4-4-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Endorsement: The permission or license granted by this section shall in no way be recommendation for any article or thing, tangible or intangible, which
such salesperson, peddler or solicitor may have to offer the public. (1976 Code § 116.062)
B. Individual Permits: An individual permit shall be issued for each person and such applicant must appear in person under his own signature. No one
person shall be permitted to apply for a group or a crew of salespersons.
C. Hours: No solicitation whatsoever shall take place, before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. even by licensed salespersons,
peddlers or solicitors within the confines of the village limits. (1976 Code § 116.066)
D. Unreasonable Use Of License: No peddler, nor any person on his behalf, shall shout, use an amplifier, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device,
including any loud speaking radio and/or sound amplification system on any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the village, or upon
any private premises in the village where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets
and alleys or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention. (1976 Code § 116.067)
Chapter 5
TAXICABS
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 108/525
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "taxicab" shall mean and include all vehicles, however propelled, which carry passengers for hire upon or along
streets of said village, except vehicles operating regularly upon established routes. (1976 Code § 111.001)
4-5-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required: No person shall operate or maintain any taxicab, as herein defined, without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter set forth,
and unless said license is in full force and effect. (1976 Code § 111.002)
B. Application For License: Any person desiring a license for any taxicab shall file an application therefor with the village clerk, setting forth the name,
business and residence address of the applicant, a full description of the motor vehicle for which a license is desired, including the make, model, motor
and engine number and the state license number; and any other information that the mayor or the village clerk may require. Said license shall be
issued by the mayor upon conformance with the terms of this chapter. (1976 Code § 111.003)
C. Fees: The following license fees shall be paid annually in advance:
For the first taxicab operated by any person $15.00 per year
For each additional taxicab 10.00 per year
D. Plates: A metal plate shall be furnished by the village clerk for each taxicab so licensed, which plate shall at all times be firmly affixed above the state
license plate on the front of the taxicab. (1976 Code § 111.004)
4-5-3: DRIVER'S LICENSES:
A. License Required: No person shall operate a taxicab as the driver thereof without first having obtained a driver's license in the manner hereinafter set
forth, and unless said license is in full force and effect. (1976 Code § 111.005)
B. Application For License: Any person desiring a license as a driver of a taxicab shall file an application with the village clerk setting forth the name, sex,
residence address, date and place of birth, former occupation, experience as a driver and such information as the mayor or village clerk may require.
Such license shall be issued by the mayor to all persons of good moral character who have complied with this chapter and with all laws of the state of
Illinois governing taxicab drivers. No license shall be issued to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (1976 Code § 111.006)
C. Fees: The fee for a taxicab driver's license shall be four dollars ($4.00) per year, payable annually in advance. Every driver shall carry the license
issued to him under this chapter at all times that he is driving or on duty with any such taxicab, and shall exhibit it upon demand to any village police
officer or law enforcement officer. (1976 Code § 111.007)
4-5-4: CONDITION OF VEHICLES:
A. Mechanical Condition; Tests: Every taxicab operated upon the streets of the village shall be kept and maintained in a good and safe mechanical
condition. Every such taxicab during the month of January and the month of July of each year shall be subject to the safety test hereinafter provided at
an official testing station as established and set up by state statute. Said safety test shall include the testing and inspection of brakes, lights, horns,
reflectors, rearview mirrors, safety chains, frames, axles, body, wheels, steering apparatus and other safety device and appliances. The passing of the
safety test shall not be a bar at any time to prosecution for operating, or causing to be operated, a taxicab not in good and safe mechanical condition. If
the taxicab is in safe mechanical condition, the operator of the official testing station shall at once issue and affix to said taxicab a certificate of safety
which shall at all times be displayed on said taxicab. No certificate of safety issued during the first six (6) months of any year shall have any effect after
August 1, of that year and no such certificate issued during the second six (6) months of any year shall be of any effect after February 1, of the
succeeding year. No taxicab shall be operated upon the streets, alleys or public places of the village without having been tested as herein required or
without having said certificate of safety displayed on said taxicab. (1976 Code § 111.008)
B. Sanitary Conditions: Each taxicab shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. (1976 Code § 111.009)
4-5-5: OPERATION OF VEHICLES:
A. Obey Traffic Regulations: No taxicab shall be driven, operated or controlled so as to violate any of the parking or traffic ordinances of the village or so
as to obstruct traffic or interfere with the free movement of traffic upon any street, alley or public place.
B. Driving Under Influence: No person shall drive, operate or control any taxicab while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or criminal chemical
substance prohibited from use or possession by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and no driver shall drink any intoxicating liquor or use any criminal
chemical substances, either inside or outside of the taxicab during the hours he is driving or on duty with the taxicab. (1976 Code § 111.010)
C. Passengers Riding In Front: No person shall be allowed to ride in the front seat of any taxicab with the driver, with the following exceptions:
1. At such times as the rear seat or seats are fully occupied by paying passengers and the person riding in the front seat is a bona fide and paying
passenger.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 109/525
2. At such other times when the paying passenger shall request the front seat and the paying passenger shall be over the age of fifty five (55) years or
with such health problems that would make entering or exiting the rear seat difficult or painful. (1976 Code § 111.011)
D. Parking: No unemployed taxicab shall stand or be parked upon any public street or alley, except at such places as from time to time shall be designated
by the village board of trustees as taxicab stands and allotted to the particular license in question. (1976 Code § 111.012)
4-5-6: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. The mayor shall have the right to revoke any taxicab license issued hereunder whenever said taxicab is not kept in the mechanical or sanitary condition
required by this chapter, or is not equipped with a governor or other similar device in good repair as herein required.
B. The mayor shall have the right to revoke any license issued hereunder to any person as a taxicab driver whenever such person violates any of the
provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the village governing taxicabs or traffic, and also whenever it appears that a person holding any
such license is not of good moral character. (1976 Code § 111.013)
4-5-7: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1976 Code § 111.999; amd. 2003 Code)
Chapter 6
FOOD DEALERS AND ESTABLISHMENTS
4-6-1: FOOD DEALERS:
A. Definitions:
FOOD DEALER: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in conducting or operating any of the following businesses:
1. Restaurants and lunchrooms.
2. Grocery stores or establishments for the sale at retail of butter, cheese, fresh fruit, vegetables or other provisions.
3. Ice cream or soft drink parlors.
4. Meat markets or establishments for the retail sale of fresh meat, poultry or fish.
5. Bakeries. (1976 Code § 113.001)
B. License Requirements:
1. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do business in the village without having first secured a license therefor.
2. Applications For License: Applications for such license shall be made in writing to the village clerk upon forms furnished by the village clerk. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, applicant's address, the location of the premises upon which said license shall be used, the kind of
food to be sold or handled and a statement that the applicant agrees to comply with this and all other ordinances relating to or regulating said
business.
3. Compliance Certificates Required: In relation to a restaurant license or an itinerant restaurant license, the license shall not be issued unless the
applicant shall submit, prior to approval of the applicant's food dealer's license, a certificate from the county health department and the village
building department that the applicant and his premises are in full compliance with the regulations and ordinances of the county health department
and the village building department. (1976 Code § 113.002)
4. Fees: The annual fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 03-03-11, 3-3-2003)
5. Term: See subsection 4-1-7A of this title. (Ord. 10-03-06, 3-15-2010)
6. Revocation Of License: Any food dealer's license may be revoked by the mayor and village board of trustees for repeated violations of this chapter,
or of any other ordinance relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises, the articles sold or to the license required. (1976
Code § 113.004)
C. Sanitary Conditions:
1. Premises used for the sale or storage of food intended for human consumption must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to
permit any accumulation of refuse or waste of any kind to remain therein for more than twenty four (24) hours, and it shall be unlawful to permit any
decaying matter or decaying animal or plant material to remain on such premises.
2. If any building, factory or part thereof, or if any furniture, receptacles, implements, appliances or machinery, or if any car, truck or vehicle used in the
moving, distributing or transportation of any food product shall be constructed, kept, maintained or permitted to remain in a condition contrary to any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 110/525
of the requirements of this chapter, the same is declared a nuisance. (1976 Code § 113.008)
4-6-2: RESTAURANTS AND ITINERANT RESTAURANTS:
A. Licenses Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant or itinerant restaurant in the village without having first obtained a valid
license from the village in accordance with chapter 1 of this title.
B. Itinerant Restaurant Requirements:
1. License Term And Issuance: A license for an itinerant restaurant shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed one year. The license shall state the
name of the itinerant restaurant and the period of time for which it is valid. The license shall be issued to the person named in the application and
shall not be transferable. (1976 Code § 113.101)
2. Sanitary Requirements: The health officer shall approve an itinerant restaurant only if it complies with the following sanitation requirements:
a. It shall be located in clean surroundings and kept in clean and sanitary condition.
b. It shall be so constructed and arranged that food, drink, utensils and equipment will not be unduly exposed to insects or to dust or other
contamination.
c. Only food and drink which is clean, and free from adulteration shall be sold or served.
d. An adequate supply of water of a safe, sanitary quality shall be easily available and used for drinking and for cleaning utensils and equipment.
e. Only single service eating and drinking utensils shall be used.
f. If multiuse utensils are used in the preparation or serving of food or drink, they shall be thoroughly washed with hot water and a satisfactory
detergent and subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each day's use and so handled and stored as to be protected from
contamination. Adequate provisions shall be made for the refrigeration of perishable food and drink. Ice used in or with food or drink shall be from
a source approved by the health officer and so handled as to avoid contamination.
g. Garbage and refuse shall be kept in tightly covered, watertight containers until removed, and shall be disposed of in a place and manner approved
by the health officer.
h. Dishwater and other liquid wastes shall be disposed of so as not to create a nuisance.
i. Adequate and satisfactory toilet and handwashing facilities shall be readily accessible to employees. No person engaged in the handling or serving
of food or drink shall return to his work, after using the toilet, without first thoroughly washing his hands.
3. Hours Of Operation: No itinerant restaurant shall operate in any residential district within the village before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., nor after nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. or dark, whichever occurs first. (1976 Code § 113.104)
C. Compliance Required: The mayor may suspend or revoke any restaurant or itinerant restaurant license issued by the village upon the violation by the
licensee or employee of the licensee of any of the terms of this chapter, the suspension or revocation to be in accordance with chapter 1 of this title.
(1976 Code § 113.101)
4-6-3: OUTDOOR EATING CAFES IN DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT:
Outdoor eating cafes on private property located in the B-1 and B-2 downtown overlay district are permitted uses.
A. Conditions: Outdoor eating cafes on private property are subject to the following conditions:
1. An application for the permit must be submitted to the building department for review. An administrative review shall be conducted and a final
determination made within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application;
2. Outdoor cafes are permitted only as an accessory use to an existing restaurant that has obtained a special use permit from the village;
3. All tables, chairs and other appurtenances shall be constructed in such a manner that they can be easily removed during winter months and/or if
required by the village;
4. The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor cafe shall be restricted by the liquor license governing the restaurant;
5. The outdoor cafe shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity;
6. All outdoor cafes shall be exempt from applicable parking requirements;
7. The operation of outdoor cafes shall be permitted between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.;
8. All outdoor cafe permits shall be subject to an annual review and such permits may be revoked at any time on thirty (30) day notice;
9. The proprietor shall provide adequate outdoor refuse disposal as required by the village's health department.
B. Permit Fee: An annual permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required;
C. Design Criteria: The following design criteria shall be applied to all outdoor cafe petitions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 111/525
1. Canopies that are attached to the building will be permitted, when in conformance with these regulations;
2. All outdoor furnishings shall be designed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot;
3. Outdoor furnishings materials and their color should be selected for continuous harmony and aesthetic quality with the adjoining buildings and
streetscape. Materials shall be of durable quality such as wrought iron; light gauge materials like aluminum and plastics shall be generally
discouraged. Weather resistant wood is allowed only as a secondary accent material;
4. Colors should be harmonious; brilliant or bright colors shall be used only for accent;
5. Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. The table surface shall be smooth and easily
cleanable. Proper measures shall be taken to correct damage or decline due to the elements, neglect or abuse; and
6. Devices incorporated to separate eating areas from pedestrian pathways such as fencing or planter, must conform to above standard of design.
D. Comply With Other Regulations: All outdoor cafe establishments shall comply with state and village health code regulations. (1976 Code § 113.108)
4-6-4: PERMIT TO ALLOW WINE TO BE BROUGHT ONTO THE PREMISES OF A RESTAURANT:
Any business, licensed by the village as a restaurant, may apply to the village board of trustees for a permit to allow the restaurant's patrons to bring
bottles of wine onto the premises of that restaurant for the patron's consumption.
A. Conditions: Restaurants granted a permit pursuant to this section shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. The permit allows only wine to be brought into the restaurant.
2. The permit is only applicable to patrons seated at tables or booths.
3. This permit is only applicable between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. No new bottle may be accepted by staff
after the applicable hours.
4. Only one bottle per patron of legal drinking age at a table or booth shall be allowed.
5. A "corking fee" may be charged by the restaurant for the service of opening and serving the wine, but such fee shall be posted in plain view during
business hours.
6. Before opening, the wine must be sealed in its original seal.
7. The wine must be commercially manufactured.
8. The bottle may not exceed one thousand milliliters (1,000 ml) in volume.
9. The bottle must be given to the staff before the patron is seated.
10. The bottle may only be opened by the staff of the restaurant.
11. If the wine was sealed with a cork, no bottle may be returned to the patron unless staff of the restaurant has recorked the bottle to make the cork
flush with the top of the bottle. If the wine was sealed by some means other than cork, no bottle may be returned to the patron unless staff of the
restaurant has placed the original seal as close to its original condition as possible and secured to the bottle.
12. Before any patron may leave the premises with his/her/their previously opened bottle, an explanation of applicable traffic laws shall be given.
B. Application: Applications for such permits shall be made in writing, to the mayor, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent
thereof if a corporation, with a nonrefundable one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee and shall contain the following information:
1. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; if a corporation the name and address of the duly authorized agent who
signed the application.
2. The name, location and a description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated with a permit authorized pursuant to this section.
C. Review: Each application shall be reviewed by the village board of trustees and either approved or denied by a majority vote. If approved, the permit will
be valid for one year from the day approved by the board.
D. Renewal: Renewal shall be obtained through the same procedure as application, but the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
E. Review, Renew, Or Revoke: The village retains the right to review, renew or revoke a permit granted under this section. (Ord. 05-12-29, 12-19-2005)
4-6-5: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1976 Code § 113.999; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 05-12-29, 12-19-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 112/525
Chapter 7
OTHER BUSINESSES
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them:
AUCTIONEER: Any person, firm or corporation who sells property at public auction for another on commission and for a recompense, or one who
conducts a public sale at auction.
BAKERY: Any establishment or place used for the manufacturing of bread, buns, rolls, biscuits, cakes, crackers, pastry, doughnuts or any establishment
used for the purpose of mixing, compounding or baking any food product of which flour or meal is the principal ingredient for sale to the public. A licensed
restaurant in which the foregoing food products are mixed, and baked for consumption in such restaurant only, or in an ordinary restaurant on a stove or
range, shall not be considered a bakery.
BANK: Any building, structure or enclosure where money, or other thing of value, is held on deposit, loaned or pledged and general banking business is
done.
COAL YARD: Any place where coal is sold from a yard, car or track or offered for sale or kept and stored for sale.
DRAYMAN: Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in transporting, hauling or moving chattel property or merchandise by means of wagons,
drays or motor vehicles for hire.
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of installing, or altering by contract, electrical equipment for the
utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power, but not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and
not including apparatus, wires or equipment installed by or for public utilities, including common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois
commerce commission for use in their operation as public utilities. The term electrical contractor does not include employees employed by such contractor
to do or supervise such work.
FILLING STATION: Any building, structure, enclosure or other place where a container or tank, either portable or stationary, containing any gasoline,
naphtha, petroleum, gas, kerosene, turpentine or other inflammable liquids are kept and located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale or distributing,
provided this shall not apply to places where any such inflammable liquids are kept or sold for medicinal purposes only.
ICE CREAM PARLOR: Any place where ice cream, ices and ice cream beverages are kept and offered for sale to be consumed on the premises.
ICE DEALER: Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in the business of wholesaling or retailing or selling any ice from house to house or to
business places within the village.
LAUNDRY: Any place, building, structure, room, establishment, premises, or portion thereof, used for the purpose of marking, sorting, washing, dyeing,
starching or ironing collars, cuffs or other wearing apparel, table, bed or other household linens, towels, bedding or other washable fabrics for the general
public.
LUMBERYARD: Any place where lumber is sold from a yard car or track, offered for sale, kept for the purpose of seasoning or drying, or kept and stored
for sale.
MANUFACTURER: The production of an article of tangible personal property, whether the article is a finished product or an article for use in the process of
manufacturing, or assembling a different article of tangible personal property by a procedure commonly regarded as manufacturing, processing, fabricating
or refining that changes some existing material or materials into a material with a different form, use or name.
MILK DEALER: One who shall sell, offer for sale, expose for sale or exchange and deliver milk or cream for human food to the general public.
PRIVATE SCAVENGER: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish for hire.
PUBLIC GARAGE: Any building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place (excepting a public thoroughfare) where two (2) or more automobiles or
other motor vehicles are stored or parked in a condition ready for use, for repair or for service to the public.
RESTAURANT AND COFFEEHOUSE: Any house, room, place, establishment, vehicle, wagon or stand used for the preparation or serving of meals,
lunches and coffee as a beverage, and other refreshments are sold, served or supplied to the public to be consumed on the premises.
RETAIL BEVERAGE DEALER: Any person, firm or corporation selling, offering for sale, or keeping with the intention of selling at retail, either in bottles or
other containers, for consumption on the premises, any malt or vinous nonintoxicating beverages as defined by law, or any soft drinks, carbonated
beverages, fruit juices, waters, milk, buttermilk, chocolate, tea, bouillon or other beverages.
RETAIL DRUGSTORE: Any place or establishment where prescriptions, drugs or medicines are filled or compounded; or where medicines, drugs,
chemicals, therapeutic preparations, druggists' sundries, invalid and infant foods, physicians' supplies, proprietary medicines, toilet articles and other
articles commonly sold in drugstores are sold, offered for sale, or kept with the intention of selling at retail or for supply for physicians, dentists,
veterinarians or other practitioners.
RETAIL FOOD STORE: Any building, room, enclosure, place or establishment used, operated or maintained for the purpose of selling, offering for sale or
keeping with the purpose of selling or distributing at retail, any article of food, condiment or drink used or intended for human consumption or any such
article which is an ingredient or is used for or is mixed with or enters into the composition of any such food, provided that for the purpose of this code the
term food or drink shall not include ice cream, ices, soft drinks or other beverages.
SWIMMING POOL: Any artificial basin of water which is modified, improved, constructed or installed for the purpose of public swimming, wading, floating,
or diving, and includes pools for community use, pools at apartments, condominiums, and other groups or associations having five (5) or more living units,
clubs, churches, camps, schools, institutions, YMCAs, YWCAs, parks, recreational areas, motels, hotels and other commercial establishments. It does not
include pools at private residences intended only for the use of the owner and guests. Any pool at private residence for which consideration is given for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 113/525
lessons shall be considered a swimming pool for the purposes of this chapter.
TOBACCO AND CIGAR STORE: Such place having for sale tobacco, cigars or cigarettes or cigarette papers or wrappers.
UNDERTAKER: Any person, firm or corporation who prepares a human dead body for burial or cremation, manages funerals, conducts, manages or is in
charge of undertaking rooms, stores or places or in any way is held out to the public as an undertaker or funeral director. (1976 Code § 116.002; amd.
2003 Code; Ord. 08-06-14, 6-16-2008)
4-7-2: MOBILE FOOD CARTS:
A. License Required: No person shall sell or offer for sale any popcorn, peanuts, candies, ice cream or confectionery from any wagon or stand on the
streets or public places of the village, or immediately adjacent to any of the sidewalks in the village, without first procuring a license in the manner
provided by chapter 1 of this title. (1976 Code § 116.015)
B. Fees: The license fee for any such wagon or stand shall be that fee set out in section 4-1-6 of this title. (1976 Code § 116.016)
C. Violation: Upon failure of any such person to first procure a license in accordance with chapter 1 of this title, the chief of police may forcibly remove any
such wagon or stand from the limits of any street within the village. (1976 Code § 116.017)
4-7-3: LAUNDRIES:
A. Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this section shall apply to laundries, as defined in section 4-7-1 of this chapter, as well as to any
establishment wherein washing machine units are available for use by the general public upon the deposit of a coin or a payment of a fee to the
operator of such establishment or his agent. (1976 Code § 116.020)
B. License Required: No person shall conduct, operate, maintain or carry on any laundry within the village limits without first obtaining a license so to do as
herein provided. (1976 Code § 116.021)
C. Application; Investigation And Issuance:
1. The application for such license shall be made in writing to the village clerk and shall truly state the name and address of the applicant, if an
individual, or the names and residences of all members of the firm, if a copartnership, or the names and residences of the principal officers of a
corporation, together with the location or proposed location for which such license is desired, and the maximum number of persons to be employed
therein.
2. Within ten (10) days after the receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the health officer to cause an investigation to be made of the premises
named and described in such application, for the purpose of determining whether the sanitary conditions therein conform with the provisions of this
section.
3. If the health officer shall be satisfied that the proposed laundry is in conformity with the provisions of this section, he shall transmit such application to
the mayor, together with his recommendation for the issuance of a license, whereupon the mayor shall issue or cause to be issued to such applicant,
upon payment to the village clerk of the license fee hereinafter provided, a license attested by the village clerk authorizing such applicant to
establish, maintain, conduct or operate a laundry at the place designated in such application for and during the period of such license. (1976 Code
§ 116.022)
D. Fees And License Term:
1. For every license issued under the provisions of this section for the establishment, maintenance or operation of any laundry, there shall be paid to
the village clerk, by each and every applicant, a license fee as outlined in section 4-1-6 of this title.
2. Every such license shall expire on April 30, following the date of its issuance. (1976 Code § 116.023)
E. Conditions Of License:
1. Sanitary Premises:
a. Every room or place used as a laundry, or for the storage of unlaundered or laundered fabrics in connection therewith, shall at all times be kept in
good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition as to floors, walls, ceilings, windows, woodwork, machinery, utensils and fixtures, and
every such room or place shall be kept free from rats, mice and vermin and all matters of an infectious or contagious nature.
b. No person who has tuberculosis, any acute or active venereal disease, any communicable or loathsome skin disease or any other communicable
disease, shall work in any laundry, and no owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any laundry shall knowingly require, permit or suffer
any such person to be employed therein.
c. No wallpaper shall be applied upon the walls or ceilings of any room used for laundry purposes. (1976 Code § 116.024)
2. Sleeping In Laundry Prohibited: No person shall be permitted to sleep in any laundry, nor shall any sleeping room or living room be in direct
communication with any laundry. No laundered or unlaundered article belonging to the trade of any laundry shall be stored or kept in any room which
is used for living purposes. (1976 Code § 116.025)
3. Proper Facilities Provided: Every person owning, maintaining, conducting or operating any laundry shall be required to provide proper facilities and
equipment for the separate handling of clean and soiled fabrics, and no clean or laundered fabrics shall be allowed to come in contact with any
unlaundered or soiled fabrics of any kind at any time. (1976 Code § 116.026)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 114/525
4. Removal Of Incomplete Laundry: No person owning, maintaining, conducting or operating any laundry in which wearing apparel, household linens,
towels, bedding and all other fabrics are received and treated through the process of washing, shall remove or cause to be removed from such
premises until the same has been thoroughly sterilized by keeping it in the washing machine, vat or other vessel provided for that purpose, until the
water therein has been brought to a boiling temperature or maintained at a temperature of one hundred seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (175°F) for
at least twenty (20) minutes; or by subjecting it to live steam pressure; or by keeping it in a drying house, or drying chamber, in which the
temperature is not less than two hundred fifteen degrees Fahrenheit (215°F) for a period of not less than fifteen (15) minutes; or by passing it
through any ironing machine where the ironing surface is at a temperature of not less than two hundred twenty five degrees Fahrenheit (225°F),
except silks and woolens or other fabrics which would be injured by the foregoing processes, provided the same shall be treated with soap, bleach or
any other standard disinfectant solutions as shall be approved by the health officer. (1976 Code § 116.027)
5. Attendants: A qualified attendant or operator shall be present in every laundry at all times during the hours of operation of said laundry. (1976 Code
§ 116.028)
F. Inspections: It shall be the duty of the health officer, and he is authorized and empowered, to inspect or cause to be inspected, from time to time, all
premises wherein laundries are conducted, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this section and all other ordinances of the village
and the laws of the state of Illinois relative to the keeping and operating of laundries, are being complied with, and it shall be his duty to cause all such
ordinances and laws to be strictly enforced. (1976 Code § 116.029)
G. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person engaged in doing custom laundry work at home for a regular family trade, nor to
any room, rooms or portion thereof located in any dwelling in which domestic laundry work is done by or for the occupants of said building exclusively.
(1976 Code § 116.030)
4-7-4: ITINERANT MERCHANTS:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise, either by himself or as merchant or clerk for
another, to set up, maintain or carry on, aid or assist in setting up, maintaining or carrying on within this village any temporary store or establishment for
the sale or disposition by auction or otherwise of any stock of goods, wares or merchandise (not being agricultural products raised by the vendor)
without first having obtained a license for so doing as hereinafter provided. (1976 Code § 116.045)
B. Fees: The license fee for the same shall be at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day, provided that no license shall be granted for a longer period than
three (3) months without renewal and the amount of such license shall be payable in advance. Such license shall be issued in the manner provided for
the issuing of Village licenses during regular working hours. (1976 Code § 116.046)
4-7-5: CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS:
Charitable organizations wishing to establish a tag day solicitation within the Village shall request the same from the Village Board of Trustees. (1976 Code
§ 116.050)
4-7-6: PRIVATE SCAVENGERS:
A. License Required: No person shall engage in the business of private scavenger, or shall be permitted to remove and dispose of garbage and rubbish,
without first having obtained a license to do so.
B. Application; Issuance: An application for a private scavenger's license shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of chapter 1 of this
title. The applicant shall also state the number of vehicles which he intends to operate or use in said business and what method of disposal and the
place thereof are proposed by the applicant. All applications for licenses, or any renewal thereof, shall be approved by the Mayor and Village Board of
Trustees. (1976 Code § 116.070)
C. Fees And Term: The annual fee for each private scavenger's license shall be as set out in section 4-1-6 of this title. The license year shall be as
provided in section 4-1-7 of this title. No license fee shall be prorated for a portion of a year and no license fee shall be refunded. (1976 Code
§ 116.070; amd. 2003 Code)
D. Compliance Required: No license shall be issued to a private scavenger if it appears that the conduct of the license activity will be contrary to the
health, safety or welfare of the public. (1976 Code § 116.070)
4-7-7: SEASONAL HOLIDAY BUSINESS VENTURES INVOLVING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS:
A. There shall be created a new class of business, entitled "seasonal holiday business ventures involving agricultural products", such as, Christmas trees,
pumpkins, corn stalks, etc.
B. The license fee for such a business shall be five dollars ($5.00) per day, but no more than fifty dollars ($50.00) per season.
C. Said business may operate only in the commercial areas of the Village which have business or manufacturing zoning.
D. The applicant for the license must appear before the Village Board to determine if it is appropriate to issue a business license for the sale of the
seasonal agricultural products stated above.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 115/525
The Board will take into consideration in determining whether or not a license should be issued the following:
1. The location of the business, whether in a parking lot, vacant lot adjacent to an established business, or in an established business.
2. If the business is located outdoors, the total square foot area the business will encompass as it relates to the total parking area of the adjacent
businesses.
3. Whether the business will create any pedestrian, traffic or other hazard.
The Board will make its final determination within thirty (30) days of the date of application. (Ord. 93-11-25, 11-15-1993)
4-7-8: TATTOO AND PIERCING STUDIO:
A. License Required: No person shall operate a business in which the practice of marking the skin with indelible patterns or pictures by making punctures
and inserting pigments or the puncturing or piercing of the skin of a person for the insertion of jewelry or other adornment takes place without first
procuring a license in the manner provided by this section.
B. Applicant: A person, business, or corporation may apply to the Village Board of Trustees for a license to allow the establishment of a tattoo and piercing
studio. No license shall be issued unless the applicant, along with other requirements in this section, shows proof of compliance, to the satisfaction of
Village staff, with the conditions listed in subsection C of this section. In the application the applicant shall be responsible for naming the person who
shall be responsible for assuring compliance and giving notice to the Village should that person change during the term of the license.
C. Conditions: Before any applicant is granted an initial license or renewal pursuant to this section and throughout the duration of an issued license, the
applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of Village staff, compliance with the following conditions and requirements:
1. Proof of applicable liability insurance;
2. Autoclave on premises and in use for sanitation and sterilization purposes;
3. Monthly testing showing spore counts below acceptable levels as established by the Lake County Department of Health;
4. Compliance with all regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA);
5. The structure housing the studio must be greater than four hundred eighty feet (480') from any part of the property on which any church, public
school, playground or athletic field is located; and
6. Compliance with all relevant Federal, State, and County licensing and practice standards. If any such standard conflicts with this section, the stricter
shall apply.
D. Initial Application: Initial applications for such license shall be made in writing, to the Mayor signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly
authorized agent thereof if a corporation, with a nonrefundable one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee and shall contain the following:
1. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; if a corporation the name and address of the duly authorized agent who
signed the application;
2. The name, location and a description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated with the license authorized pursuant to this
section;
3. Compliance with the provisions of subsections C1 through C6 of this section;
4. The name and address of the person who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. This person may be
the same as the applicant.
E. Review: Each initial application shall be reviewed by the Village Board of Trustees and either approved or denied by a majority vote. If approved, the
license shall terminate on May 31 next following the date of issuance. Renewals shall be for one year terms running from June 1 to the following May
31. The fee to be paid shall be applicable for a full year, or any part thereof, without proration or other reduction if purchased for less than a full year. All
fees for licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be paid at the time the application is made.
F. Renewal: Renewals shall be reviewed and processed by Village staff. The renewal of a license will be granted in the routine course of business
provided that there are no open violations, unresolved enforcement actions or unpaid assessments of any kind. If such matters exist, the renewal shall
be submitted to the Village Board with such recommendation as staff may suggest. Renewal fees shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
G. Transfers: Licenses may be transferred, providing that the new licensee is qualified under subsections C1 through C6 of this section. If there is any
question about the qualification of any proposed transferree, the requested license transfer shall be submitted to the Village Board with such
recommendation as staff may suggest.
H. Village Rights: The Village retains the right to review, renew, or revoke a license granted under this section. (Ord. 17-06-16, 6-12-2017)
4-7-9: SWIMMING POOLS:
A. License Required: Any person wishing to utilize a swimming pool for the purposes of providing swimming lessons, shall first register with and submit for
and obtain a license from the Village of Antioch.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 116/525
B. Application: All registrants shall submit to the Village an application on a form provided by the Village Clerk which shall contain the following:
1. Proof of their approved State of Illinois Department of Public Health swimming facility license,
2. Proof of Lake County Health Department approvals, and
3. An affidavit stating its understanding and compliance with the provisions of Illinois Swimming Facility Act, 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 125/4.
Application forms and supporting documentation shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
C. Application Fee: All persons required to register with and obtain a license from the Village for the purpose of operating a swimming pool shall pay an
application fee equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 08-06-14, 6-16-2008)
4-7-10: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this Code for each offense. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1976 Code § 116.999; amd. Ord. 93-11-25, 11-15-1993; 2003 Code; Ord. 06-06-20, 6-5-2006; Ord. 08-06-14,
6-16-2008)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 18-07-29 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 8
SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMITTING
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 18-07-29 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
4-8-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use,
in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
B. Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
C. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter,
the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or
regulations. (Ord. 18-07-29, 7-9-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 18-07-29 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
"The Act" shall mean Public Act 100-0585, known as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. All other terms shall have the same meaning ascribed
to them as by the Act. (Ord. 18-07-29, 7-9-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 18-07-29 - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. Go to new ordinance.
4-8-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in subsection C9
of this section, regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain a permit from the Village prior to collocating any small wireless facility. An application shall be received and
processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
1. Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell Facilities
Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 117/525
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed
to be installed;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent written evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
2. Application Process: The Village shall process applications as follows:
a. Application Priority: The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
b. Application Processing: An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement
of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village
fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days following the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the 90th day after submission of the complete application, or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit application within
the time limits as provided under this chapter.
c. Installation Of New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the 120th day after submission of the complete application, or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit application
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
d. Application Denial: The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances, or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant concurrent with the notice of application denial.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty
(30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days
of the denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application, with applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated
with the small wireless facility.
e. Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the
Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and
the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
3. Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
4. Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
b. A local, State, or Federal disaster declaration, or similar emergency, that causes the delay.
5. Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the
applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 118/525
if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or
that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
6. Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable
Village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed, as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or regulations
in effect at the time of renewal.
7. Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery at the
Village's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
C. Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
1. Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably determines
that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
2. Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair, and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good
repair, and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents, or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable
industry and governmental standards and regulations.
3. No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere
with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code
of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
4. Electric Distribution Or Transmission System: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of
an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and
on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
5. Public Safety: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
6. Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic
district.
7. Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to
collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a
single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village
may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet
(100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits, or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
8. Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
a. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date
the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting
right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
b. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 119/525
9. Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which
the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms, and conditions
set forth in the Village of Antioch zoning ordinance.
10. Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the rightof-
way.
11. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that
addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.
12. Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning, or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
13. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60)
days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed
three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the
applicant.
D. Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
1. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
2. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes
the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
3. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable, and applications not accompanied by the fee shall be deemed incomplete.
4. The Village shall not require an application, approval, or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
a. Routine maintenance;
b. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies
the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with subsection B1d of this section; or
c. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
5. Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
E. Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
1. Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within rightsof-
way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
2. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or conservation
purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are
under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
3. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities
are being used, developed, and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service
or video service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
F. Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole
located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after the
first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
G. Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of
the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of
the abandonment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 120/525
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances
or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village. Such
notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
H. Indemnification: A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property
damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and
the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with
respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
I. Insurance: The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
1. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
2. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
3. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits
consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section.
A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 18-07-29, 7-9-2018)
Chapter 9
ADULT USES
4-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult uses to protect the community from the many types of criminal activity frequently associated with such
uses. The village recognizes that such regulation cannot, in effect, prohibit such uses. This chapter has balanced the competing interest of the community
in reducing criminal activity and protecting property values versus the protected rights of the owners, operators, employees and patrons of adult uses.
(Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, or for viewing on the premises by use of
motion picture devices or by coin operated means, any books, magazines, films and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area"; or an establishment which a segment or
section devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon
its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises
or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which: a) features topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers, male or female
impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; b) not infrequently features entertainers who display "specified anatomical areas"; or c) features
entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron
or features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in, explicit simulation of "specified sexual activities".
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing,
"novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas", or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises, or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets and other similar uses.
EMPLOYEE: Employees, independent contractors or any other persons who are retained by the licensee or subject to dismissal from working at the
licensed premises.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals; 2) pubic region; 3) buttock; 4) female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 121/525
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
A. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance
by a minor; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described
above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
B. For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or 3) less than five (5) years have
elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement from the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty four (24) month
period;
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no affect on the disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
4-9-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult use without a valid adult use business license issued by the village pursuant to this chapter.
A. Applications For License: An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the village.
1. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as is needed to enable the village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
2. If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is an individual, that person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate an adult use is other than individual, each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the business must sign
the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 4-9-4 of this chapter, and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if the license is granted.
B. Contents Of Application: The completed application for an adult use business license shall contain the following information:
1. If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall submit proof that he is eighteen (18) years of age;
2. If the applicant is a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or
limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
3. If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal shareholders, and the name and
address of the registered corporate agent.
C. Additional Application Requirements:
1. If the applicant intends to operate the adult use business under a name other than that of the applicant, he must state: a) the business' assumed
name; and b) any required registration documents.
2. If the applicant has been convicted of any specified criminal activity, as defined in section 4-9-2 of this chapter, he must specify the criminal activity
involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of such.
3. The applicant must state if a previous license under this chapter or similar ordinance from another city or county was denied, suspended or revoked.
He must include the name and location of the business as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation.
4. It must be stated whether the applicant holds any other license under this chapter or other similar ordinance from another city or county and, if so,
the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
5. The applicant must submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the
business. This sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions
of the interior of the premises. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
4-9-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 122/525
A. Within sixty (60) days after receipt of a completed adult use business license application, the corporate authorities of the village shall approve or deny
the issuance of said license. The corporate authorities of the village shall approve the issuance of a license unless they determine, by a preponderance
of the evidence, any one or more of the following:
1. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
2. The applicant is overdue in payment to the village of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him in relation to any
business;
3. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form.
4. The applicant has been denied a license by the corporate authorities of the village, or any other city, village, town, township or county, to operate an
adult use business within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose license to operate an adult use business has been revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
5. The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter.
6. The premises to be used for the adult use business have not been approved by the fire protection district and the building department as being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
7. The license fee required by subsection 4-9-5A of this chapter has not been paid.
8. The applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the adult
use business. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read at any time.
C. The fire protection district and code enforcement officers shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance, or not in compliance, with
village codes within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the village.
D. No adult use business license shall be issued unless the premises at which the adult use will operate are in conformance with the restrictions set forth
in the zoning ordinance1. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
4-9-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Fees: Every application for an adult use business license, whether a new license or for renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by a five
hundred dollar ($500.00) nonrefundable application and investigation fee. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
B. Expiration Of License:
1. Each license shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the May 31 next following the date of its issuance and may be renewed only by
making application as provided in section 4-9-4 of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration
date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. (Ord. 10-03-06, 3-15-
2010)
2. If the village denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the
village finds that the basis for denial of the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license.
C. Transfer Of License: A licensee shall not transfer his license to another person or business, nor shall a licensee operate an adult use business under
the authority of a license at any place other than the address on the license.
D. Business Records: All adult uses shall file a verified report with the village showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to employees during
the preceding calendar year. In addition, all adult uses shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses and ages of all
persons employed, including independent contractors, by the licensee.
E. Hours Of Operation: No adult use facility shall be open prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday. Said
adult use facilities shall be closed on Sundays and all legal holidays2.
F. Location:
1. Zoning: Adult use facilities shall only be allowed to operate in the M-1 manufacturing zoning district as said M-1 manufacturing zoning district existed
as of January 1, 2000. No adult use will be allowed in the M-1 district as to property annexed into the village after January 1, 2000.
2. Distance From Certain Uses: No adult use shall be within six hundred feet (600') from the property line of a school, church, park, residential
neighborhood, business serving alcoholic beverages, state controlled highway, the Antioch downtown overlay district or another adult use facility3.
For purposes of this subsection F2, distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
point on the property line of the lot on which the adult use establishment is located to the nearest point on any property line of a residential property
or any lot on which a protected use or other adult use establishments is located, as the case may be.
3. Limited Exception For Subsequent Protected Uses And Residential Property: An adult use lawfully operating under this chapter and under the
village's adult use licensing provisions, shall not be deemed to be in violation of the location restrictions set forth in this subsection solely because a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 123/525
protected use subsequently locates within the minimum required distance of the adult use establishment or when any other lot or tract within the
required minimum distance of the adult use establishment subsequently becomes residential property. This subsection shall not apply to an adult use
establishment at a time when an application for an adult use license, under the adult use establishment licensing provisions of the village for that
establishment is submitted after the license has previously expired, has been revoked or is at that time under suspension. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-
2000)
4-9-6: INSPECTIONS:
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, fire protection district, building department or other village or village
designated departments or agencies to inspect the premises of the adult use for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the
business is occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates an adult use or his agent or employee violates this chapter if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any
time the business is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
4-9-7: BUSINESS RESTRICTIONS:
A. Adult Entertainment Cabarets: All dancing and other performances shall occur on a stage intended for that purpose, which is raised at least two feet (2')
from the level of the floor. No dancing or other performances shall occur closer than ten feet (10') to any patron. In addition, no performer shall fondle,
caress or otherwise touch any patron and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any performer. No patron shall directly pay or give any
gratuity to any performer and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. Gratuities may be indirectly given to performers by placing
the gratuity on the stage.
B. Video Viewing Booths: No booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of
entertainment shall have doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms so used
shall have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room. All such described
areas shall be lighted in such a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from
the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the motion pictures or other offered
entertainment. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
4-9-8: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Alcoholic Beverages: No alcoholic beverages shall be served, consumed, possessed, delivered or transported on or about the premises at any time.
B. Minors: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed on, about or inside the adult use premises. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
4-9-9: LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Suspension:
1. The village may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if, after a hearing, it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee, a) violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; b) refused to allow an inspection of the adult use business premises as
authorized by this chapter; or c) knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult use business premises.
2. If the licensee, or an employee of the licensee, has been found guilty in a court of law of a violation of this chapter, no hearing is necessary prior to
suspension of the license.
B. Revocation:
1. The village shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in subsection A of this section occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months, or if the licensee is convicted of any specified criminal activity.
2. The village shall revoke a license if the village determines, after a hearing, that the licensee:
a. Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
b. Knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;
c. Knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
d. Knowingly operated the adult use business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
e. Knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises;
f. Is delinquent in payment to the village, county or state for any taxes or fees past due; or
g. Knowingly or intentionally facilitated another commission of the offense of public indecency.
3. If the village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult use business license for one
year from the date the revocation became effective. If subsequent to revocation, the village finds that the factual basis for the revocation did not
occur, the applicant may be granted a license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 124/525
4. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek
prompt judicial review of such action in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000)
4-9-10: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each occurrence.
Each day that the violation of any of the provisions contained in this chapter continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 00-12-20, 12-4-2000;
amd. 2003 Code)
Chapter 10
RAFFLES
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are applicable to the administration of this chapter:
BUSINESS: With respect to an organization, a voluntary organization composed of individuals and enterprises who have joined together to advance the
commercial, financial, industrial or consumer interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: With respect to an organization, an organization or institution organized and operated to confer benefits upon an indefinite number of
members of the public based upon status, need, disadvantage, illness or other similar criterion, where the service rendered to those eligible for benefits
also confers some benefit to the public.
CIVIC: With respect to an organization, a voluntary organization composed of individuals and enterprises who have joined together to advance the
historical, cultural or social interests of a community.
EDUCATIONAL: With respect to an organization, an organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches
of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study
presented in tax supported schools.
FRATERNAL: With respect to an organization, an organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is both to promote the
welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that
otherwise would be cared for by the government.
LABOR: With respect to an organization, an organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those
engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: With respect to an organization, an organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit
inuring to anyone as a result of the operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/1, in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented or differentiated by a number or combination of numbers or by some
other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance;
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS: With respect to an organization, any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: With respect to an organization, an organization or association comprised of members substantially all of whom are individuals who have
served in the military service of the United States, their spouses, widows or widowers and the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its
members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. (Ord. 01-12-32, 12-3-2001)
4-10-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Licenses Required; Fee: Except as provided in section 4-10-3 of this chapter, no person, organization or corporation shall conduct a raffle or sell
chances for a raffle within the village without having first obtained a license for that purpose. There is no fee for a raffle license. (Ord. 15-10-14, 10-19-
2015)
B. Eligibility For License: Licenses may be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, civic or veterans'
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of at least five (5) years before
making application for a license and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the village determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. In order to be
granted a license under this chapter, the applicant must sign a sworn statement, contained in the application, attesting to the nonprofit character of the
prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of the organization.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 125/525
C. Ineligibility For License: The following are ineligible for a license under this chapter:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
3. Any person who is not of good moral character;
4. Any organization or institution in which a person as defined in subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest,
or in which such a person is active or employed;
5. Any organization or institution in which a person as defined in subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this section is to participate in the management or
operation of a raffle as defined in this chapter.
D. Applications: The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the village in which the raffle chances will be sold or issued,
the time period during which raffles or chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances, the location or locations at which
winning chances will be determined, and whether the persons holding the winning chances must be present at the drawing or other determination in
order to be eligible to receive the winning prizes.
E. Approval/Disapproval Of Application: The village shall, within thirty (30) days, evaluate and either approve or disapprove of an application for a raffle
license under this chapter. The village clerk shall issue the license if the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter.
F. Duration Of License: Each license shall be valid for only one raffle or for a specified number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period, not to
exceed one year. Such license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor in the event of a violation of the terms of this chapter or of any applicable
state law. (Ord. 01-12-32, 12-3-2001)
4-10-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A license need not be issued to any bona fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, civic or veterans' organization that conducts a raffle at a
meeting or function held by that organization in which chances are sold only to members of that organization and/or to attendees at that meeting or
function and when the winning chance is chosen at the same meeting or function at which the chances are sold. (Ord. 01-12-32, 12-3-2001)
4-10-4: LIMITATIONS:
The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle under this chapter and in accordance with applicable state
law is limited to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), and the maximum retail value of a single prize in a single raffle is limited to thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00). The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold is limited to one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the
maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold is limited to one hundred twenty (120) days. (Ord. 01-12-32, 12-3-2001)
4-10-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles pursuant to this chapter is subject to the following restrictions:
A. Use Of Proceeds: The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be devoted exclusively to the lawful purposes of the organization or institution licensed to
conduct the raffle. "Net proceeds" means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees
and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle; provided that in no event shall the prize expenses be allowed to
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross receipts of the raffle. (Ord. 08-04-09, 4-7-2008)
B. Participation In Management Of Raffle: No person except a bona fide member of the licensed sponsoring organization may participate in the
management or operation of the raffle.
C. Remuneration: No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
D. Locations: Winning raffle chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license.
E. Age Of Participants: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when that
person is accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 01-12-32, 12-3-2001)
4-10-6: RECORDS:
Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep such records and shall handle the receipts from the operation of any such raffle as required by
applicable state law. (Ord. 01-12-32, 12-3-2001)
4-10-7: RAFFLES MANAGER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 126/525
A. Manager Required: All operations involved in the conducting of a raffle shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the
organization in its application for license.
B. Bond:
1. Unless waived as provided in subsection B2 of this section, the manager shall give a fidelity bond in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost
to the applicant of prizes to be awarded and expenses to be incurred, as well as the estimated net proceeds of the raffle. The bond shall provide that
notice must be given to the village clerk not less than thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation of any bond issued pursuant to this subsection.
2. The license application shall contain a waiver of bond provision providing that the manager's bond required by subsection B1 of this section may be
waived only by a unanimous vote of the members of the organization to which the license is to be issued. The village clerk shall have the discretion
to accept the representation of the organization that its membership has voted unanimously to waive the manager's bond, but the village clerk may
require evidence of such unanimous vote before allowing the license to be issued without a manager's bond. (Ord. 01-12-32, 12-3-2001)
Chapter 11
BUSINESS STRUCTURES FACADE IMPROVEMENT GRANTS
4-11-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF GRANT PROGRAM:
Subject to the terms and limitations of this chapter, there is hereby established a 50/50 grant program for the purposes of development and redevelopment
within certain designated areas of the village of Antioch. (Ord. 06-06-22, 6-19-2006)
4-11-2: PURPOSE:
In order to stimulate visual and aesthetic interest in, and renewed and enhanced economic vitality in the qualifying business areas, the purpose of this
chapter is to provide economic incentives to business property owners of qualifying properties within qualifying zoning districts for building facade
upgrades and redesigns provided such facade upgrades and redesigns comply with the standards provided herein and comply with the provisions of any
other applicable ordinances and regulations of the village. (Ord. 06-06-22, 6-19-2006)
4-11-3: DESIGNATION OF QUALIFYING ZONING DISTRICTS:
To qualify for the facade improvement program (the "program") established by this chapter, the property which is the subject of an application for
assistance under the program must be shown to be clearly within zoning districts B-1, B-2, B-3, or the downtown overlay district within the territorial limits
of the village of Antioch, Illinois. (Ord. 07-02-04, 2-20-2007)
4-11-4: CREATION OF FACADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM:
As part of a business area development, rehabilitation and enhancement plan, there is hereby created a facade improvement program to be implemented
within the qualifying zoning districts. The facade improvement program shall operate as follows:
A. General Intent: Approved property owners who install at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in value and actual cost of qualifying improvements to
facades and storefronts are eligible to apply to the village for a cost sharing grant equal to fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the work, up to a maximum
grant of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per storefront or interior, per fiscal year. The village shall verify and determine the value and the cost of such
improvements based upon credible evidence thereof submitted by the applicant. Only the actual cost paid for such improvements, and not the value
thereof, shall be eligible for cost sharing under this chapter. Provided, however, where actual costs paid for the qualifying improvements are less than
the value of those improvements (as such value is determined by the village) only the actual eligible cost paid shall be eligible for the grant cost share
reimbursement.
B. Eligible Improvements: Eligible improvements include brick cleaning and tuck pointing; painting; awnings; sign replacement or repair (but only under
circumstances where it is determined by the village that the proposed signage is a significant contribution to the overall architecture of the building);
window display area remodeling; exterior lighting; replacement of windows or doors; restoration of original architectural features; and other
improvements which are visible from the street and which have a positive impact on the appearance of the building. Interior restoration would include
tin ceiling restoration or restoration of original woodwork or architectural features. Other interior eligible expenses include life safety devices and
handicap washroom upgrades. (Ord. 07-02-04, 2-20-2007)
C. Ineligible Improvements: Improvements which are ineligible for grants under the facade improvement program include new construction; interior
remodeling (except the improvements listed above); purchase of furnishings, equipment or other personal property which does not become part of the
real estate; and improvements completed or expenses incurred prior to notification of approval.
D. Criteria For Grant Eligibility: The criteria used to determine eligibility for grants under the facade improvement program are as follows:
1. The compatibility of the proposed improvements with the overall architectural design goals for the area;
2. Compliance with village building codes, zoning and sign regulations and the comprehensive plan;
3. The relationship between the proposed improvements and the general character of the streetscape and other buildings in the area;
4. The overall impact of the improvements on the appearance, marketability and life safety features of the building;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 127/525
5. The relationship between the improvements and the original architecture or historic significances of the building or area;
6. Any financing, in conjunction with a project where village of Antioch facade improvement funds are used, must be funded through a financial
institution within the village limits.
Eligibility shall be evaluated on a first come, first served basis.
E. Procedure: Forms for grant applications shall be available at the department of community services. The procedure for evaluation of applications shall
be as follows:
1. Completed applications (5 copies) shall be filed with the department of community services. Applications shall not be deemed to be complete unless
accompanied by a preliminary design sketch, a description of needed work items, cost estimates from contractors and a signed agreement with the
village. The estimates are preferred to be from local (Antioch, Antioch township or Antioch chamber of commerce members) contractors unless such
services are not available. A minimum of two (2) estimates are required. If local contractors are not competitive other estimates will be accepted. The
agreement required under this subsection E1 shall: a) be on a form provided by the office of the village clerk, b) incorporate the relevant provisions of
this chapter, and c) provide that the applicant agrees that the village is not in any way a contractor, owner or operator for the project and further
agreeing to indemnify and hold the village harmless from any and all claims, suits, demands and judgments pertaining to, and arising out of the work
which is the subject of the application.
2. Within seven (7) days after receipt of a completed application, the director of department of community services, accompanied by the director of
planning and zoning or his designee, shall meet with the applicant to review the application. At the conclusion of said meeting (or continued meeting
date if application is deemed incomplete), the director of department of community services shall determine whether the application is eligible for
processing. The application may be amended on its face to meet concerns or suggestions of the department of community services. Written reasons
for denial shall be provided to applicant within seven (7) days after meeting.
3. If the department of community services finds the applicant to be ineligible for a grant, the applicant may appeal to the village board. Appeals to the
village board must be in writing, state with specificity the reason(s) supporting the applicant's appeal and be filed with the office of the village clerk
within fourteen (14) days of applicant's receipt of the notice of ineligibility.
4. The eligible application will then be presented to the chairman of the redevelopment commission within seven (7) days of the receipt of the
completed application. The chairman's recommendation shall be forwarded to the finance, economic and redevelopment committee of the village
board for further recommendation to the village board of trustees. The chairman of the redevelopment commission shall report his findings to the full
redevelopment commission at their next regularly scheduled meeting.
5. The village board shall consider the application at its next meeting on which the application can be placed on the agenda and shall either vote to find
the application eligible, find the application ineligible, or request further information from either the applicant or appropriate village staff. If further
information is needed and provided, the village board shall take up the application at its next available regular village board meeting and vote
promptly after receipt and review thereof, and the decision of the village board shall be final. Nothing herein shall prevent the applicant from
withdrawing the application prior to a decision by the village board.
6. Copies of all bids, contracts, invoices, contractor statements and lien waivers shall be submitted to the department of community services but neither
the community development director nor the village shall have any liability to any party for review or evaluation of any such documents. The
documents submitted shall become public records of the village.
7. Applicant is responsible for obtaining such building permits and/or zoning approvals as are necessary for any improvements.
8. Any changes to approved plans or drawings must be approved by the department of community services prior to being made. Changes to the
previously submitted plans without prior approval of the changes shall render the project "nonqualifying".
9. Upon a finding of eligibility by the village board of trustees, the applicant may proceed with the project in accordance with the procedures and
regulations consistent with all applicable village codes, the provisions of this chapter, and such procedures and regulations as are established by the
office of the village administrator which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
10. Following completion of the work, the village building department will inspect the work for conformance with the approved plans and drawings and
compliance with village codes.
11. Upon final inspection approval from the building department, applicant may apply to the village for a cost share reimbursement for up to fifty percent
(50%) of the project cost up to a maximum limit of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). No legal, architectural or engineering fees shall qualify for, or
be included, in the project costs for program cost sharing purposes. No amounts shall be approved for payment in excess of the village's portion of
the preliminary cost estimate submitted with the application, and no check shall be issued by the village unless the applicant and contractor have
acknowledged and certified in writing, under oath, that the work is complete, applicant has paid applicant's portion of the cost of the work and final
waivers of all mechanic's and material man's liens are delivered to the village for all labor and materials supplied to complete the work. If the project
is not completed within twelve (12) months of the village board of trustees approval date, the project grant eligibility will expire. (Ord. 06-06-22, 6-19-
2006)
4-11-5: FUNDING:
Each fiscal year the village shall appropriate or budget such funds as are deemed appropriate for providing grants under the program established in this
chapter. Only such funds as have been appropriated or budgeted shall be disbursed. When grant applications have been approved totaling the
approximate appropriated or budgeted amount for any fiscal period, then no further applications shall be received until the beginning of the next fiscal
period, and any applications which at that time have not been approved, may proceed through the approval process but the applicant shall be notified that
funding may not occur until the following fiscal period. Any applications which have been approved but so deferred shall be at the top of the list for funding
in the next fiscal period. (Ord. 06-06-22, 6-19-2006)
4-11-6: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for purposes of the interpretations of this chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 128/525
FACADE: The front or main face of a building or other exterior walls which are visible from a public street or waterway.
QUALIFYING BUSINESS PROPERTY: All property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, or within the downtown overlay district within the territorial limits of the village of
Antioch, Illinois.
STOREFRONT: That portion of a building facade which provides direct access and visibility to a separate business establishment at the street level. The
term storefront shall also include all signs, awnings, and window display areas associated with the business establishment. (Ord. 07-02-04, 2-20-2007)
4-11-7: POWERS OF CORPORATE AUTHORITIES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to be a limitation on the authority of the village board to amend, modify, alter or repeal the provisions of this
chapter. Until an application has been approved for funding by the village board, such amendment, alteration, modification or repeal shall terminate all then
pending applications without recourse or liability to the village, its elected and appointed officials, its employees, consultants or agents. All applications
made hereunder are subject to the provisions of this chapter and particularly, without limitation, this section. (Ord. 06-06-22, 6-19-2006)
Chapter 12
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE AND CUSTOMER PROTECTION REGULATIONS
4-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the village.
The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization
to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received
from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 129/525
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR: A person or entity that provided cable services or video services in the village of Antioch under a franchise agreement
with the village pursuant to section 11-42-11 of the Illinois municipal code1 on January 1, 2007.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the service provider fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The Village: Unless the holder has earlier sent notice to the village pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(a), the holder shall
notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the village.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the
first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village. Together with this chapter the village shall send the holder instructions for remitting the payment and statement required
hereby.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the
village, under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-42-11, in which a franchise fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-3: PEG ACCESS CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS:
On the date set forth in subsection 4-12-2D of this chapter, but not earlier than ninety (90) days after the holder sends notice to the village under 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(a), the holder shall: a) designate the same amount of capacity on its network to provide for public, education, and
government access use, as the incumbent cable operator is required to designate under its franchise terms in effect with a local unit of government on
January 1, 2007; and b) retransmit to its subscribers the same number of public, education, and government access channels as the incumbent cable
operator was retransmitting to subscribers on January 1, 2007. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 130/525
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telecommunications service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of
the local unit of government's 9-1-1 or E9-1-1 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operators terminate, the audit requirements shall be those set forth in title 1, chapter 9 of
this code. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by title 1, chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-8: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
A. Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any mandatory amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-9: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-10: PENALTIES:
The village does hereby declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements of the cable and video customer protection law, as
incorporated by reference in this chapter, or any applicable rights and obligations of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, as enumerated in
this chapter, a cable or video provider shall be subject to monetary penalties which shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of
the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. Such penalties
shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the law and shall not represent the village's exclusive remedy for any material breach. All monetary
penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis.
A. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other applicable standards, rights and
obligations specified in any provision of the law.
B. The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30)
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the
cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this section.
D. The board of trustees hereby delegates authority to levy penalties to the village administrator.
E. Any decision of the village administrator to levy penalties may be appealed to the board of trustees, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged
material breach and penalties levied therefor within twenty one (21) days following receipt of the cable or video provider's request for an appeal. (Ord.
07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
4-12-11: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule of customer credits for violations of the law provided for in the provisions of 220
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 131/525
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s). Those credits shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer is
under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 07-11-33, 11-19-2007)
Chapter 13
VIDEO GAMING
4-13-1: VIDEO GAMING LICENSING:
A. Video gaming is allowed within the corporate limits of the village of Antioch, strictly subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. An appropriate video gaming license duly issued by the Illinois state gaming board is required as a precondition to the grant of any license for video
gaming by the village clerk.
C. No video gaming terminal meeting the definition of such a device set forth at 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5 shall be installed, maintained or
suffered to exist in any location within the corporate limits of the village of Antioch unless the owner or operator of such premises shall first have a
video gaming license duly issued by the village administrator pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
D. No business owner or operator shall encourage, permit, allow or suffer the use, operation or maintenance of any video gaming terminal meeting the
definition of such a device set forth at 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5 within or upon his, her or its premises within the corporate limits of the village
of Antioch, except in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the Illinois video gaming act1 and the regulations
promulgated under the said act by the Illinois state gaming board.
E. The fee for each video gaming terminal meeting the definition of such a device set forth at 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5 shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per year, or for any part of a year.
F. The application and issuance process for any video gaming licenses shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 1 of this title, unless inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the Illinois video gaming act2 or the regulations of the Illinois state gaming board in which case, the
more specific regulations shall apply. However, due to the nature of this enterprise and the terms and provisions of the said act, each application for a
license shall include the following acknowledgement:
Applicant hereby acknowledges and agrees that the Village retains the right under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et. seq.) to terminate
all licenses and ban video gaming within the corporate boundaries of the Village of Antioch. Applicant further acknowledges that Applicant is
proceeding with this application and the investment in machines, physical restructuring of premises and all other modifications necessary or helpful in
establishing his, her or its video gaming business at its own risk without reliance on the part of the Village or commitment therefrom to continue
licensing of such machines or the video gaming business generally.
G. The term of video gaming licenses shall be from June 1 of any year to the following May 31, whereupon said licenses shall automatically expire unless
renewed for an additional term consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
H. Except for establishments which are strictly limited to access by persons twenty one (21) years or older, each licensee shall post a sign immediately
outside the doorway or portal to the designated gaming area, which sign shall be as follows:
1. The sign shall be constructed of sturdy material not less than twelve inches by sixteen inches (12" x 16");
2. The sign shall be conspicuous and legible at a distance of not less than twenty feet (20'), and shall be in a well lit location;
3. The licensee shall be responsible to maintain the sign and keep it in good repair, continuously legible;
4. The sign shall contain the following words and symbols:
NO PERSONS UNDER 21 ALLOWED!
I. All licensees shall post a sign immediately above or alongside each video gaming device, which signs shall be as follows:
1. The signs shall be constructed of sturdy material not less than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11");
2. The signs shall be conspicuous and legible at a distance of not less than five feet (5') and shall be well lit;
3. All print on the signs shall be not less than 14-point font;
4. The licensee shall be responsible to maintain the sign and keep it in good repair, continuously legible;
5. The signs shall contain the following words and symbols:
How do you know if you have a gambling problem?
Review the following questions:
*You have often gambled longer than you had planned.
*You have often gambled until your last dollar was gone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 132/525
*Thoughts of gambling have caused you to lose sleep.
*You have used your income or savings to gamble while letting bills go unpaid.
*You have made repeated, unsuccessful attempts to stop gambling.
*You have broken the law or considered breaking the law to finance your gambling.
*You have borrowed money to finance your gambling.
*You have felt depressed or suicidal because of your gambling losses.
*You have been remorseful after gambling.
*You have gambled to get money to meet your financial obligations.
If you or someone you know answers yes to any of these questions, consider seeking professional help or advice by calling the National Problem
Gambling Helpline at 1-800-522-4700 or the State of Illinois Hotline: 1-800-426-2537.
J. Licensees shall set aside an area directly adjacent to the sign described in subsection H of this section for the provision of pamphlets and other written
materials directed to the detection of problem gamblers and the prevention of gambling addiction. Such materials may be supplied by the village or as
required by the state gaming board. (Ord. 12-09-17, 9-17-2012)
4-13-2: INSPECTIONS:
Authorized representatives of the Antioch police department, including sworn peace officers and such other individuals as the chief of police may
designate from time to time, may make inspections of the premises of operators licensed or required to be licensed under chapter 2 of this title or any
premises where there is cause to believe video gaming occurs, for the purpose of determining the existence or nonexistence of a violation of the
prohibitions of this chapter. These inspection powers are in addition to any other statutory or common law powers otherwise granted to the police. (Ord.
12-09-17, 9-17-2012)
4-13-3: PENALTY:
A. Any person or corporate entity found guilty of any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution under the gambling provisions
of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 et seq.
B. In addition to the prosecution set forth in subsection A of this section, any such person or corporate entity found guilty of such violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be fined according to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1 of this code, provided that the official issuing the citation may
alternatively issue it to the village's adjudication court, in which case, the penalty shall be that set forth in the schedule of fines in section 1-3-1A of this
code.
C. Each violative video gaming machine, each prohibited bet or wager and each day during which a violation occurs shall be deemed to be a separate
violation subject to fine.
D. The village shall further have the right to obtain a prohibitory injunction, without bond, upon a showing that any person or business entity has
maintained or operated one or more video gaming terminals meeting the definition of such devices set forth at 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5
without a due and proper license issued under this chapter, requiring the halting of such activity as a public nuisance. In any such injunction action, the
village shall be entitled to recover its costs and attorney fees from the defendant. (Ord. 12-09-17, 9-17-2012)
Chapter 14
TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTE DEALERS
4-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS: Any product other than traditional tobacco and snuff which can be chewed, inhaled or orally ingested which
contains nicotine. By way of example, and not limitations, products such as lozenges or chewing gum containing nicotine are alternative nicotine products.
COMPLIANCE CHECK: An inspection conducted with the intention of assessing retail sales of tobacco products to minors and enforcing age of sales
laws.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are commonly used, may be used or are marketed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance
in violation of the "cannabis control act" or the "Illinois controlled substances act". It includes, but is not limited to:
A. Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
B. Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance;
C. Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or
controlled substances;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 133/525
D. Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
E. Objects peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body, including, where applicable, the following items:
1. Water pipes,
2. Carburetion tubes and devices,
3. Smoking and carburetion masks,
4. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials,
5. Carburetor pipes,
6. Electric pipes,
7. Air driven pipes,
8. Chillums,
9. Bongs, and
10. Ice pipes or chillers.
F. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of the "cannabis control act" or the "Illinois controlled
substances act".
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR E-CIGARETTE: A battery operated device that contains a combination of nicotine, flavor, or chemicals or any combination
thereof that are turned into vapor which is inhaled by the user.
LICENSE: A license issued by the village of Antioch for the retail sale of tobacco products.
LICENSEE: The holder of a valid license for the retail sale of tobacco products.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, any right of way, mall or shopping
center, park, playground, and any other property owned by the village, any school district, or any park district.
REGULATED PRODUCTS: Products that are subject to the regulations of this chapter, including tobacco, tobacco accessories, e-cigarettes, vaping
products and alternative nicotine products.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS: Open displays of tobacco products that the public has access to without intervention of a store employee.
TOBACCO ACCESSORIES: Any cigarette papers, pipes, holder of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines and other items designed
primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal under any ordinance or statute.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or
dipping tobacco.
VAPE OR VAPING: The process of using an e-cigarette.
VAPING PRODUCTS: The oils, liquids, nicotine, flavorants and other chemicals used in the process of vaping.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device, which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015; amd. Ord. 16-08-21, 8-1-2016)
4-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful to sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish, possess, keep or offer for sale at retail tobacco products or accessories, or engage in or conduct a
retail tobacco business, or conduct any place for the sale of tobacco products or accessories within the corporate limits of the village, without having a
retail tobacco dealer's license, or in violation of the terms of such licenses.
B. It is unlawful to sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish, possess, keep or offer for sale at retail e-cigarettes or accessories, or engage in or conduct a retail
e-cigarette business, or conduct any place for the sale of vaping products or accessories within the corporate limits of the village, without having a retail
e-cigarette dealer's license, or in violation of the terms of such licenses. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 134/525
4-14-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for such license shall be made to the village of Antioch in writing upon blanks prepared and furnished by the village (which may be on forms
provided for joint filing with liquor licenses), signed by the applicant, if any individual; or by at least two (2) members of a partnership, if the applicant is a
partnership, or if the applicant is a corporation, then by the president and secretary thereof, verified by oath or affidavit of the signers, and shall contain the
following information and statement:
A. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in five percent (5%)
or more of the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation the date of the incorporation, the state of incorporation, the objects for which it was
organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and the name and address of all persons owning more than five percent (5%) of the
stock, along with a copy of the corporate charter currently on file with the Illinois secretary of state;
B. The citizenship of the applicant, their place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of their naturalization;
C. The character of business of the applicant;
D. The length of time that the applicant has been in business of that character;
E. In the case of a partnership, the date of the formation of the partnership;
F. The applicant's current state tobacco license number from the department of revenue (unless already bonded under the cigarette tax act of the cigarette
use tax act);
G. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license;
H. A statement whether the applicant has made a similar application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in the application, and
the disposition of such application;
I. A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained
in this chapter or any ordinance or statute;
J. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor;
K. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinance of the village in the conduct of
business;
L. A statement that the applicant has, or is eligible for and will obtain, a license from the state of Illinois in the event such a license is required by applicable
statute or departmental regulation. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-4: LICENSE; RESTRICTIONS ON APPLICANTS:
No license shall be granted to:
A. A person who is not of good character and reputation;
B. A person who is not a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States;
C. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, unless the village board determines that such person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth in such person's application and the village board's investigation. The burden
of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant;
D. A person who has been convicted of pandering or any other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
E. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued would not be eligible for a license upon a first application;
F. A partnership, if any general partner thereof, or any limited partner thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited partner interest
in such partnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason;
G. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 135/525
H. A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or is qualified under the "business corporation act of 1983"1 to transact business in Illinois;
I. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possess the same qualifications required for the
licensee;
J. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period the license is to
be issued;
K. A person who does not qualify for a state license, in the event such a license is required by applicable statute or departmental regulation. (Ord. 15-12-
23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-5: OWNERSHIP CHANGES:
Any change in the names, addresses, or identity of any owner or holder of five percent (5%) or more of any stock, shares, equity, or other instrument of
ownership of a licensee licensed under this chapter, shall be reported to the village clerk within ten (10) days of any such change. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-
2015)
4-14-6: LICENSE FEE; BACKGROUND CHECKS:
A. Each such license shall terminate on May 31 next following the date of issuance. The fee to be paid shall be applicable for a full year, or any part
thereof, without proration or other reduction if purchased for less than a full year. All fees for licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be paid at the time
the application is made.
B. The chief of police shall conduct a criminal background check of all applicants at the time of their initial application, and at any time a change in
ownership results in a new owner being added to the reported list of owners or holders of five percent (5%) equity or stock. By applying for a license,
the applicant agrees to provide proof of submission under the uniform conviction information act through a fingerprint conviction information request
with an approved LiveScan vendor authorized by the Illinois state police within the preceding thirty (30) days and to this background check. Applicants
may be required to sign such consent forms as the chief may reasonably require. The chief shall report to the village board whether the application is
demonstrably false in any material respect or if the applicant is ineligible to hold a license.
C. In the event that a license is denied, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant, less a fifty dollar ($50.00) processing fee. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-
2015)
4-14-7: LICENSE CLASS A; GENERAL TOBACCO SALES RETAILER:
A. Businesses whose primary activity is other than the sale of tobacco products, shall obtain a class A license before engaging in sales. "Primary sales"
means sales that constitute fifty percent (50%) or more of the total sales of the business.
B. The annual fee for such license is one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each tobacco retail location. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-8: LICENSE CLASS B; PRIMARY TOBACCO SALES RETAILER:
A. Businesses whose primary activity is the sale of tobacco products shall obtain a class B license before engaging in sales. "Primary sales" means sales
that constitute fifty percent (50%) or more of the total sales of the business.
B. The annual fee for such license is one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each tobacco retail location. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-9: LICENSE CLASS C; E-CIGARETTE SALES RETAILER:
A. Businesses who intend to sell e-cigarettes and/or vaping products, shall obtain a Class C license before engaging in sales.
B. The annual fee for such license is one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each e-cigarette retail location. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-10: NUMBERS OF LICENSES; NONTRANSFERABILITY AND RECORDS:
A. At any point in time, there shall be no more than the following number of licenses issued in the classes shown below:
Class Number
A 12
B 3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 136/525
C 12
(Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015; amd. Ord. 18-02-09, 2-12-2018; Ord. 18-06-26, 6-27-2018)
B. Licenses will be issued in the order that applications are received.
C. Licenses are nontransferable, except a new license will be issued to a licensee who changes location.
D. A list of all licensees shall be kept by the Village Clerk of the Village of Antioch. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-11: LICENSE; POSTING:
Every licensee shall cause the license or licenses to be framed and hung in a conspicuous place on the licensee's premises. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-12: LICENSE; PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS:
A. Generally: It is unlawful for any person or licensee to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver regulated products within one hundred feet (100') of any
school, childcare facility or other building used for educational or recreational purposes by persons under eighteen (18) years of age. For the purpose
of this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from nearest portal of the building
or structure used as a part of the premises where a licensed establishment is located, to the nearest portal of a school, childcare facility or other
building used for educational or recreational purposes by persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Class B And C Licensees: No two (2) Class B and/or C licensees shall be established within five hundred feet (500') of each other. For the purpose of
this subsection, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from nearest portal of the building or
structure used as a part of the premises where a licensed establishment is located, to the nearest portal of the other licensed establishment.
C. Grandfathered Sites: In the event a licensee is located in technical violation of the distance requirements of this section at the time of the adoption of
this chapter, each such licensee shall be considered to have legal nonconforming status, which will remain intact until such time as the licensee ceases
to operate its business at that location. A change of ownership to a new licensee properly reported to the Village Clerk pursuant to section 4-14-5 of
this chapter shall not be considered the ceasing of business operations at a given location. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-13: LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
Upon the approval by the Village Board of the Village of Antioch of the application as provided in this chapter and the payment of the required license fee,
the Village Clerk shall issue to the person or persons applying therefor a license allowing the retail sale of tobacco and e-cigarette products under the
provisions of this chapter, indicating the classification under which the license is issued, and the term for which such license is issued. The license shall be
signed by the Mayor. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-14: LICENSE; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
A. The Antioch Mayor may revoke or suspend any license if it is determined that the licensee has violated any State Statute or any of the provisions of any
ordinance or resolution of the Village or any applicable rule or regulation established by the Village Board. However, no such license shall be revoked
or suspended until after a public hearing by the Mayor with a written notice to the licensee affording the licensee a minimum of three (3) business days
in which to appear and defend. In all such hearings, the Village Attorney shall reduce, or cause to be reduced, all evidence to writing and shall maintain
an official record of the proceedings. The Mayor shall within five (5) days after such hearing, state the reasons for such determination in a written order
of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order upon the licensee. The decision of the Mayor on any license suspension or revocation
proceeding shall constitute a final administrative action and is subject to review in the courts under the Illinois Administrative Review Act, 735 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.
B. A license shall be suspended or revoked for any violation of this chapter after notice and opportunity to be heard as follows:
1. In the case of a first violation, the licensee shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) and shall be notified in writing of penalties levied for further violations. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
2. In the case of a second violation, the licensee shall be fined not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) and the tobacco license shall be suspended for not less than thirty (30) consecutive business days nor more than ninety (90)
consecutive business days. Tobacco retailers must remove all regulated products and accessories from public view while the license is suspended
and all regulated product sales shall be suspended. Notice of the suspension shall be posted in plain view of the public at the licensee's premises.
3. In the case of a third violation, the licensee shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) and the tobacco license shall be suspended for not less than six (6) months nor more than eighteen (18) months from the date of
suspension and all regulated product sales shall be suspended. Tobacco retailers must remove all tobacco products and accessories from public
view while the license is suspended.
4. In the case of a fourth violation, the licensee shall be fined seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and the license shall be revoked. All regulated
products and accessories must be removed from all areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 137/525
C. Any licensee determined by the Village Board to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Village costs of the hearing on such
violation. The Village shall determine the costs of the hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporter fees, attorney fees incurred by the Village, the
cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village or such lesser sum as the Village Board
may allow, and such costs assessed shall be in addition to the fine imposed. Notice of the suspension shall be posted in plain view of the public at the
licensee's premises.
D. The licensee shall pay said costs to the Village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of
notification is a violation of this chapter and may cause the levy of an additional fine or revocation of license at the discretion of the Village Board.
E. When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to such licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the
sale of regulated products in the premises described in such revoked license.
F. While it shall not be a defense to an action brought under this section that the retailer's employee conducted the unlawful sale or transaction, the Mayor
may, in his or her discretion, direct prosecution of an ordinance violation case against that employee in lieu of taking formal action on the
establishment's license and licensee. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-15: SALES TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
A. It is strictly unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver regulated products to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
B. No licensee or his agent or employees shall permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years in or about any premises operating under a
Class B or C license unless that minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. (Ord. 18-05-17, 5-14-2018)
4-14-16: WARNING SIGNS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or tobacco accessories in any place that does not post signs
informing the public of the age of sale restrictions and Surgeon General warning in a conspicuous place at or near every display of tobacco products.
Each sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
SALE OF TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE, OR THE
MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: SMOKING BY PREGNANT WOMEN MAY RESULT IN FETAL INJURY, PREMATURE BIRTH, AND LOW
BIRTH WEIGHT.
B. The text of such signs must be in red letters on a white background, and said letters must be at least one-half inch (1/2") high.
C. To ensure uniformity and to promote public health, the Village Clerk may issue standard signs which meet the requirements of this provision at the
same time that licenses are issued. (Ord. 18-05-17, 5-14-2018)
4-14-17: IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
No licensee shall sell or permit to be sold regulated products or accessories to an individual without requesting and examining photographic identification
establishing the purchaser's age as twenty one (21) years of age or greater. (Ord. 18-05-17, 5-14-2018)
4-14-18: VENDING MACHINES PROHIBITED:
Tobacco vending machines or any other devices for the sale or distribution of regulated products are prohibited. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-19: SALE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.
B. Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold or delivered for any
commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance.
C. Items marked for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful
research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale shall be exempt from this section.
D. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section, or any part thereof, shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 138/525
E. The Village shall further have the discretion to seek a suspension or revocation of any licensee's license under section 4-14-14 of this chapter in the
event of any violation of this section. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-20: MINIMUM AGE TO PURCHASE OR POSSESS REGULATED PRODUCTS AND ACCESSORIES:
A. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase or possess regulated products or misrepresent their age or use any false
or altered identification with the intention of purchasing regulated products.
B. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not be in violation of this section if such regulated product is in an unopened container or
package and was in the person's possession pursuant to the performance of specified duties at a lawful place of employment. By way of example, and
not limitation, this provision allows persons under eighteen (18) to stock shelves with tobacco products at a licensed establishment, but it does not
authorize that person to conduct sales. (Also see section 4-14-21 of this chapter.) (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-21: MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ACCESSORIES:
It is unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, employ or permit any person
under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products or accessories on any vendor's premises. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-22: OUT OF PACKAGE SALES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to sell regulated products out of the manufacturer's package with required health warnings. It is unlawful to sell cigarettes individually or
regulated products in any form other than in the manufacturer's original packaging. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-23: VENDOR ASSISTED SALES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away, or display regulated products for sale at any location where the consumer can acquire those products
through self-service. All regulated products must be displayed from behind a sales/service counter so that no consumer can access regulated products
without the assistance of an employee of the licensee. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-24: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of any nature constituting a violation of any provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of
any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or
omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. Notwithstanding this provision, nothing herein shall prevent the individual prosecution of
such officers, directors, managers or other agents or employees in the discretion of the licensing authority or arresting authority. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-
2015)
4-14-25: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to establish protocols and procedures appropriate for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of the state and
of the village in relation to the same, are being complied with at all licensed establishments. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-26: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
No parent, guardian or custodian of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall permit, facilitate, condone or allow such minor to purchase,
possess or consume in any manner or form cigarettes or any other regulated products. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-21-2015)
4-14-27: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter (other than the specific fines and suspension provisions set forth in section 4-14-14
of this chapter) shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 15-12-23, 12-
21-2015)
Title 5
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
5-1-1: WEEDS AND VEGETATIVE GROWTH:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 139/525
A. Nuisances Declared: The following are hereby declared nuisances:
1. The growth of any Canadian thistle, burdock, yellow dock, jimsonweed, bull thistle, poison ivy, ragweed, velvet weed, sandbur, mustard, sweet clover
or any other noxious or dangerous weed on any premises owned, controlled or occupied by any person. (1976 Code § 93.001)
2. For any owner or occupant of any land or any tract of land in the village to permit any weed, grass or plant to grow thereon to a height exceeding
eight inches (8") or to the extent of maturing its seeds. (1976 Code § 93.002)
B. Abatement:
1. Notice: The village clerk or other designated village official may serve on either the owner or occupant of any lot on which such weed, grass or plant
grows, a removal notice, giving such person ten (10) days to cut the weeds, grass or plants. (1976 Code § 93.003)
2. Abatement By Village: If the owner or occupant of any lot or tract of land in the village permits any weed, grass or plant herein declared to be a
nuisance, to grow thereon to a height exceeding eight inches (8") or to the extent of maturing its seed, the village may proceed to destroy same or
cause the same to be destroyed, regardless of whether or not any notice shall have been served in accordance with this section. The serving of any
such notice shall not be a condition precedent to the taking and enforcement of action under this section. (1976 Code § 93.004)
3. Charges For Abatement: When the village destroys or cuts any weeds, plants or grass exceeding a height of eight inches (8"), the minimum charge
for this cutting or removal shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). Should additional expenses over the two hundred dollars ($200.00) be incurred,
such charges shall be added to the bill forwarded to the owner or occupant of the premises in question. The owner or occupant shall have thirty (30)
days to pay the expenses in this section. (Ord. 06-06-18, 6-5-2006)
4. Lien: The village shall have a lien upon such lot or tract of land for such reasonable expenses provided a notice of lien for same shall be recorded in
the following manner: The village or the person performing the service as aforesaid shall file such notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds
of Lake County. Such notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
a. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof;
b. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and
c. The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village, and shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense was
incurred.
The officer or employee of the village having knowledge of the facts, is authorized to sign such notice of lien on behalf of the village and verify the
same, and record or cause same to be recorded as aforesaid. The procedure set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7 shall be followed.
(1976 Code § 93.007)
5. Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the costs and expense, after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release shall be filed of record in the same manner as filing notice of the lien. (1976 Code § 93.008)
5-1-2: JUNK AND JUNKYARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any junkyard or any other place where junk is collected and stored upon any lot or parcel of land
situated within the village. Any junkyard or place where junk is collected and stored or any lot, piece or parcel of land utilized for the deposit or storage of
junk, is declared a nuisance and any person establishing or maintaining any such junkyard shall be deemed guilty of suffering a nuisance to exist. (1976
Code §§ 93.020, 93.021)
5-1-3: SMOKE:
A. Nuisance Declared: The emission of dense smoke within the village from the smokestack of any locomotive, steam roller, steam derrick, steam pile
driver, tar kettle or other similar machine or contrivance, or from the smokestack or chimney of any building or premises excepting for a period of six (6)
minutes in any one hour during which the firebox is being cleaned out, or a new fire being built therein is declared to be a nuisance. (1976 Code
§ 93.025)
B. Emissions Prohibited: No person owning, operating or in charge or control of any locomotive, steam roller, steam derrick, steam pile driver, tar kettle or
other similar machine or contrivance or of any building or premises shall cause or permit the emission of dense smoke within the village from the
smokestack or chimney or any such locomotive, steam roller, steam derrick, steam pile driver, tar kettle or other similar machine or contrivance, or from
the smokestack or chimney or any building or premises so owned, controlled or in charge, except for a period of six (6) minutes in any one hour, during
which the firebox is being cleaned out or a new fire being built therein. (1976 Code § 93.026)
5-1-4: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH:
A. Removal Required: The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the village shall remove from the premises, or otherwise dispose of, all garbage
and rubbish, and shall keep the premises at all times free and clear of any accumulation of refuse. (1976 Code § 93.040)
B. Containers Required:
1. The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the village shall provide and maintain clean and in good condition and repair, standard garbage
and refuse containers for the temporary storage of all garbage and refuse accumulated between collections.
2. A receptacle for garbage and rubbish shall be of adequate strength, shall be water tight, shall be a capacity of not more than thirty (30) gallons, and
shall be securely covered or fastened.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 140/525
3. All receptacles shall be placed outside the residence or other building in an accessible place, at ground level, near the street or curb line not earlier
than the evening preceding the designated day of collection.
4. No receptacle used for the storage, collection and removal of garbage, rubbish or other refuse shall be placed so as to constitute a nuisance to
adjacent property or the occupants thereof. (1976 Code § 93.041)
C. Dumping Prohibited: No person shall throw, place, leave or suffer to be thrown, placed or left, any garbage, rubbish or other refuse upon any street,
parkway or other public place or upon any vacant or unimproved lot parcel of land in the village. (1976 Code § 93.042)
5-1-5: MISCELLANEOUS NUISANCES:
A. Nuisances Declared: The following are hereby declared to be nuisances and no person shall violate any provision of this section:
1. Business Practices:
a. To conduct any business or use any premises in such a manner as to create an offensive smell or taint in the air, or render the same unhealthy,
unwholesome or disagreeable to others.
b. To conduct any trade, employment, manufacture or business which, by reason thereof, occasions foul, noxious or offensive odors or smells
offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public.
c. To locate, without first having obtained permission from the village, any packinghouse, renderies, tallow chandleries, bone factories, soap
renderies or tanneries within the limits of the village or within a distance of one mile outside the limits of the village.
2. Building Construction: It is forbidden to permit performance of construction work prior to the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or to permit the
performance of construction work after the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday. It shall be further a nuisance to permit the
performance of construction work prior to the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or to permit the performance of construction work after the hour of six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Sundays or holidays.
3. Dangerous Structures:
a. To permit any insecure or unsafe scaffold to be erected or used whereby the safety of persons working upon or passing thereunder may be in
danger.
b. To permit any building or structure or any part or portion thereof to become unsafe and insecure and to remain in an unsafe and insecure condition
so as to be dangerous to other persons or their property.
4. Condition Of Property:
a. To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, garbage, filth or other nauseous substance or substances to be collected, deposited or
remain at any place so as to prejudice others or be detrimental to the healthful condition of the community.
b. To cause or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring, stream, well or pond to the injury or prejudice of others, or to drain into or
cause any sewage to flow over or upon the land or premises of another or public grounds other than through the sewer channels provided for that
purpose.
c. To deposit or suffer to be deposited any junk within two hundred feet (200') of any street or other public place in the village or within one hundred
feet (100') of the lands and premises of another1.
d. To draw, drain or suffer any sewage to be drawn off or drained from any basement, cesspool, catch basin, toilet or outhouse so as to render any
foul, offensive, nauseous, filthy or unhealthy condition of the soil or atmosphere, dangerous or offensive to the health of others. Putrid or offensive
matter and all contents of any sink, vault, catch basin, cesspool or other place where foul substances are collected shall, before their removal or
exposure, be disinfected and rendered inoffensive by the person or persons who are about to remove the same.
e. To permit the use of any property, real or personal, in such a manner as to be offensive to the community or dangerous to the health of the same
or to so conduct oneself so as to be offensive to the community, individuals thereof or the public.
5. Public Property:
a. To obstruct or encroach upon any street, alley or public way or to suffer any obstruction or encroachment upon any street, alley or public way.
b. To permit any ditch, drain or excavation along, upon or under any public street or other public place to remain without being refilled and rendered
safe with all reasonable dispatch.
6. Cemeteries: To establish any cemetery within the corporate limits of the village or within one mile of the limits thereof without first having obtained
permission so to do by an ordinance of the village board.
7. Open Burning: The burning of papers, paper goods, cardboard, garbage or rubbish of any kind within the village. (1976 Code § 93.050)
8. Animals:
a. To confine or keep confined any cattle or swine within any pen, yard, building or other enclosure so as to be offensive to persons residing in the
vicinity and to the annoyance of the same or detrimental to the healthfulness of such vicinity with the exception of the keeping of Vietnamese
potbellied pigs in residential areas when the Vietnamese potbellied pigs are kept solely for pet purposes and not for livestock or breeding purposes
and are not a nuisance as defined in this subsection.
Only two (2) Vietnamese potbellied pigs shall be allowed per household. This subsection shall be applied to section 6-1-3 of this code. A
Vietnamese potbellied pig shall be included in the total number of pets allowed, pursuant to section 6-1-3 of this code. (1976 Code § 93.050; amd.
2003 Code)
b. To permit any domestic fowl to run at large within the village limits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 141/525
c. To permit any domestic animal of the species of horse, ass, mule, cattle, sheep, goat or swine to run at large within the village limits.
9. Loitering: To loiter about the premises of another without the consent of the owner thereof.
10. Alcoholic Beverages: To drink intoxicating liquors upon any public street, alley or other public place or upon any vacant lot without the consent of
the owner thereof.
B. Abatement: When any nuisance shall be found within the village contrary to any of the provisions of this section, the same may be similarly abated by
the chief of police in abating such nuisance. Such officer or officers may employ necessary work and labor and may charge the expense of abating
such nuisance to the person liable therefor. (1976 Code § 93.050)
5-1-6: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the schedule of fines set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code for each
offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. Imposition of a fine pursuant to this section and the schedule of fines set forth in
subsection 1-3-1A of this code shall not constitute a bar to the right of the village to effectuate abatement of any offense as described elsewhere in this
chapter. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 2
AIR POLLUTION AND OUTDOOR BURNING
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings specifically ascribed to
them:
AGRICULTURAL WASTES: Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated on a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices,
including such items as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials and landscape wastes.
DOMICILE WASTES: Any refuse generated on single-family domiciliary property as a result of domiciliary activities. The term includes landscape waste
but excludes garbage and trade waste.
GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings and crop residues.
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products of the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or
passing through equipment for which a permit could be issued under section 9(b) of the environmental protection act of the state of Illinois1.
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE: Any construction made of stone, brick, or metal used for the exclusive use of building a fire for the aesthetic enjoyment thereof
but not used for cooking.
REFUSE: Any discarded matter; or any matter which is to be reduced in volume, or otherwise changed in chemical or physical properties, in order to
facilitate its discard, removal or disposal.
RESTRICTED AREAS: The area within the boundaries of the village, plus a zone extending one mile beyond the boundaries of the village.
TRADE WASTE: Any refuse resulting from the prosecution of any trade, business, industry, commercial venture, utility or service activity, and any
government or institutional activity, whether or not for profit. The term includes landscape waste but excludes agricultural waste. (Ord. 12-07-15, 7-16-
2012)
5-2-2: PROHIBITED ACTS2:
No person shall cause or allow open burning, except provided in this chapter. (Ord. 12-07-15, 7-16-2012)
5-2-3: EXEMPTIONS:
A. General: The following activities are not in violation of this chapter unless they cause air pollution as defined in section 5-2-1 of this chapter:
1. Burning in an outdoor fireplace, subject to the regulations provided for hereinbelow:
a. Outdoor fireplaces of permanent construction cannot be attached to any structure, accessory building, building, or other medium that is
combustible. All units, permanent or portable, must be freestanding with a minimum three feet (3') clearance on all sides. Portable units must be
placed on a noncombustible surface such as concrete, patio blocks, or stone in such a way that the firebox is eighteen inches (18") above this
surface.
b. Outdoor fireplaces are strictly limited to burning the following materials:
(1) Cut wood (dry, unpainted, unfinished).
(2) Manufactured logs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 142/525
(3) Manufactured nonwood logs specifically made for use in fireplaces.
c. No other material may be burned in outdoor fireplaces. Pressure treated wood, wet wood, rubbish; leaves, garbage, landscape waste, agricultural
waste, and other waste are expressly prohibited.
d. The fire in an outdoor fireplace must be maintained in such a manner as to minimize the generation of smoke. Smoke that is a result of a
smoldering or dying fire shall be eliminated. Generation of such smoke is considered a public nuisance punishable by fine.
e. All fires in an outdoor fireplace are prohibited between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. daily. Fires must be
extinguished in such a manner that all air to the fire is cut off or the burning material is wet down with water until it is cool to the touch.
f. All outdoor fireplaces must have a screen covering the flame or glass doors that prevents the distribution of hot embers or sparks outside of the
firebox.
g. Outdoor fireplaces shall be attended by an adult at all times. Precautions shall be taken to avoid touching hot surfaces, particularly when children
are present. Manufacturer's installation, operating, and safety instructions shall be followed at all times.
2. Prescribed burning for control of growth in prairie or wetland areas: This shall be strictly limited as follows:
a. Burning is allowed for environmental or ecological purposes only;
b. Any prescribed burn shall be conducted by trained personnel who meet the minimum requirements and capabilities prescribed by the fire chief;
c. No such burn shall be allowed unless and until the personnel conducting the burn have obtained the required permit from the Illinois environmental
protection agency (EPA) and shall have placed on file with the fire chief their written plan for conducting the burn in a safe manner.
d. The fire chief shall have plenary power to directly regulate and oversee any such burn, including prohibiting it when, in his or her sole discretion
and ultimate authority, atmospheric conditions or other factors suggest that it may pose a danger to life or property.
3. The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when reasonably necessary in the judgment of the responsible government official.
4. Small open flares for heating tar, for welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares, and the like. (Ord. 12-07-15, 7-16-2012)
5-2-4: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the schedule of fines set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code for each
offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 12-07-15, 7-16-2012)
Chapter 3
POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
5-3-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. Any applicants for the establishment of new regional pollution control facilities shall comply fully with the requirements of the applicable state statute, as
well as any applicable local governmental regulations. (1976 Code § 98.03)
B. In any proceedings required for the establishment of new regional pollution control facilities, the applicant shall pay all costs thereof, including, but not
limited to, engineering fees, special meeting fees, publication fees, attorney fees and license or permit fees. These costs shall be assessed from time
to time as required. (1976 Code § 98.02)
5-3-2: APPLICATION FOR SITE APPROVAL:
A. Requests for site approval shall be filed with the village clerk. Upon receipt of any request with nine additional copies being filed therewith, the village
clerk shall date stamp the request and deliver a copy to the mayor and each trustee of the village.
B. Requests for site approval shall include the following items:
1. A written petition on eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") paper which sets forth the following information:
a. The identification of the applicant and owner, and, if the proposed site is owned in trust, the beneficiaries.
b. The legal description of the proposed site and a street address or some other reasonable description of where the proposed site is located.
c. A description of the proposed facility, its operation, and the expected longevity thereof.
d. The area to be served by the proposed facility and a statement of the needs of the area for the facility.
e. The expected types, amounts and methods of treatment or storage of all wastes proposed for the site.
f. The monitoring plans, including background analysis, for ground water, surface water and air.
g. The plans for closure of the site and continued monitoring thereafter.
h. The planned end use of the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 143/525
i. Any other information which has, will, or would be supplied to the environmental protection agency to obtain a developmental or operational permit.
j. Reasons supporting approval of the application.
k. A prayer for site approval.
2. Request for a permit made to the Illinois environmental protection agency, if any request has been made, or the request for permit as the applicant
proposes to make it.
3. A site plan showing details of the proposed facility including, but not limited to, the following items:
a. Cross sections.
b. All existing wells within one thousand feet (1,000') of the site.
c. All monitoring wells.
d. Fences, buildings and other structures.
e. Roads, entrances and driveways.
f. Core sample locations on and within one thousand feet (1,000') of the site, or to the extent the applicant owns or controls the samples to be of
sufficient frequency and depth to create a comprehensive picture of subsurface conditions.
4. A detailed topographic survey of the subject site and the surrounding area within one thousand feet (1,000') which indicates land uses and, if
applicable, the boundary of the 100-year floodplain as determined by the Illinois department of transportation.
5. A statement of the plan of operation and, if applicable, the stages of development or use.
6. A statement or report of traffic information regarding the proposed site including the anticipated number of vehicles and their size, weight and
direction of movement.
7. All studies, maps, reports, permits or exhibits which the applicant desires the village to consider at the public hearing.
8. A list of any other regional pollution control facilities or landfill sites owned or operated by the applicant and any notices, violations or complaints
regarding the facilities or sites which were initiated or documented by the environmental protection agency or the pollution control board, this
experience and record of conduct bearing on the criteria of the public health, safety and welfare.
9. Any additional information as may be reasonably required relative to a particular location application, this information to be requested in writing by
the village clerk when so directed by the village board of trustees and to be submitted in writing ten (10) days prior to the public hearing date.
10. A fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) application fee to cover costs and expenses of the village in processing the request for location approval.
However, any portion of this fee that has not been spent or allocated for the processing shall be returned to the applicant. The application fee must
accompany the request in order for the request to be filed. Should the fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) application fee prove inadequate to cover the
costs of the proceedings, the applicant will be notified in writing with a list of the expenses incurred. The applicant will then have seven (7) days to
deposit with the village clerk an additional twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), any portion of which remaining unspent or unallocated for costs
and expenses to be returned to the applicant.
C. In order to give members of the public an opportunity to make informed written comment pursuant to section 39.1(c) of the act1 and to give members of
the public and the village board of trustees an opportunity to prepare adequately and fairly for the public hearing hereinafter described, the applicant
must fully comply with all application requirements as set forth in subsection B of this section. Failure to comply with the application requirements for
information shall render the required information inadmissible at the public hearing. Failure to attach the required application fee shall render any
attempt at filing a request for location approval null.
D. A copy of the request shall be made available for public inspection at the Antioch village hall and members of the public shall be allowed to obtain a
copy of the request or any part thereof upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
E. No application for site approval may be amended to add additional data or reports once an application has been filed with the village clerk. However, an
applicant may withdraw an application at any time before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period from filing of the application allowed by the act for
the submission of written evidence by the public and interested parties. Upon withdrawal, any unexpended portion of the application fee shall be
returned to the applicant. The applicant may thereafter file a new application in full compliance with this chapter including application fee after giving the
requisite fourteen (14) day notices. This refiling shall begin anew the time requirements for notices, evidence, public hearing, decision and appeal.
(1976 Code § 98.10)
5-3-3: PUBLIC COMMENT:
A. The village clerk shall receive and file written comment from any person concerning the appropriateness of the proposed site. Upon receipt of any
written comment, the village clerk shall date stamp the comment and immediately deliver one copy of the written comment and the postmarked
envelope in which the comment is received to the mayor and each trustee of the village.
B. Copies of the written comments shall be made available for public inspection in the offices of the village clerk, and members of the public shall be
allowed to obtain a copy of any written comment upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
C. Any written comment received by the village clerk or postmarked not later than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the request for site location
approval shall be made part of the record at the public hearing as hereinafter described and the village board of trustees shall consider the timely
written comments in making its final decision. (1976 Code § 98.11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 144/525
5-3-4: TECHNICAL REVIEW AND SUPPORT:
A. The village board of trustees shall direct the village clerk to obtain any technical aid or support in the review of an application which it deems necessary,
and the village clerk shall keep an accurate record of the expenditures therefor. Any written reports so obtained shall be filed with the village clerk no
later than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing and members of the public shall be allowed to obtain a copy of the documents upon payment of the
actual cost of reproduction.
B. Persons provided the technical review of data are authorized to present testimony and evidence at the public hearing. (1976 Code § 98.12)
5-3-5: PUBLIC HEARING:
A. As per the act, within sixty (60) days of receipt by the village clerk of a request for site location approval, a public hearing shall be held.
B. This hearing shall be conducted by the village board of trustees pursuant to proper notice, and a court reporter shall be present.
C. All reports, studies, exhibits or other evidence or copies thereof, other than testimony, which any person other than the applicant desires to submit for
the record at the public hearing must be filed with the village clerk at least ten (10) days before the public hearing and shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the village clerk. The published notice of public hearing shall contain this proviso. The village clerk shall date stamp any
reports, studies, exhibits or other evidence upon receipt. In the case of documentary evidence, members of the public shall be allowed to obtain copies
of the documents upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
D. The applicant for site location approval shall have the burden of going forward with evidence of the suitability of the site for the proposed use.
E. Any person appearing at the public hearing shall have the right to give testimony and comment on the suitability of the site location for the proposed
use.
F. Any person appearing at the public hearing shall have the right to cross examine any witness.
G. Any person shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at the public hearing. (1976 Code § 98.13)
5-3-6: RECORDS:
A. The village clerk shall be responsible for keeping the record of the hearing.
B. The record shall consist of the following information:
1. The request for site location approval as described in subsection 5-3-2B of this chapter.
2. Proof of notice of public hearing.
3. Proof of notice given by applicant pursuant to section 39.1(b) of the act2.
4. Written comments filed by the public and received by the village clerk or postmarked within thirty (30) days of receipt of the filing of a request for site
location approval.
5. All reports, studies, exhibits or documents received into evidence at the public hearing.
6. The transcript of the public hearing.
7. Findings of fact or written reports of any technical advisor employed pursuant to this chapter.
8. The resolution containing the final decision of the village board of trustees according to the statutory criteria.
C. The village clerk shall be responsible for certifying all copies of the record of the public hearing. (1976 Code § 98.14)
5-3-7: SITE APPROVAL DECISION:
A. After the public hearing and any continuation thereof, and upon a review of the record, the village board of trustees shall make a determination
concerning a site approval request within one hundred twenty (120) days from the village clerk's receipt of the site approval request. The village board
may conditionally approve any request for site approval provided the conditions are reasonable and necessary to satisfy the criteria set forth in the act
and so long as the conditions are not inconsistent with regulations promulgated by the Illinois pollution control board. Any determination by the village
board of trustees shall be supported by the record.
B. No determination by the village board of trustees of a site approval request may be reconsidered. (1976 Code § 98.15)
5-3-8: ADMINISTRATION OF FEES AND COSTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 145/525
A. Upon termination of any proceedings under the hearing process, a final accounting and summary of all authorized expenditures and reimbursements
shall be presented to the appropriate village board committees and the full village board of trustees.
B. Any portion of an application fee not required for reimbursement to the village for costs or expenses incurred by the village under the hearing process
shall be returned to the applicant.
C. In order to properly administer the application fee received with respect to the hearing process and procedure set forth herein, the village clerk is hereby
authorized and directed to receive and hold the application fees for administration and expenditure subject to the review and approval of the village
board of trustees. (1976 Code § 98.16)
Chapter 4
GARBAGE, LANDSCAPE WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CONTRACT: The contract entered into between the village and the waste hauling company selected through an open public process by the village board
to provide waste hauling services for certain residential properties as described in this chapter.
CONTRACT HAULER: The company with whom the village has an exclusive contract to provide waste hauling services as described in this chapter.
CURBSIDE: The approved point of collection which shall be within five feet (5') of the edge of the paved street.
GARBAGE: All household and kitchen wastes, such as discarded food or food residues and paper necessarily used for wrapping same, books, boxes and
cartons, providing all such materials are placed in suitable containers and not left in piles on the ground, and small amounts of sod, earth and rocks,
provided the last three (3) items listed are put in suitable containers of reasonable, movable weight. It shall also include do-it-yourself home remodeling
and repair construction materials, and not commercial remodeling and construction materials, provided such items are put in suitable containers or
bundles of reasonably movable weight.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of
lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any matter other than in a fireplace or other specifically intended combustion chamber.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL/MATERIALS: Aluminum cans, tin and/or steel cans, plastic milk jugs (HDPE), plastic beverage bottles (PETE), newspaper,
glass bottles/containers and all other materials specified by the village, the contract hauler or the contract.
RECYCLING CONTAINERS: The container or cart provided by the contract hauler to residents for the specific purpose of storing recyclable materials on
site and for placing those materials curbside for collection. Exact size, shape and color of the container may vary from time to time, however, recycling
containers will be clearly marked for use as a recycling container only. (Ord. 15-08-09, 8-17-2015)
5-4-2: EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT REQUIRED:
No person or company shall engage in the enterprise of collecting, transporting, processing, storing or disposing of garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse,
recyclables, landscape waste or solid waste of any kind from any residence, dwelling, or multi-family residential development of four (4) units or less within
the corporate limits of the village, as the limits exist from time to time, without first having secured an exclusive contract with the village for such purposes,
consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 15-08-09, 8-17-2015)
5-4-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
By resolution, the village board has authorized the village administrator to enter into a contract with a contract hauler to provide residential waste hauling
services consistent with section 5-4-2 of this chapter. From time to time, the village board may pass other resolutions which authorize the village
administrator to enter into new, or renewed contracts with a duly designated contract hauler on such terms and conditions as the corporate authorities may
direct. All residents and persons disposing of "garbage" and recyclable materials as defined herein shall comply fully with the terms and conditions of the
contract that is then in full force and effect. (Ord. 15-08-09, 8-17-2015)
5-4-4: RECYCLING PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
A. There is hereby established a villagewide residential recycling program which shall be operated by the contract hauler pursuant to the terms and
conditions set forth in the contract.
B. Recycling containers and carts shall be used only for the purposes of storing recyclable materials pending their hauling by the contract hauler, shall be
stored on the residential premises in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and may be placed at the designated location for collection only
during the times specified in this chapter.
C. Once recyclable materials have been placed in or alongside the container and set at the curb or other designated collection location, such materials
become the property of the village and the contract hauler, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to move, remove or tamper with recyclables or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 146/525
landscape waste and each such act of moving, removing and/or tampering in violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as provided in section 5-4-7 of this chapter.
D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter:
1. Any person may donate recyclables and landscape waste to any other person whether operating for profit or not for profit; and
2. Any person may maintain his own compost pile or site so long as such site or pile neither constitutes a nuisance to surrounding property owners nor
endangers the public health or safety. (Ord. 15-08-09, 8-17-2015)
5-4-5: COLLECTION:
No garbage, recyclables, landscape waste or any refuse whether or not in the proper container, shall be placed on any portion of any public or private
road, street or alley, or within twenty five feet (25') thereof, earlier than twenty four (24) hours prior to the scheduled time and date for the pick up of such
garbage, recyclables or landscape waste for the premises; and any garbage, recyclables or landscape waste placed earlier than as aforesaid is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. Such a nuisance may be abated at the direction of the mayor and the removal of such nuisance shall be at the expense
of the owner and resident of the premises in question who shall be jointly liable. (Ord. 15-08-09, 8-17-2015)
5-4-6: LANDSCAPE WASTES:
A. Provisions For The Removal Of Landscape Waste: The contract may further include provisions for the removal of landscape waste. The contract hauler
shall be required only to pick up and haul landscape waste that is in bundles, bags or cans and which complies with the provisions of the contract. The
contract hauler shall not be required to pick up or haul landscape waste cut and left on any property by a commercial enterprise or landscape service,
and it shall be a violation of this chapter to dump such waste on the curb or in the public way, punishable as provided in section 5-4-7 of this chapter.
B. Prohibited Acts:
1. Open Burning Of Landscape Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any open burning of landscape waste at any site in the
village. Notwithstanding the broad scope of this prohibition, it shall be lawful to have campfires burning small amounts of clean wood in fire pits
located safely away from any buildings or other combustible structures, and always subject to any fire safety directives or burning bans that may be
issued from time to time by the fire chief.
2. Land Disposal Of Landscape Waste:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow the open dumping or disposal of any waste, including landscape waste, at any site in the
village, except at a site approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency pursuant to regulations adopted by the Illinois pollution control
board and in accordance with the requirements of this section.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, dump or deposit any waste, including landscape waste, upon the public highways or other public
property. (Ord. 15-08-09, 8-17-2015)
5-4-7: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code or who fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter or any
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
code, and each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the village shall have the right to such other remedies available to it at
law and in equity, including, but not limited to, such injunctive relief as necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 15-08-09, 8-17-2015)
Chapter 5
LANDSCAPE WATERING AND SPRINKLING
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
LAWN: That portion or portions of any lot or parcel of real estate under cultivation with grass, trees, shrubs, bushes, flowers or other type of vegetation.
SWIMMING POOL: Any in or above ground tank or container designed to hold water and be used for swimming. (Ord. 04-04-16, 4-19-2004)
5-5-2: WATER USE RESTRICTIONS:
Except as set forth in this chapter, no owner or occupant of any lot or real estate within the village shall engage in or permit at any time lawn sprinkling,
swimming pool filling or any other exterior water use on such lot or real estate during the period June 1 through September 15 of any year. (Ord. 04-04-16,
4-19-2004)
5-5-3: LAWN INSTALLATION RESTRICTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 147/525
Except as set forth in this chapter, no owner or occupant of any lot or real estate within the village shall engage in or permit the establishment of new lawns
by sodding or seeding during the period June 1 through September 15 of any year. (Ord. 04-04-16, 4-19-2004)
5-5-4: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be excepted from the restrictions set forth in sections 5-5-2 and 5-5-3 of this chapter:
A. On even numbered calendar days, persons having even numbered house or business address numbers may engage in exterior water use for all
purposes; provided, however, that exterior water use for lawn sprinkling purposes shall not be permitted from the hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to the
hour of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
B. On odd numbered calendar days, persons having odd numbered house or business address numbers may engage in exterior water use for all
purposes; provided, however, that exterior water use for lawn sprinkling purposes shall not be permitted from the hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to the
hour of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
C. Property owners may establish new lawns by seeding or sodding during the restricted period using an approved alternate water source separate from
the village water supply. Alternate water sources shall be approved in writing by the village engineer prior to use.
D. Garden hose use shall be permitted at all times for the purposes of washing cars and watering of individual plants provided a shutoff nozzle is utilized
which prevents the continual discharge of water from the hose. (Ord. 05-06-10, 6-20-2005)
5-5-5: WATER EMERGENCIES:
Upon determination by the village administrator, or in his absence the director of public works, that a condition of extreme water shortage exists, the village
administrator or director of public works may impose such additional, immediate or total external water use restrictions as may be necessary to ensure
maintenance of an adequate supply of water to meet internal residential, business and firefighting requirements. (Ord. 04-04-16, 4-19-2004)
5-5-6: PENALTY:
The owner, owners or any person or persons that are in actual control of the premises where a violation of this chapter has occurred shall be fined as set
forth in the schedule of fines in subsection 1-3-1A of this code. Each and every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-
07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 6
PHOSPHORUS-CONTAINING FERTILIZER
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR: A person who is engaged in the business of applying fertilizer for hire.
FERTILIZER: A substance containing nitrogen, phosphorus, potash or any other recognized plant nutrient element or compound which is used primarily
for its plant nutrient content. Fertilizer shall not include the following natural products: agricultural limestone, marl, sea solids and unprocessed animal
manure, which have not been manipulated so as to alter or change them chemically, burnt or hydrated lime, and sewage sludge produced by any sanitary
district; and shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
NONCOMMERCIAL APPLICATOR: A person who applies fertilizer but who is not a commercial applicator. (Ord. 07-10-25, 10-15-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-6-2: PROHIBITION:
No commercial or noncommercial applicator, including homeowners and renters, shall apply to any area within the village of Antioch any fertilizer, liquid or
granular, which contains any amount of phosphorus or other compound containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, except:
A. The naturally occurring phosphorus in unadulterated natural or organic fertilizing products such as yard waste compost; or
B. As otherwise provided in section 5-6-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-10-25, 10-15-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-6-3: IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, DRAINAGEWAYS AND BUFFER ZONES:
No commercial or noncommercial applicator shall apply any fertilizer to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 148/525
A. Impervious surfaces;
B. Areas within drainage ditches;
C. Waterways or within ten feet (10') thereof; and
D. Any delineated wetland and any area established as a natural buffer zone therefor. (Ord. 07-10-25, 10-15-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-6-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exemptions to the prohibitions described in this chapter:
A. The prohibition against the use of fertilizer containing phosphorus shall not apply to turf and lawn areas for which soil tests confirm the ambient
phosphorus content is below median phosphorus levels for typical area soils. The scope of this exemption shall only be for such volume or
concentration of phosphorus necessary to permit such turf or lawn area to contain phosphorus levels equal to the median phosphorus levels for typical
area soils. Phosphorus applied as fertilizer pursuant to this exemption shall be integrated into the soil where it is immobilized and generally protected
from loss by stormwater runoff.
B. The prohibition contained in section 5-6-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any farming or agricultural business, provided the use of fertilizer is related to
the growth of a product or maintenance of growing fields. Appropriate steps shall be taken to integrate the fertilizer into the soil where it is immobilized
and generally protected from loss by stormwater runoff. This exemption shall not apply to the standard lawn area of said farm or agricultural business.
(Ord. 07-10-25, 10-15-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-6-5: SIGNS:
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership which sells any fertilizer at retail shall be required to post a sign at the point of sale for fertilizer containing the
following legend: "THE VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH PROHIBITS THE APPLICATION OF FERTILIZER CONTAINING PHOSPHORUS TO ANY LAWN OR
TURF AREA AND ANY IMPERVIOUS SURFACE, DRAINAGE WAY, WETLAND OR BUFFER ZONE." Such sign shall have an area not less than 93.5
square inches and shall be conspicuously posted no less than four feet (4') above the ground. (Ord. 07-10-25, 10-15-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
5-6-6: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the chief of police and the director of planning, zoning and building or other village officer charged
with enforcement of village ordinances.
B. Any person, corporation, firm, franchise or other entity found to violate this chapter shall be liable for penalties as set forth in the schedule of fines in
subsection 1-3-1A of this code. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 7
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL REGULATIONS
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ABANDONMENT: The act of leaving a thing with the intent not to retain possession of or assert ownership control over it. The intent need not coincide with
the act of leaving. It is prima facie evidence of the necessary intent to abandon a vehicle, vessel or container containing a hazardous substance that:
A. The vehicle, vessel or container has been left for more than two (2) days unattended and unmoved; or
B. License plates or other identifying marks have been removed from the vehicle, vessel or container; or
C. The vehicle, vessel or container has been damaged or is deteriorated so extensively that it has value only for junk or salvage; or
D. The owner/operator has been notified by a law enforcement agent to remove the vehicle, vessel or container and it has not been removed within
twenty four (24) hours after notification.
CONTAINER: A receptacle used for the shipment or storage of goods that meets one or more of the following:
A. Of permanent character and strong enough for repeated use; or
B. A cargo container used to transport or store small quantities of materials, such as a box, drum, barrel, can or carboy; or
C. Specifically designed to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more modes of transportation without intermediate reloading.
FIRE CHIEF: The fire chief of the village of Antioch or his authorized representative.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 149/525
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: A. Any material as designated pursuant to the federal "comprehensive, environmental response, compensation and liability
act of 1980", 42 USC 9601 (14), as amended or as may be amended in the future; or
B. Any substance, material, waste or mixture designated as a hazardous material, waste or substance according to the provisions of chapter 49 of the
code of federal regulations or according to 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1 et seq., as amended or as may be amended in the future, excluding
highway route controlled quantities of radioactive materials as defined in 49 CFR and special fireworks as defined in 49 CFR 173.88(d) when the
aggregate amount of the flash power does not exceed fifty (50) pounds; or
C. Any material listed on the environmental protection agency pollutants, 40 CFR 401.15, as amended, or as may be amended; or
D. Any material which is classified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) as a flammable liquid, a class 2 combustible liquid, or a class 3
combustible liquid; or
E. Any material which has been determined by the party storing it, or having control of it, through testing or other objective means, to be likely to create
a significant potential or actual hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment. This definition shall not establish any requirement
to test for the purposes of this chapter; or
F. Any material which has been determined by the fire chief, through information based on appraisal and assessment from reliable resources, to be
likely to create a significant potential or actual hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment. The fact that the material in
question is not designated as a hazardous substance pursuant to subsections A through E of this definition, or is excluded by the legislation of NFPA
classifications of subsections A through D of this definition does not preclude the fire chief from determining that the material is a hazard, given the
totality of the particular facts and circumstances, existent at the time of the hazardous substance incident.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE INCIDENT: Any circumstance involving the release or threatened release of a hazardous substance, which, in the judgment
of an emergency response authority, whether said emergency response authority be the village, a MABAS agreement member unit, or a federal or state
agency or other local agency, creates a significant potential or actual hazard to the environment or to the public health, safety, and welfare excluding risks
associated with hazardous substances in the normal course of an individual's employment. "Hazardous substance incident" includes those incidents of
releasing or abandoning of a hazardous substance, whether or not such release or abandoning is found to threaten immediate and irreparable harm, but
such term does not include any release of a hazardous substance authorized pursuant to federal, state, or local law or regulation.
PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation, partnership, association, firm, trust, sole proprietorship, estate, state or any department, institution
or agency thereof, any municipal corporation, county or other political subdivision of the state or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties and which is not subject to privilege or immunity from liability for a hazardous substance incident.
RELEASE: Any actual or threatened spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping,
vaporizing, evaporating, or disposing into the environment, but excludes:
A. Any release which results in exposure to persons solely within a work place, with respect to a claim which such persons may assert against the
employer of such person;
B. Emissions from the engine exhaust of a motor vehicle, rolling stock, aircraft, vessel or pipeline pumping station engine;
C. Release of source, byproduct, or special nuclear material from a nuclear incident, as those terms are defined in the atomic energy act of 1954, as
amended, if such release is subject to requirements with respect to financial protection established by the nuclear regulatory commission under
section 1870 of such act;
D. The normal application of fertilizer;
E. A release authorized pursuant to any federal, state or local law or regulation.
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The controlling, containing, isolating, or stabilizing of released hazardous substances from the environment or any action as
may be necessary to be taken in the event of the threat of a release of hazardous substances or such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess,
and evaluate the release or threatened release of hazardous substances, the disposal of removed material, or the taking of such other actions as may be
necessary to minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare or the environment which may otherwise result from a release or threatened
release of hazardous substances. The term includes, in addition, but without limitation, security fencing, containment barriers or other measures to limit
access to or spread of hazardous substances, provisions of alternative water supplies, temporary evacuation and housing of threatened individuals, any
emergency assistance which may be provided under the Illinois emergency services and disaster agency act of 1975, as amended or as may be
amended, pursuant to a MABAS agreement.
VEHICLE: Any device which is capable of moving itself, or being moved, from place to place upon wheels or endless tracks. The term includes, but without
limitation, automobiles, trucks, semitractors, semitrailers, railroad engines and railroad cars.
VESSEL: Any craft which is made to float upon water or which does float upon water. (Ord. 10-07-25, 7-19-2010)
5-7-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIABILITY FOR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE INCIDENT, REMOVAL AND COSTS:
A. The Antioch fire department is authorized to remove and abate the effects of any hazardous substance incident:
1. Upon or into property or facilities located in the corporate limits of the village; and
2. Pursuant to any mutual aid box alarm agreement in effect; and
3. In the waters of any lake, pond, creek, river, wetland or stream which directly or indirectly discharges water into any property located within the
corporate limits of the village; and
4. Outside the corporate or response limits where the health, welfare or property of the village or those people within its protection are in danger.
B. The following persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the village for payment of all costs, direct and indirect, foreseeable and unforeseeable,
incurred by the village as a result of any removal or abatement of a hazardous materials incident and to any member unit of a MABAS agreement
rendering aid to the village pursuant to said agreement:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 150/525
1. The person or persons whose conduct caused such release; and
2. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance at the time of such release, without regard to fault or
proximate cause; and
3. The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the container, vehicle or vessel which held such hazardous substance at the time of,
or immediately prior to, such release or threatened release, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and
4. Any person owning or in control of any real property from which a hazardous substance is or is threatened to be released.
C. In the event any person undertakes voluntarily or upon order of the fire chief to remove or abate the effects of any actual or threatened hazardous
substance release, the fire chief may take such action as is necessary or desirable to supervise or verify the adequacy and safety of the removal or the
abatement. The persons described in subsections B1 through B4 of this section shall be liable to the village for all costs, direct or indirect, incurred as a
result of such supervision or verification. (Ord. 10-07-25, 7-19-2010)
5-7-3: EXTENT OF LIABILITY:
A. The costs recoverable under this chapter shall include the following:
1. Any and all costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection with the cleanup, abatement, site management or fire extinguishment involved
in any hazardous substances incident;
2. The actual cost of any experts or consultants needed by the village in connection with the cleanup, abatement, site management or fire
extinguishment involved in any hazardous substances incident;
3. Prejudgment interest on the costs and expenses described in subsections A1 and A2 of this section at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum;
4. Any and all collection costs, including, but not limited to, attorney fees and court costs incurred by the village in enforcing this chapter, or in obtaining
payment from the liable party or parties hereunder.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no person shall be liable for the expense of any fire not involving a hazardous substance incident, and no
person shall be liable for the expense of the extinguishment of a fire beyond the expenses directly or indirectly attributable to any hazardous substance
that may be present or involved in the fire;
C. Nothing herein shall limit, change or impair the right of recovery or subrogation arising under any mutual aid agreement, or other ordinance, statute,
regulation or provision of law. No criminal or quasi-criminal remedy for any wrongful action shall be excluded or impaired by this chapter. (Ord. 10-07-
25, 7-19-2010)
5-7-4: LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed to give effect to its purposes, which are as follows:
A. To shift the burden of liability for threatened or actual hazardous substance incidents from the taxpayers of Antioch to those persons defined as liable
hereunder; and
B. To deter potentially liable persons from allowing hazardous substance incidents to occur; and
C. To protect the safety and living environment of the residents of the village of Antioch. (Ord. 10-07-25, 7-19-2010)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively:
AT LARGE: Any dog, cat, or other domestic animal off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or his authorized agent by leash
or other means.
CAT: Any animal, male or female, of any kind, age and description of the feline species which is more than two (2) months old.
DOG: Any animal, male or female, of any kind, age and description of the canine species which is more than two (2) months old.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 151/525
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Any animal, male or female, of any kind, age and description which is normally kept or referred to as a household pet. (1976 Code
§ 98.001)
6-1-2: DOGS AND CATS:
A. Lake County Ordinances Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference, for the purpose of controlling dogs and cats within the village, the current
animal control ordinances of Lake County, Illinois, a copy of such ordinance(s) to be kept on file in the office of the village clerk. (2003 Code)
B. Rabies Inoculation Required: Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) months of age or older, shall each year cause said dog or cat to be inoculated against
rabies by a licensed veterinarian, and provide the dog or cat with a collar or harness and attach thereto an official rabies vaccination tag which shall be
worn by the dog or cat at all times. However, if the vaccine used is one recognized by the state department of agriculture, for a three (3) year period of
immunity and the dog or cat is over twelve (12) months of age at the time of inoculation, the interval between inoculation may be extended to three (3)
years. (1976 Code § 98.004)
6-1-3: DOGS AND CATS; LIMITS ON NUMBER ALLOWED1:
A. Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to own, keep or harbor at any time more than the maximum number of dogs and cats in the
village, as specified in this section.
B. Number Allowed:
Parcel Size
(Acres)
Maximum Number Of Dogs,
Cats Or Combination Allowed
Up to and including 1/2 acre 3
Over 1/2 acre (up to and
including 11/2 acres)
4
C. Multi-Family Units: Households located within multi-unit structures (apartments, condominiums, etc.) will be limited to the number of dogs and cats
specified for parcels sized up to one-half (1/2) acre; however, owners/landlords of such multi-unit housing, condominium associations or other
applicable authorities, may further limit the number of animals in said units. (1976 Code § 98.015)
D. Multiple Animal Permits: For parcels larger than one and one-half (11/2) acres, a special multiple animal permit, as specified in this section, is required
for the owning, keeping or harboring of five (5) or more dogs or cats. The limit for dogs and cats or any combination thereof is eight (8) under this
permit. (1976 Code §§ 91.015, 91.021)
1. Applications by individuals for multiple animal permits shall be made to the village animal warden on forms prescribed by the village and shall be
accompanied by the required annual fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00).
2. Each permit shall be issued for the term of one fiscal year or for such part thereof as remains at the time of the issuance of the permit. Each permit
shall be renewed during the month of December every year. Each permit shall be signed by the village administrator or his designated representative
and shall be issued under the seal of the village.
3. The village animal warden may refuse to issue or renew or may suspend or revoke a multiple animal permit on any one or more of the following
grounds:
a. Material misstatement in the application for original permit or in the application for any renewal permit under this section.
b. Wilful disregard or prior history of violation of this section.
c. Wilfully aiding or abetting another in the violation of this section.
d. Allowing one's permit under this section to be used by another person.
e. Failure to allow the village animal control warden to annually, or unannounced, inspect the premises for sanitary conditions, proper ventilation,
adequate nutrition, humane care and treatment, including required rabies vaccinations and registrations for all dogs and/or cats in the warden's
jurisdiction.
E. Exemptions: Licensed kennel operators, pounds, animal shelters, pet shop operators and dog dealers, as defined in the Illinois animal welfare act2,
existing before the effective date hereof, are exempt from this section.
F. Violations:
1. Any owner or person who keeps or harbors more than the permitted number of dogs or cats before the effective date hereof, shall not be allowed to
obtain or replace dogs or cats that are in excess of that which is allowed. Such owners or persons shall be subject to a multiple pet permit as
stipulated in this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 152/525
2. Failure to comply with this section within fifteen (15) calendar days of receiving notice of violation of this section from the animal warden shall result
in the issuance of a ticket for violation of this section. The court upon hearing evidence of the violation shall order removal by the animal warden of all
animals in excess of that which is allowed. (1976 Code § 91.015)
6-1-4: KEEPING OF OTHER ANIMALS:
A. Cows, Hogs, Sheep And Cattle: The keeping of cows, hogs, sheep and cattle within the village is forbidden, with the exception of the keeping of
Vietnamese potbellied pigs as provided in subsection B of this section.
B. Vietnamese Potbellied Pigs: Vietnamese potbellied pigs may be kept in residential areas when the Vietnamese potbellied pigs are kept solely for pet
purposes and not for livestock or breeding purposes and do not constitute a nuisance as more fully defined in subsection 5-1-5A of this code. Only two
(2) Vietnamese potbellied pigs shall be allowed per household. This subsection shall be applied to section 6-1-3 of this chapter in that a Vietnamese
potbellied pig shall be included in the total number of pets allowed in section 6-1-3 of this chapter. (1976 Code § 91.021)
6-1-5: HORSES:
A. Keeping: No horse or other equine animal shall be kept or boarded and no accessory building used for the keeping, training or the like, of a horse or
other equine animal shall be hereafter erected or altered within the village, except in conformity with the regulations established and set forth in this
section. (1976 Code § 91.025)
B. Minimum Area And Limitations On Number: The number of horses or other equine animals permitted on a lot or parcel of land shall be as follows:
Parcel Size
(Acres)
Maximum Number Of Horses
Or Other Equine Animals Allowed
0 to 5 acres 0
5 to 8 acres 2
8 acres or more 4
All definitions of land areas shall be exclusive of road easements and rights of way. (1976 Code § 91.026)
C. Exercise Area: No horse or other equine animal, and no corral, ring or enclosure for the training of a horse or other equine animal shall be kept, located
or maintained closer than thirty five feet (35') from any lot line or property line. (1976 Code § 91.027)
D. Accessory Buildings: Any accessory building used for the housing, training or keeping of a horse or other equine animal shall not be located closer than
sixty feet (60') from any lot line or property line or within ten feet (10') from any septic field or drain field tile line. (1976 Code § 91.028)
E. Restrictions:
1. Fencing Required: Every horse or other equine animal exercise ring, corral, pasture or other open area for training or keeping of horses or other
equine animals shall be suitably fenced so as to contain the animal in such a manner as to protect adjoining property from trespass by the animal
and to provide protection without danger of injury to the animal itself. No such areas shall be located over any septic tank or drain field tile line. (1976
Code § 91.029)
2. Commercialism Prohibited: No person shall engage in the business of buying, selling, dealing in or the boarding of or the keeping for hire of any
horse or other equine animal. (1976 Code § 91.030)
6-1-6: BITING OR ATTACKING DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS:
A. 1. It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog or other animal to prevent such dog or other animal from biting or attacking any person or pet in the
village, and, if a person or pet is bitten by a dog or other animal, the owner shall report the incident to the police department immediately. Any dog or
other animal which may unprovokedly bite or attack any person or pet in the village is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and such dog or animal may
be apprehended and impounded at any time by any police officer, animal warden, or other such person charged with the enforcement of this chapter. If
such dog or other animal is impounded, the owner shall have no right to redeem the dog or other animal if:
a. It has unprovokedly attacked or bitten any person(s) or pet(s) in the village on two (2) separate occasions within any twenty four (24) month
period; or
b. It has inflicted a serious wound or other permanent or disabling injury in the attack in question.
2. The loss of right to redeem shall not apply if the owner shall remove such dog or other animal from the village immediately upon redemption and
shall not thereafter keep or otherwise maintain such dog or other animal in the village at any time.
B. If an owner has notice that his dog or other animal has bitten any person or pet, it shall be unlawful for such owner to kill such dog or other animal or to
sell or give away such dog or other animal, or to permit or allow such dog or other animal to be taken beyond the limits of the village except to a
licensed veterinary hospital. It shall be the duty of such owner to immediately report the incident to the police department and to immediately place
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 153/525
such a dog or other animal in a licensed veterinary hospital where such dog or other animal shall be quarantined for a period of at least ten (10) days
(upon request of any police officer, animal warden or other person charged with the enforcement of this chapter) and to deliver such animal to them for
such placement. The owner shall immediately furnish the police department with the name and location of said hospital and a certificate of a licensed
veterinarian stating whether or not such dog or animal shows symptoms of rabies. At the expiration of the quarantine period and prior to the release of
such dog or other animal, the owner shall furnish the police department with another certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating that such dog or other
animal does not have rabies. All costs of maintaining any such dog or other animal in a veterinary hospital shall be the obligation and responsibility of
its owner and shall be paid by said owner. If, however, the rabies inspector or licensed veterinarian has presented evidence that such dog or other
animal has been inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law prior to the biting, such dog or other animal shall be confined in the house
of its owner or in a manner that will prohibit such dog or other animal from biting any person or pet for a period of ten (10) days, unless in the judgment
of the police department, animal warden or the licensed veterinarian, circumstances are such that the dog or other animal should be confined
elsewhere. At the end of the ten (10) day period, the dog or other animal shall be examined by the rabies inspector or a licensed veterinarian.
C. In all cases where the animal that has bitten a person is slain or dies within ten (10) days from the time of the biting, it shall be the duty of the person
slaying such animal and the owner of such animal to notify the police department and to immediately deliver the head of such animal intact to said
department or cause the same to be done. Such head shall be sent to the state department of health for examination for rabies.
D. Any animal found to be rabid by a licensed veterinarian shall be destroyed according to all applicable statutes and rules of the Illinois and Lake County
departments of health.
E. It shall be an adequate defense to any charge of violation of this section for the charged owner or possessor of an alleged biting or attacking dog or
other animal to show that the animal was defending its owner, another person or the owner's property or that it was in a fenced in area or other
enclosure when the same was invaded by the person or animal bitten.
F. In recognition and in memoriam of the little dog which was bitten and killed by a loose animal with a history of prior bites, this section shall hereafter be
known as "Gizmo's law". (Ord. 10-02-04, 2-16-2010)
6-1-7: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Disturbing The Peace: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in his possession or harbor any dog, domestic or other animal which, by
frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping or by other loud noise, shall cause annoyance of any family or person, or shall disturb the peace or quiet
of any neighborhood or place within the village. Such annoyance of any family or person or the disturbance of the peace or quiet of any neighborhood
or place within the village by any dog, cat, domestic or other animal is declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to suffer
or permit such nuisance to exist. (1976 Code § 91.012)
B. Running At Large: No person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog, cat, domestic animal or other animal shall cause or permit such dog, cat or other
domestic animal to run at large at any time during the year in any area in the village other than the private premises of the owner or keeper of such
dog, cat or other domestic animal. All dogs, cats, domestic animals or other animals kept within any area of the village shall be confined by means of a
secure leash or chain, or confined within a fenced area in such a manner as to prevent the dog, cat, domestic animal or other animal from running at
large. Any dog, cat, domestic animal or other animal found running at large in violation hereof, or that shall menace the public welfare is declared to be
a public nuisance and shall be apprehended and impounded in the manner provided in this chapter.
C. Animal Wastes Disposed Of By Owner: All persons walking their dogs or other domestic animals on the public property of the village, or on any private
property not owned by the person walking the animal, shall carry a receptacle necessary for the placing of any droppings or feces, while the animal is
on the public or private property other than his own. The owner of the animal shall place the droppings in the receptacle to be disposed of in a proper
garbage container or lavatory. Should any person walking a dog or other domestic animal be found without the receptacle, it shall be the duty of the law
enforcement officials, including the animal warden, to impound the animal pursuant to this chapter, and a nontraffic ticket alleging the violation shall be
issued to the person walking the animal. (1976 Code § 91.008)
D. Cruelty To Animals: No person shall be cruel to any animal in any of the following ways:
1. By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing, tormenting, mutilating or cruelly killing any animal, or causing or knowingly
allowing the same to be done;
2. By cruelly working any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done;
3. By unnecessarily failing to provide any animal in his charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink and shelter;
4. By abandoning any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal or by abandoning any animal on any highway or public way or in any other place
where it may suffer injury, hunger or exposure or become a public charge; or
5. By carrying or driving, causing to be carried or driven or kept, any animal in an unnecessarily cruel manner. (1976 Code § 91.014)
E. Slaughtering: No person shall slaughter or cause to be slaughtered any cattle, hogs, sheep or any other animal in any house, barn, outhouse, shed or
other tenement or in any yard, lot, street or ground within the limits of the village. (1976 Code § 91.020)
6-1-8: PROCEDURE WHEN PERSON IS BITTEN:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog, cat, domestic animal or other animal, when notified by the animal warden or his authorized agent
that such dog, cat, domestic animal or other animal has bitten any person, to sell or give away such dog, cat, domestic animal or other animal or allow
such dog, cat, domestic or other animal to be taken beyond the limits of the village, except for confinement with a licensed veterinarian. It shall be the
duty of such owner or keeper, upon receiving notice from the animal warden or his authorized agent of the circumstance aforesaid, to deliver such dog,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 154/525
cat, domestic or other animal within twenty four (24) hours to a licensed veterinarian for examination, confinement and observation, at the expense of
the owner. Where there is a failure to comply within twenty four (24) hours with the order from the animal warden or his authorized agent to have such
dog, cat, domestic or other animal examined, confined and observed as provided herein, the animal warden or his authorized agent, upon a showing of
reasonable evidence that such dog, cat, domestic or other animal has bitten a person, may seek a court order to have such dog, cat, domestic or other
animal confined and observed. Within twenty four (24) hours after the dog, cat, domestic or other animal is examined and confined, the veterinarian
shall report (as required by section 12 of the Illinois rabies control act3) to the animal warden, the owner's name, address and the date of confinement,
the breed, description, age and sex of the dog, cat, domestic or other animal. Such dog, cat, domestic or other animal shall be confined for a period of
ten (10) days. At the termination of the period of confinement, the veterinarian shall notify the animal warden in writing of the final disposition of the
animal.
B. If, however, the dog, cat, domestic or other animal is examined by a licensed veterinarian within twenty four (24) hours after notification by the animal
warden and found to be free of signs of rabies, and the animal warden or the licensed veterinarian is presented evidence that such dog, cat, domestic
or other animal has been inoculated against rabies more than thirty (30) days prior to the biting and less than one year, if a one year immunity vaccine
is used, or less than three (3) years if a three (3) year vaccine is used, such dog, cat, domestic or other animal shall be confined in the house of its
owner or in a manner that will prohibit such dog, cat, domestic or other animal from escaping and from biting any person or animal for the ten (10) day
period, unless in the judgment of the animal warden or the licensed veterinarian, circumstances are such that the dog, cat, domestic or other animal
should be confined elsewhere. At the end of the ten (10) day period, it shall be the duty of the owner to present the dog, cat, domestic or other animal
to a licensed veterinarian for examination. The licensed veterinarian shall then notify the animal warden, in writing, within twenty four (24) hours of the
results of the examination.
C. If the dog, cat, domestic or other animal escapes from the house of its owner, or from such other place of confinement provided by its owner, during the
ten (10) day confinement period, or if the owner fails to deliver the dog, cat, domestic or other animal to a licensed veterinarian for reexamination within
twenty four (24) hours of the completion of the ten (10) day confinement period, the owner is declared to be in violation of this section and is subject to
the penalties provided in this chapter. In addition, the owner of an escaped dog, cat, domestic or other animal shall immediately apprehend it and
deliver it to a licensed veterinarian for confinement, at the owner's expense, for the remainder of the ten (10) day period.
D. The owner of a dog, cat, domestic or other animal, four (4) months of age or older, not currently inoculated against rabies, as provided elsewhere in this
chapter, must have the dog inoculated against rabies at the time of release from confinement. (1976 Code § 91.011)
6-1-9: EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY:
The animal warden, peace officers or other persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall not be held liable for the injury, death or
disease which may occur to any dog, cat or other domestic animal as a consequence of the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (1976 Code
§ 91.013)
6-1-10: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-2-1: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY:
The definitions of "property", "owner", "permanent deprivation", "deception", "threat", "stolen property", "obtain", "obtains control" and "value", as set out in
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-1 through 5/15-9 are adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein. (1976 Code
§§ 130.001, 130.002, 130.003)
6-2-1-1: THEFT:
A. General: A person commits theft when he knowingly:
1. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
2. Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
3. Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
4. Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him to believe that the property was stolen; and
a. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or
b. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
c. Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit. (1976 Code § 13.001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 155/525
B. Theft Of Lost Or Mislaid Property: A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property commits theft when he:
1. Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner; and
2. Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner; and
3. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property. (1976 Code § 130.002)
C. Theft Of Labor Or Services: A person commits theft when he obtains the temporary use of property, labor or services of another which are available
only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent, of the person providing the property, labor or services.
(1976 Code § 130.003)
D. Offender's Interest In Property:
1. It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the offender has an interest therein, when the owner also has an interest to which the offender is
not entitled.
2. Where the property involved is that of the offender's spouse, no prosecution for theft may be maintained unless the parties were not living together
as a legal couple and were living in separate abodes at the time of the alleged theft. (1976 Code § 130.004; amd. 2003 Code)
6-2-1-2: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or advertisements on any public property without the authority of the mayor and village board of
trustees; and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any property without the written consent of the owner thereof. (1976 Code § 130.005)
6-2-1-3: ADVERTISING MATERIALS; PLACEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a licensed bill poster or not, to distribute handbills, circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures or advertising
matter of any kind whatsoever, by placing the same in or on any motor vehicle standing or parked in the village. (1976 Code § 130.030)
6-2-1-4: LITTERING:
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any straw, dirt, filth, shells, coal, ashes or other rubbish in any street, alley or other public place in the
village. (1976 Code § 130.034)
6-2-1-5: DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
A. Definitions:
ACCOUNT HOLDER: Any person, having a checking account or savings account in a financial institution.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any bank, savings and loan association, credit union or other depository of money or medium of savings and collective
investment.
INTENT TO DEFRAUD: To act wilfully, and with the specific intent to deceive or cheat, for the purpose of causing financial loss to another, or to bring
some financial gain to oneself. It is not necessary to establish that any person was actually defrauded or deceived.
B. Offense: A person commits a deceptive practice when:
1. With intent to defraud, he causes another, by deception or threat, to execute a document disposing of property or a document by which a pecuniary
obligation is incurred; or
2. With intent to obtain control over property or to pay for property, labor or services of another, he issues or delivers a check or other order on a real or
fictitious depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be paid by the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with the
depository when the check or other order is issued or delivered is prima facie evidence that the offender knows that it will not be paid by the
depository, and that he has the intent to defraud. (1976 Code § 130.006)
6-2-1-6: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A person commits criminal damage to property when he:
A. Knowingly damages any property of another without his consent; or
B. Recklessly, by means of fire or explosives, damages property of another; or
C. Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 156/525
D. Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another, without his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby
intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or building; or
E. Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
F. Knowingly shoots a firearm at any portion of a railroad train; or
G. Knowingly damages the property of another without his consent by defacing, deforming, or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint or any
other similar substance; or
H. Wilfully and maliciously cuts, injures, damages, tampers with or destroys or defaces any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire engine, or other public
or private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to such equipment, or intentionally opens any fire hydrant without proper authorization.
(1976 Code § 130.007)
6-2-1-7: CRIMINAL TRESPASS:
A. A person commits criminal trespass when he or she:
1. Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within or on a building; or
2. Enters upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden; or
3. Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart; or
4. Enters upon one of the following areas in or on a motor vehicle (including an off road vehicle, motorcycle, moped, or any other powered 2-wheel
vehicle), after receiving prior to that entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving
notice from the owner or occupant to depart:
a. Any field that is used for growing crops or which is capable of being used for growing crops; or
b. An enclosed area containing livestock; or
c. An orchard; or
d. A barn or other agricultural building containing livestock;
For purposes of subsection A1 of this section, this section shall not apply to being in a building which is open to the public while the building is
open to the public during its normal hours of operation; nor shall this section apply to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable
belief that the building is still open to the public.
B. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of subsection A of this section if he has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing including a valid court order as defined by subsection (7) of section 112A-3 of the code of criminal procedure of 19631 granting
remedy (2) of subsection (b) of section 112A-14 of that code2, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof.
C. This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of his agent having
apparent authority to hire workers on such land and assign them living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to anyone living on
such land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other agreement or arrangement with the owner or his agent, nor to anyone invited by such
migrant worker or other person so living on such land to visit him at the place he is so living upon the land.
D. A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if he beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial properties located
within any municipality. For the purpose of this subsection, "unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property" means any real estate: 1) in
which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least two (2) years; and 2) which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at least
one year; and "beautifies" means to landscape, clean up litter, or to repair dilapidated conditions on or to board up windows and doors.
E. No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property which
that person beautifies pursuant to subsection D of this section.
F. This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this subsection,
"emergency" means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious
bodily harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger of damage or destruction. (Ord. 04-06-24, 6-7-2004)
6-2-1-8: SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the below terms shall have the following ascribed meanings:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than
ten percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs,
cocktail lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 157/525
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his
or her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: 1) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways,
or 2) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and
corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller
rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in
athletic competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the
purposes of accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes
for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within
these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through
during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of fifteen
feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work
areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home based business,
unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of employment".
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: 1) has been in active and continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective date of
this amendatory act of the 95th general assembly, whether incorporated or not, 2) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
exclusively for club purposes at all times, 3) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but
not for pecuniary gain, and 4) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an
organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has
established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club
under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation, a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment,
mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar
public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole
or in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, the village of Antioch, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged
for admission, including a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide
licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals,
restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances,
educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention
facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping
centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas,
lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a
hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco,
plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of
other products is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or
any establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or burning cigarette, cigar, pipe, hookah pipe, pipe weed, or other lighted
tobacco product in any manner or in any form.
B. Smoking Prohibited In Public Places And Places Of Employment:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place or place of employment within the village of Antioch.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place designated as a "no smoking area", as provided in subsection D of this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in any place of employment.
4. It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in said
public place.
5. It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove ash trays, as provided in
subsection E of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 158/525
C. Exemptions: The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this section shall not apply to:
1. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this section. Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms
where smoking is permitted. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms.
2. Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or government vehicles.
3. Private residences or dwelling places except when used as a childcare, adult daycare, healthcare facility, or any other home based business open to
the public.
4. Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted.
5. Any public place or place of employment that is a tobacco dealer, whose principal business is the sale of retail of tobacco and tobacco related
products; provided that smoke generated by smoking on the premises of the tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is
otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been granted.
D. Designation Of Other No Smoking Areas: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator,
manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of said public place or place of
employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited, provided that such employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator,
manager, or other person in control shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsection E of this section.
E. Responsibilities Of Proprietors: Each owner, lessee, occupant, employer or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment shall be
responsible for all the following:
1. Post conspicuous signs no smaller than five inches by seven inches (5" x 7") in enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public place,
place of employment or the building wherein they are located, as the case may be, bearing the text "no smoking" or the international "no smoking"
symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it. Such signs shall also be posted outside of
the main entrance to the public place or place of employment, shall reference the fifteen foot (15') buffer zone in which smoking is prohibited, and
contain the telephone numbers of the designated enforcement authorities noted in this section, in addition to the telephone number and website
designated by the Illinois department of public health for registering complaints.
2. Remove ash trays or other similar containers intended for the deposit of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products from public places.
3. Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited to refrain from smoking, and if the person continues to smoke, request the
person to leave.
4. Notify employees regarding the requirements of this section.
F. Enforcement:
1. This section shall be enforced by the village of Antioch police department.
2. Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the village of Antioch.
3. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section may initiate enforcement by contacting the village of Antioch police department.
4. An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons violating this section
of the appropriate provisions thereof and request that the violator cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues to smoke, request
the person to leave.
G. Penalties:
1. Any person who shall violate subsection B1 or B2 of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for a first violation and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for any subsequent violations within one year. Each day in which a violation of subsection
B1 or B2 of this section occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
2. Any person who shall violate subsection B3 or B4 of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
upon conviction for the first violation and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each subsequent conviction stemming from a violation within one
year of the initial violation of subsection B3 or B4 of this section. Each day in which a violation of subsection B3 or B4 of this section occurs
constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
3. Any person who shall violate subsection B5 of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
each violation. Each day during which a violation of subsection B5 of this section continues beyond the specified time for correction shall constitute a
separate punishable offense, although owners, operators, managers or other controllers of public places and places of employment shall be given a
reasonable time to come into compliance with subsection B5 of this section following issuance of a notice of violation, but such period shall not, in
any event, exceed one week.
4. In addition to the fines established by this subsection G, violation of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on
which the violation occurred.
5. Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by an action in the circuit court for injunctive relief, or other
means provided for by law, and the village may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. (Ord. 07-12-38, 12-17-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 159/525
6-2-2: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND DECENCY:
A. Definition: "Public place" means any place where conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
B. Indecent Exposure: Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a
public indecency:
1. An act of sexual intercourse; or
2. An act of deviate sexual conduct; or
3. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person; or
4. A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either sex. (1976 Code § 130.010)
C. Indecent Publications:
1. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to circulate, pass from one person to another, or expose in any public place or anywhere in view of a
store or place frequented by the public, any immoral, indecent or obscene publication, printed or written matter or picture or other representation.
2. It shall be unlawful to keep any such publication, printed or written matter, picture or other representation in any place frequented by, or where it may
come into the possession of, minors, or to disclose or expose any such material to a minor. (1976 Code § 130.011)
6-2-3: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE:
6-2-3-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of any conduct tending toward a breach of the peace. The causing or making of any
unnecessary loud noise or shouting or yelling shall be considered disorderly conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
B. With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation thereby ensues; or
C. Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its explosion
would endanger human life, knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that a bomb or explosive is
concealed in the place; or
D. Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the
time of the transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that an offense has been committed; or
E. Enters on the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in the dwelling; or (1976 Code § 130.015)
F. Instigates, starts or engages in a fight with another person in any public or private place in the village. For the purposes of this subsection, a "fight" is
defined as any form of physical combat or hostile encounter, not predetermined as a sporting event; and "instigate" is defined as any insulting or
threatening remark or gesture reasonably likely to cause or provoke a fight. (Ord. 04-03-07, 3-15-2004)
6-2-3-2: ASSAULT, BATTERY AND RECKLESS CONDUCT:
A. Assault: A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery. (1976 Code § 130.016)
B. Battery: A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification and by any means, causes bodily harm to an individual or
makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. (1976 Code § 130.017)
C. Reckless Conduct: A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he
performs recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they are otherwise lawful or unlawful. (1976 Code § 130.018)
6-2-4: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING PEACE OFFICERS:
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to the person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his official
capacity. (1976 Code § 130.032)
6-2-5: OFFENSES RELATING TO ALCOHOL, DRUGS AND TOBACCO:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 160/525
6-2-5-1: INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED CONDITION:
A person who is in an intoxicated or drugged condition is criminally responsible for conduct unless the condition either:
A. Negates the existence of a mental state which is an element of the offense; or
B. Is involuntarily produced and deprives him of substantial capacity either to appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the
requirements of law. (1976 Code § 130.031)
6-2-5-2: ADVERTISING ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO:
It is expressly forbidden to advertise the distribution of alcohol or tobacco on any village owned property before, during or after an event sponsored by the
village. (1976 Code § 130.037)
6-2-5-3: MARIJUANA; CANNABIS:
A. Definition: "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring
or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks, (except the resin
therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. (1976 Code § 130.040)
B. Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess any quantity of cannabis in the village. (1976 Code § 130.041)
C. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any person engaged in research with the prior written approval of the dangerous drugs commission of the
state of Illinois or its successor agency, or the prior written approval of the department of law enforcement of the state or its successor agency. (1976
Code § 130.042)
6-2-5-4: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Short Title: This section shall be known and may be cited as the PARAPHERNALIA ORDINANCE. (1976 Code § 130.060)
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CANNABIS: Defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/33.
COCAINE SPOON: A spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is to hold or administer
cocaine, and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical, lawful uses of a spoon. A cocaine spoon may or may not be merchandised on a
chain and may or may not be labeled as a cocaine spoon or coke spoon.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug, substance or immediate precursor enumerated in the controlled substances act4.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are commonly used, may be used, intended for use or designed
for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance as defined in the controlled substances act.
1. Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to:
a. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or cannabis or from which a controlled substance or cannabis can be derived;
b. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substance or cannabis;
c. Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or cannabis;
d. Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances or cannabis;
e. Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances or cannabis;
f. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, manitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances or cannabis;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 161/525
g. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
h. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances or
cannabis;
i. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances or cannabis;
j. Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances or cannabis;
k. Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
(1) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured
metal bowls;
(2) Water pipes;
(3) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(4) Smoking and carburetion masks;
(5) Roach clips, which are objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
(6) Chamber pipes;
(7) Carburetor pipes;
(8) Electric pipes;
(9) Air driven pipes;
(10) Chillums;
(11) Bongs;
(12) Ice pipes or chillers.
2. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
a. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
b. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
c. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this subsection;
d. The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
e. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
f. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who, he knows or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this subsection. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, as to a direct violation of this subsection shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia;
g. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
h. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
i. National and local advertising concerning its use;
j. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
k. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
l. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise;
m. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and
n. Expert testimony concerning its use.
MARIJUANA PIPE OR HASHISH PIPE: A pipe characterized by a bowl which is so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or
designed is the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than lawful smoking of tobacco, and which may or may not be equipped with a screen. (1976
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 162/525
Code § 130.061; amd. Ord. 16-08-21, 8-1-2016)
C. Prohibitions:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, display, furnish, supply or give away any cocaine spoon, marijuana pipe, hashish
pipe, or any drug paraphernalia.
2. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses,
hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians,
pharmacists or embalmers in the normal lawful course of their respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers or warehousers or their
employees engaged in the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia, nor to public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their
official duties, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. (1976 Code § 130.062)
6-2-5-5: MINOR'S POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PROHIBITED:
A. Possession: The use and/or possession of tobacco in any form by a person not having reached the age of eighteen (18) years is hereby prohibited.
B. Penalty: See subsection 6-2-10A of this chapter. (Ord. 03-05-21, 5-19-2003)
6-2-6: OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS:
6-2-6-1: DISCHARGING WEAPONS:
No person shall fire or discharge any cannon, gun, fowling piece, pistol or firearm of any description, or fire, explode or set off any combustible or
explosive material within the limits of the Village without permission from the Mayor, which permission shall limit the time and place for the firing and shall
be subject to revocation by the Mayor or Village Board at any time after it is granted. (1976 Code § 130.033)
6-2-6-2: AIR RIFLES, BOWS AND ARROWS AND SLINGSHOTS:
A. Definitions:
AIR RIFLE: Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, pellet gun or any implement which impels a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel,
lead or other hard materials with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
ARROW: A slender shaft, usually pointed at one end and feathered at the other, for shooting from a bow.
BOW: A flexible, curved strip of wood, plastic, metal, or other material with a string or cord connecting the two (2) ends, designed for shooting arrows.
DEALER: Any person, copartnership, association or corporation engaged in the business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles defined in this
chapter.
SLINGSHOT: A Y-shaped piece of wood, plastic, metal, or other material with an elastic or similar band attached to the upper tips for the purpose of
shooting stones or other projectiles.
B. Sale Or Use Of Air Rifles, Bows And Arrows And Slingshots: It is unlawful for: (1976 Code § 130.035)
1. Any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise transfer any air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years
where the dealer knows or has cause to believe the person to be under eighteen (18) years of age or where the dealer has failed to make
reasonable inquiry relative to the age of the person and the person is under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Any person to sell, give, lend or otherwise transfer any air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot to any person under eighteen (18) years of age except
where the relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward or adult instructor and pupil exists between such person and the person under
eighteen (18) years of age, or where such person stands in loco parentis to the person under eighteen (18) years of age. (1976 Code § 130.035;
amd. 2003 Code)
3. Any person to carry any air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot on the public streets, roads, highways or public lands within the Village, unless the
person carries the rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot unloaded, disassembled, broken down or dismantled in such a manner as to make same
inoperable.
4. Any person to discharge any air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot in the Village except on a safely constructed target range, or on any private
grounds or residence under circumstances when the air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot is fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to
endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in such manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside
the limits of such grounds or residence.
5. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, it is lawful for any person to have in his possession any air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot, if it is:
a. Kept within his house of residence or other private enclosure;
b. Used by the person if he is a duly enrolled member of any club, team or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining as part of its
facilities or having written permission to use an indoor or outdoor target range, and then only if the air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot is actually
being used in connection with the activities of the club, team or society; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 163/525
c. Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances when the air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot is fired, discharged or operated
in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in such manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over
any grounds or space outside the limits of such grounds or residence.
6. The provisions of this subsection B do not prohibit sales of air rifles, bows and arrows or slingshots:
a. By wholesale dealers or jobbers;
b. To be shipped out of the State;
c. To be used at a target range operated in accordance with subsection B5 of this section or by members of the armed services of the United States
or veterans' organizations.
7. Any police officer shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, any air rifle, bow and arrow or slingshot sold or
used in any manner in violation of this subsection B. (1976 Code § 130.035)
6-2-7: CRIMINAL HOUSING MANAGEMENT:
A person commits the offense of criminal housing management when, having personal management or control of residential real estate, whether as legal
or equitable owner of residential real estate or as a managing agent or otherwise, he knowingly permits, by his gross carelessness or neglect, the physical
condition or facilities of the residential real estate to become or remain so deteriorated that the health or safety of any inhabitant is endangered. (1976
Code § 130.036)
6-2-8: FIREWORKS:
A. Sales Within Village Limits: No person shall sell, barter or exchange any fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, roman candles, skyrockets or other articles
intended for pyrotechnic display within the limits of the Village. (1976 Code § 92.001)
B. Sales Outside Village: No person shall sell, barter or exchange any fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, roman candles, skyrockets or other articles
intended for pyrotechnic display within one-half (1/2) mile of the Village limits and, for the purpose of enforcement of this section, jurisdiction of the
Village shall extend to and include all places within one-half (1/2) mile of the corporate limits of the Village. (1976 Code § 92.002)
C. Violation: Any person who shall rent or lease any real estate or improvements thereon, or who shall knowingly permit any person to occupy or use any
real estate or improvements thereon, within the limits of the Village, or within one-half (1/2) mile of the corporate limits, for the purpose of sale, barter or
exchange of any of the articles or things enumerated this section shall be subject to the fine and imprisonment provided in subsection D of this section.
(1976 Code § 92.003)
D. Penalty: Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined as provided in section 6-2-10 of this chapter for each offense. In addition to the
penalty provided in this subsection, the Chief of Police or other police officers of the Village may seize all such articles or things as may be made by
such sale, barter or exchange and confiscate the same. (1976 Code § 92.999(A))
6-2-9: SHOPPING CARTS:
A. Removal: No person shall remove or license or permit the removal of a grocery cart or shopping cart from the premises and/or parking lot of the
business establishment which furnished said cart. (1976 Code § 96.001)
B. Abandonment: No person shall abandon or leave unattended any grocery cart or shopping cart upon any public street, sidewalk or public way within the
Village, or upon the private property of any person adjoining or abutting any public way or sidewalk within the Village, other than the premises where
said cart was originally obtained. (1976 Code § 96.002)
C. Nuisance Declared: Abandoned or unattended grocery carts or shopping carts, whether on public or private property other than the property of the
business establishment which furnished the carts, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1976 Code § 96.003)
D. Impoundment: Any member of the Police Department is authorized to remove or have removed any grocery cart or shopping cart left at any place within
the Village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this section, or which reasonably appears to be abandoned or left unattended, as defined
herein. Such grocery cart or shopping cart shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes
1030/1 et seq. (1976 Code § 96.004)
E. Signs Posted: A copy of this section shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or upon every business establishment which provides grocery carts or
shopping carts for the use of its customers or patrons. (1976 Code § 96.005)
6-2-10: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this Code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this Code or who fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter or any
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 164/525
Code, and each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the Village shall have the right to such other remedies available to it
at law and in equity, including, but not limited to, such injunctive relief as necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. When a person violates section 6-2-5-5 of this chapter, the arresting officer shall have the discretion to divert the case to the Village's "teen court" for
peer review adjustment, including the imposition of community service in lieu of a monetary fine. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 3
MINORS
6-3-1: CURFEW:
A. Curfew Hours: It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or
highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18)
years of age approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Saturday;
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday; and
Between 11:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M. on the following day.
It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate this subsection. (1976 Code
§ 130.020; amd. 2003 Code)
B. Warning To Violator: Any child under the age of eighteen (18) years who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be warned by any police
officer forthwith to comply with such provisions. Any child who resists such warning shall be brought immediately to the police station. The parent,
guardian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of such child shall be notified without delay of the manner in which this section has
been violated, and must then come to the police station and take charge of such child. Any police officer finding a violation of this section shall, without
delay, report such violation to his superior officer, who shall cause a written notice to be served upon the parent, guardian or other person having the
legal care and custody of the child involved. (1976 Code § 130.021)
C. Court Appearance: In case any child under the age of eighteen (18) years, after receiving a warning as above, shall again violate any of the provisions
of this section, the violator and the parent or guardian thereof will be requested to appear before the county court judge of Lake County for disposition.
If the parent or guardian and violator do not appear upon such request, the county court judge will then order the sheriff to bring in said persons. (1976
Code § 130.022)
D. Penalties: A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section, and in case any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child,
who has received notice of a violation as provided herein, shall knowingly permit such child again to violate the provisions of this section, shall be fined
pursuant to the schedule of fines set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
6-3-2: TRUANCY:
A. Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) enrolled in a public, private, or parochial school, to absent himself from
attendance at school without permission from a parent or legal guardian. Any person who shall so absent himself shall be guilty of the offense of
truancy and be subject to the penalties set forth in this code. Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond the control of
the person so absenting himself from school without permission from a parent or legal guardian shall not constitute truancy if permission for such
absence has substantially been obtained from the parent or legal guardian and such permission is submitted in writing to the proper school authorities
within twenty four (24) hours after such absence.
B. Obligation Of Parents Or Legal Guardians: It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any person
under eighteen (18) years of age, to allow or permit any such child, ward or other person under such age enrolled in a public, private or parochial
school, to absent himself from attendance at school without permission from said parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 09-08-21, 8-17-2009)
C. Penalties:
1. If a person between the age of ten (10) years and under the age of eighteen (18) years is convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating
this section, he or she shall be fined pursuant to the schedule of fines set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code.
2. If a person under ten (10) years of age, or the parent, legal guardian, or custodian of a person under ten (10) years of age, is convicted by a court of
competent jurisdiction of violating this section, the parent, legal guardian, or custodian of such person shall be fined pursuant to the schedule of fines
set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code notated therein as "adult responsibility".
3. The court shall have the discretion to impose community service at the court's standard conversion rates in lieu of any fine imposed hereunder, and
in weighing such issue, the court should consider which form of punishment is more likely to deter truancy in the future or by other minors and
impose that form of punishment. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
6-3-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR UNEMANCIPATED MINORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 165/525
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian, or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act1.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet nineteen (19) years of age. (1976 Code § 130.050; amd. Ord. 04-03-08, 3-15-
2004)
B. Presumption:
1. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian shall have a duty to exercise proper parental
responsibility of the minor so as to prevent the minor from violating any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to
a person or property.
2. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and the minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with
the knowledge and permission of the parent or legal guardian, in violation of this section, upon the occurrence of the events described in subsections
B2a, B2b and B2c of this section as follows:
a. An unemancipated minor residing with the parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
b. The parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by
personal service with certificate of personal service returned, from the police department of the village following the adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction; and
c. If at any time within one year following receipt of the written notice set forth in subsection B2b of this section, the minor commits an act and as a
result of that act, the minor is subsequently either adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B2a of
this section or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any
ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B2a of this section. (1976 Code § 130.051; amd. Ord. 04-03-08, 3-15-2004)
C. Penalty: Whoever violates this section shall be fined pursuant to the schedule of fines set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-
2010)
Chapter 4
ABATEMENT OF CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
6-4-1: VIOLATION:
A. Any certain property within the village of Antioch which becomes a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.
B. Any person in charge who permits property under his or her ownership or control to be a public nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and
subject to its remedies. (Ord. 11-08-13, 8-15-2011)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Property upon which three (3) or more of the nuisance activities listed below have occurred during any one hundred
twenty (120) day period, as a result of any three (3) separate factual events that have been independently investigated by any law enforcement agency.
These events must be proven in a court or through a local adjudication process either through convictions of record, or pleas amounting to admissions of
guilt, irrespective of whatever sentence may have been given or agreed to in a negotiated plea. Court action or adjudication process on local ordinances
equivalent to the below cited state law violations will be considered to be violations sufficient to support the charge that a property falls within this
definition:
A. "Disorderly conduct" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1;
B. "Unlawful use of weapons" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq.;
C. "Mob action" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1;
D. "Discharge of firearm" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.2 and 1.5;
E. "Gambling" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1;
F. "Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 166/525
G. "Public indecency" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-30;
H. "Assault or battery or any related offense" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq.;
I. "Sexual abuse or related offense" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1.50 et seq.;
J. "Prostitution" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et seq.;
K. "Criminal damage to property" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1 et seq.;
L. "Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/3 et seq.;
M. "Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol" as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16 et seq.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern conduct that occurs on that property.
COURT: Either the adjudication court established and maintained by the village of Antioch or the circuit court of the 19th judicial circuit, Lake County,
Illinois, as to matters within the jurisdiction of each adjudicative body.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not limited to:
A. The person, persons, entity or entities which hold record legal title to a property.
B. A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:
1. All or part of the legal title to the property,
2. All or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises.
C. Any tenant or other occupant who has the right or ability to control what occurs on the property.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of owning or using property in the village of Antioch.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
his or her domain, ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including land, which is affixed, incidental or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room, house,
building or structure or separate part or portion thereof, whether permitted or not. (Ord. 11-08-13, 8-15-2011; amd. Ord. 15-10-11, 10-5-2015)
6-4-3: REMEDY:
A. In the event a court determines property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use
and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or the court may employ any other
remedy available in law or equity deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.
B. In addition to the remedies provided in subsection A of this section, the court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in the amount of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day, payable to the village of Antioch, for each day the
owner had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain chronic nuisance property.
C. In determining what remedy or remedies shall be employed, the court may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
1. The disturbance of neighbors;
2. The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises;
3. Repeated consumption of alcohol in public. (Ord. 11-08-13, 8-15-2011)
6-4-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
The village's prosecuting attorney may prosecute such cases or assist in the prosecution of such cases as are filed in either the adjudication court of the
village or the branch courts of the circuit court when the remedies sought are limited to monetary penalties within the respective jurisdictions of those
adjudicatory bodies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 167/525
The village attorney may commence an action in the circuit court to abate the chronic public nuisance property as described above. Upon being satisfied
by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged chronic nuisance property exists, the court may, without notice or bond, enter a temporary restraining
order or a preliminary injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance and may enter an order restraining any defendant from removing
or interfering with all property used in connection with the public nuisance. (Ord. 11-08-13, 8-15-2011)
6-4-5: PROCEDURE:
When the chief of police receives one or more police reports documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity on or within a property, the chief of police
shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe criminal acts. Upon such findings, the chief may:
A. Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property;
2. A statement that the chief of police has information that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance
activities that may exist or that have occurred. The chief of police shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action that
the chief of police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation;
3. Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of police within ten (10) days to discuss the nuisance activities.
B. If after complying with the notification procedures described herein the chief of police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of a third
nuisance activity at or within a property and determines that the property has become a chronic nuisance property, the chief of police shall:
1. Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall conform to the
following:
a. It shall set forth the street address or legal description sufficient for identification of the property;
b. It shall include a statement that the chief of police has determined the property to be a chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the
nuisance activities leading to his/her findings;
c. It shall demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to the chief of police and propose a course of action that the chief of police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation;
d. Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at the
address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the
determination by the chief of police;
e. A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such address as shown on the tax rolls of Lake County, Illinois, and/or the occupant, at the
address of the property, if these persons are different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage
prepaid;
f. A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after the ten (10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the person
in charge and the person in charge has not contacted the chief of police;
g. The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this chapter.
2. If, after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal proceedings by the village pursuant to this chapter, a person in charge stipulates with
the chief of police that the person in charge will pursue a course of action that parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation, the chief of police may agree to postpone legal proceedings for a period of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days. If the
agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within thirty
(30) days, the chief of police shall request the village attorney or prosecuting attorney to commence a legal proceeding to abate the nuisance.
3. Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the chief of police shall send copies of the notices, as well as any other documentation
which supports legal proceedings, to the village attorney.
C. When a person in charge makes a response to the chief of police as required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with the furnishing
of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of
any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any other purpose. (Ord. 11-08-13, 8-15-2011)
6-4-6: COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION; BURDEN OF PROOF:
A. In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, or seeking to impose a civil penalty, the village shall have the burden of showing by
preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
B. It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of chronic nuisance property that the owner of the property at the time in question could not, in the
exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of
reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The owner shall have the
burden of proving this defense by a preponderance of the evidence.
C. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors if they find appropriate, and shall cite those
found applicable:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 168/525
1. The actions or lack of action taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the problem at the property;
2. Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous;
3. The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
4. The cooperation of the person in charge with the village;
5. The cost of the village investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition. (Ord. 11-08-13, 8-15-2011)
6-4-7: EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURES:
A. In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, the village may apply to the circuit court for
such interim relief, as is deemed by the chief of police in consultation with the village attorney to be appropriate. In such an event, the notification
provision set forth in section 6-4-5 of this chapter need not be complied with, however, the village shall make a diligent effort to notify the person in
charge prior to a court hearing.
B. In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a "chronic nuisance property" as defined in section 6-4-2 of this chapter, the court may order
such remedies as are provided for in this chapter. In addition, in the event that it also finds a person in charge had knowledge of activities or conditions
of the property constituting or violating this chapter and permitted the activities to occur, the court may assess a civil penalty as provided for in this
chapter.
C. The court may authorize the village of Antioch to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the
time specified by the court. In the event that the village is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the village to affect the
closure shall be accounted for and assessed as a lien against the property. If used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually incurred by the village for
the physical securing of the property, as well as any tenant relocation costs the village might incur.
D. The village of Antioch employee effectuating the closure shall prepare a statement of costs and the village of Antioch shall thereafter submit such
statement to the court for its review. If no objection of the statement is made within the period described by the court, a lien in such amount may be
recorded against such property.
E. Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof by the village.
F. As an ancillary to any enforcement action, the court shall have the power to adjudicate any claim brought in the form of a petition with due and proper
notice by a displaced, innocent tenant against the owner for damages occasioned by the loss of use of any property, and the court may award
judgment in favor of such tenant against the owner in its discretion based upon the evidence presented. (Ord. 11-08-13, 8-15-2011)
6-4-8: DISCRETIONARY ACTION:
The provisions of this chapter are designed and intended to give discretion to the chief of police, the village attorney, the prosecuting attorney and any
other village employees or agents. They are intended to provide useful tools and mechanisms for dealing with chronic problem properties and to help
preserve order and peace within the community. For these reasons, the following provisions, consistent with the reservation of discretion shall apply:
A. Nothing herein is intended, and nothing shall be construed as intending, to create rights in citizens to require action to be taken by any official,
employee or agent of the village.
B. Nothing herein is intended to give any tenant whose tenancy is disrupted by any action taken pursuant to this chapter a charge or claim against the
village for costs of relocation or loss of use of any rental property. (Ord. 11-08-13, 8-15-2011)
6-4-9: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions within this chapter, and consistent with the terms and conditions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1.5, no
property shall be considered a chronic nuisance if the police investigations described in section 6-4-2 of this chapter arise from calls for assistance from
any victim of domestic abuse or person with a disability. Additionally, no victim of domestic abuse or person with a disability shall be evicted, sanctioned or
punished in any way resulting from his or her seeking public assistance or police protection relating to that abuse or condition. However, nothing herein
shall prevent the enforcement of this code against an owner of the property who may be a victim of domestic abuse or be disabled, but whose victimhood
or disability is unrelated to the law enforcement activity causing the property to be a chronic nuisance. (Ord. 15-10-11, 10-5-2015)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
7-1-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 169/525
A. Adoption: Pursuant to the authority and in accordance with the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-204 and all other applicable police
powers and authority, the village hereby adopts in its entirety the Illinois vehicle code1, as it currently exists and as it may hereafter be amended, and
the same are adopted as ordinance provisions of the village. Any ticket or complaint charging a violation of the provisions of the rules of the road
incorporated herein may note that the offense is being charged as a violation of municipal law, but may also describe the specific offense using the
statutory section number from the Illinois vehicle code.
B. Penalty: Any violation of said provisions of the Illinois vehicle code shall hereafter be considered a violation of this section and each such violation shall
subject the violator thereof to the penalty provisions provided in the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 02-06-14, 6-3-2002)
7-1-2: VEHICLE TAXES:
A. Required: It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own or operate, or to cause or permit any of its agents or employees to use or operate a
motor vehicle (car, motorcycle, motorized bicycle, recreational vehicle, van, truck or any motorized vehicle) registered by the state without paying the
required village vehicle tax where:
1. The state registration shows an address within the corporate limits of the village or, in the alternative;
2. Where such motor vehicle is customarily garaged, stored or parked overnight within the corporate limits of the village and does not have affixed
thereto evidence of a valid vehicle license issued by the local governmental entity where it is registered by the state.
B. Amount:
1. All households, whether single-family or multi-family or owned or rented, and corporate entities of whatever nature, located in the village, shall pay a
yearly tax of twenty dollars ($20.00) covering their motor vehicle tax liability except as stated in subsections B2 and B4 of this section. The vehicle
tax will be billed in one installment on the customer's sewer and water bills in the month of March each year.
2. Any households, whether single-family or multi-family or owned or rented, and corporate entities of whatever nature, located in the village, having
more than two (2) vehicles, shall pay an additional yearly vehicle tax of ten dollars ($10.00) per vehicle for each vehicle in excess of two (2).
3. Subject to the provisions of subsection B4 of this section, the following reduced vehicle taxes shall apply:
a. Any household having a senior resident(s) (65 years of age or older) to whom a motor vehicle is registered shall pay a yearly vehicle tax of two
dollars ($2.00) for any such vehicle, and an additional yearly vehicle tax of two dollars ($2.00) for each additional vehicle registered to such senior
resident.
b. Any household or corporate entity where the residents or entity does not own a motor vehicle or regularly garage, store or park a motor vehicle
overnight in the village shall not pay a yearly vehicle tax.
c. Any household or corporate entity where the residents or entity owns only one motor vehicle meeting the criteria of subsection A of this section
shall pay a yearly vehicle tax equal to ten dollars ($10.00).
4. Any household or corporate entity seeking a reduced rate as specified in subsection B3 of this section shall fill out an application and provide proof
sufficient to the village of their meeting the criteria for the lower vehicle tax on a yearly basis before May 1.
C. Reservation Of Right To Collect Additional Vehicle Taxes: The village's acceptance of payment under this section does not represent an accord and
satisfaction of the tax liability hereunder. The village reserves the right to pursue collection of additional vehicle taxes if it determines that an insufficient
amount has been paid under this section. Fees and penalties accruing for late payment of any installment of the vehicle tax or the failure to pay any
installment of the vehicle tax shall be governed by section 1-9-10 of this code.
D. Vehicle Stickers: Should any household or business desire a sticker for their vehicle(s), they may obtain a village sticker at the village hall.
E. Use Of Revenues: All revenue derived from vehicle taxes, except actual cost of collection and disbursement, shall be kept in a separate fund and used
for improving, repairing or maintaining the streets and other public roadways of the village. (Ord. 14-01-01, 1-8-2014)
7-1-3: PARKING FINES:
A. Overtime Violations: An overtime violation shall be prosecuted via a ticket initially issued at the rate shown as a first offense on the schedule of fines set
forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code. If the fine is not paid within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the ticket the violation will be considered to be
a second offense. If the fine is not paid within twenty eight (28) days of the issuance of the ticket, the violation will be considered to be a third offense.
Each ticketing of a subject vehicle shall be considered as a separate offense.
B. Other Violations: Whoever violates any provision of this title relating to parking shall be fined as provided in the schedule of fines set forth in subsection
1-3-1A of this code for each offense. In the event the violation shall be for an offense that is not listed on the said schedule, the fine shall be set
pursuant to the general penalty provided for in section 1-3-1 of this code. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
7-1-4: GENERAL PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, whoever violates any provision of this title shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for
each offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 170/525
ARTICLE A. MOBILE TELEPHONE RESTRICTIONS
7-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be applicable:
HANDS FREE DEVICE: A device that either:
A. Is external to a mobile telephone, and which allows the user to communicate verbally through the telephone without touching the telephone, or
B. Is an internal speaker/microphone which allows the user to communicate verbally through the telephone without touching the telephone.
MOBILE TELEPHONE: A cellular, analog, wireless or digital telephone capable of sending or receiving telephonic communications via radio waves.
ON BOARD COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE: A communication system or device that is hardwired into a motor vehicle.
USE: Communicating verbally through a mobile telephone. (Ord. 11-06-06, 6-20-2011)
7-1A-2: PROHIBITION:
Except as otherwise provided for in section 7-1A-3 of this article, no person shall operate a motor vehicle while using a mobile telephone. (Ord. 11-06-06,
6-20-2011)
7-1A-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition provided for in section 7-1A-2 of this article shall not apply to the following:
A. Any person using a hands free device for voice communication, provided that that person does not touch the mobile telephone through which that
device functions while operating or using the vehicle;
B. Any person using a mobile telephone to call 911 or other emergency telephone number to contact public safety forces;
C. Any person using a mobile telephone while maintaining a motor vehicle in a stationary and parked position with the transmission in park or neutral.
(Ord. 11-06-06, 6-20-2011)
7-1A-4: PENALTY:
A. Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined as provided in subsection 1-3-1A of this code for each offense.
B. Whoever violates any provision of this article and such violation occurs during a vehicular collision shall be fined as provided in subsection 1-3-1A of
this code for each such offense. (Ord. 11-06-06, 6-20-2011)
Chapter 2
PARKING METERS
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section the following phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
METRA: The metropolitan rail transportation authority, being a division of the regional transportation authority established by the state of Illinois and
various other political subdivisions thereof.
PARKING METER: A mechanical, electromechanical or electronic device located upon a public street or sidewalk on a place regularly designated as a
"parking meter zone" hereinafter defined, which device shall record a certain number of minutes by use of a clock mechanism determining the period of
time for which parking privileges may be extended to the person depositing a sum of money therein, or which provides evidence of payment for parking
privileges at a set daily flat rate.
PARKING METER ZONE: A section of a public street or publicly owned parking lot, within marked boundaries, where a vehicle may be temporarily parked
and allowed to remain.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street between regularly established curb lines.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 171/525
VEHICLE: Any device by which any person or property may be transported upon a public highway, except those operated upon rails and permanent
tracks. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
7-2-2: PARKING ZONES ESTABLISHED:
Parking meter zones are created on the following locations in the village:
A. In the METRA Station Parking Lot on Depot Street. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
7-2-3: INSTALLATION OF METERS:
A. General: In the parking meter zones the village administrator shall cause parking meters to be installed in such numbers and at such places as the
village board of trustees may provide by resolution or motion. The village board of trustees shall further, by resolution or motion, fix the time limitations
for legal parking in the zones and the hours during the day when the parking meters or meter must be used and when the time limitations shall be
effective. The village administrator shall indicate the time limitations by designating the same on the parking meter or meters or by appropriate signs
posted in proximity to the meter in the zone.
B. Authorization To Carry Out Contracts: The village administrator is authorized to enter into such contracts as he or she may deem necessary to obtain
and maintain an adequate number of functioning meters, and to coordinate parking facilities and enforcement with METRA officials or other agencies
that may have jurisdiction over any parking zone, lot or facility.
C. Placement Of Meters: The parking meters installed in the parking meter zones as established and provided for in section 7-2-2 of this chapter shall be
placed in areas convenient to each lot and space. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal or receipt
that the parking space assigned to the meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall clearly indicate when there is overtime
parking either on the face of the meter or on the receipt the meter issues.
D. Markings For Parking Places: The director of public works shall have markings painted or placed upon the curb and/or upon the street for the purpose
of designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used, and each vehicle using the lot or space shall park within the line or markings so
established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park a vehicle in such position
that it shall not be entirely within the area so designated by the lines or markings. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
7-2-4: DEPOSITS OF MONEY; COLLECTION:
A. Time Limits:
1. When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this section, the
operator of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately deposit sufficient funds into the parking meter to put the meter in
operation. Failure to deposit funds and put the meter in operation shall constitute a violation of this section.
2. Upon placing the meter in operation as aforesaid, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle for the period shown on the meter or
receipt generated by it. If any such vehicle shall remain parked beyond the parking time limit as shown on the meter or receipt, the vehicle shall be
considered parked overtime and shall constitute a violation of this section.
B. Designation Of Collectors: The village administrator shall designate such collectors and methods, as are necessary to properly collect all funds
deposited in the parking meters. The collectors shall be only those employees as are now or hereafter duly bonded in the sum of not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the faithful performance of their duties. All monies so collected shall be deposited with the village clerk; provided,
however, a separate fund (or accounting) shall be maintained at all times of such money so deposited. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
7-2-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Tampering With Meters: It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open, wilfully
break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this section.
B. Depositing Slugs: It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slug
or any other substitute for a legally minted coin of the United States. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
7-2-6: VIOLATION TICKETS:
It shall be the duty of the officers of the village who are authorized to issue parking tickets to note on each such ticket:
A. The location and/or number of each parking meter which indicated that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to the parking meter is or has
been parking in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
B. The state vehicle license plate number and vehicle class;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 172/525
C. The time the ticket was issued;
D. A statement in a form to be prepared by the village administrator in conjunction with the village attorney advising the offender of the fact of violation, the
amount of the fine imposed and any penalty increases that may come due in the event the ticket is not promptly paid. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
7-3-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
A. In Yards Or Fire Lanes:
1. Yards: No person shall park in the front yard nor in any front or side yard on corner lots in a residential dwelling zone. "Front yard" shall be defined
as that area in front of the house or along the side of the house on a corner lot using an imaginary straight line, which runs parallel with the front of
the main building to the side lot lines.
2. Parkways: Parking is prohibited in all parkways.
3. Fire Lanes: No person shall stand or park in any "fire lane", defined as a lane, designated by the fire official with the consent of the village board of
trustees, that measures a minimum of eighteen feet (18') in width, that is marked in an approved manner, and that is necessary for the efficient and
effective use of fire apparatus. (1976 Code § 73.001)
4. Vehicles Towed: Upon issuance of a citation for any violations of this subsection, the officer issuing the citation may determine it necessary to
summon a towing service to have the offending vehicle removed. All costs for said removal shall be at the owner or operator of the vehicle's
expense. Prior to the issuance of any citation, the area designated as a fire lane shall be posted as such with a warning that violators shall be towed
at owner's expense.
B. Prohibited Parking: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in or upon any of the following named streets,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions of a police officer or official traffic sign or signal: (Ord. 09-09-
25, 9-21-2009)
Street
Side
Between
Anita Avenue
West
Depot Street and McMillen Road
Depot Street
North
Main Street and Corona Avenue
Harden
Street
Either
Spafford Street and Hillside Avenue
Harden
Street
South
Main Street and Victoria Street
Hillside
Avenue
East Lake Street and Illinois Route 173
Hillside
Avenue
Either
Orchard Street to Depot Street
Hillside
Avenue
Either
State Route 59 and State Route 173, the northerly side of Hennings Court running easterly and westerly, west side of
Hennings Court running northerly and southerly
Illinois Route
173
Either
Entire length of route within village limits
Lake Street North
Toft Avenue to Tiffany Road
Lake Street South
East access drive of the State Bank Of The Lakes (440 Lake Street) property to Tiffany Road
Main Street East State Route 173 and north limits of high school property
Naber Street
Either
Osmond Street and Hillside Avenue
North Main
Street
West
Depot Street and north limits of grade school property
Orchard
Street
Both Toft Avenue and Hillside Avenue
Orchard
Street
South
Hillside Avenue and David Street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 173/525
Park Street South
Park Street South
East curb of Main Street to point 500 feet east thereof
Spafford
Street
East Fillweber Court and Lake Street
Spafford
Street
West
Lake Street and Harden Street
Tiffany Road
Either
Entire length from North Avenue to Illinois Route 173
Toft Avenue West
Lake Street and north limits of village parking lot
Victoria
Street
East Lake Street and Harden Street (except 10 minutes along curb in front of 957 Victoria Street)
Victoria
Street
West
Lake Street and Harden Street (except for the 2 hour parking spaces from Lake Street to 100 feet south)
Wilton Street
Either
Main Street and Victoria Street
(Ord. 13-01-01, 1-21-2013; amd. Ord. 13-04-06, 4-1-2013)
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or cause to have a vehicle parked in any area on or adjacent to Route 83 (Main Street) except in areas
that are legally designated for parking. (Ord. 09-09-25, 9-21-2009)
7-3-2: PARALLEL PARKING:
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stand or park any vehicle in or on either side of Lake Street within the village other than parallel
with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line; no vehicle shall be parked
with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb.
B. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in the roadway known as Main Street within the village other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed
in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the curb or edge of the roadway.
Double parking is prohibited. (1976 Code § 76.002)
C. Appropriate signs designating no parking and/or permitted parking areas, including compact car parking spaces, may be erected and maintained for the
purpose of giving notice in accordance with this section. (Ord. 09-09-25, 9-21-2009)
7-3-3: LOADING OR UNLOADING ZONES; HOURS:
No person owning, controlling, driving or operating any commercial vehicle shall cause or permit such vehicle to stand for a period of time longer than is
necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading, unloading and delivery or pick up of materials, provided such loading, unloading, and delivery or pick up
shall not consume more than fifteen (15) minutes, on either side of Main Street or on either side of Lake Street in the village, during the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except Sundays, and except on Fridays when the restriction upon the above designated streets
shall be in force from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Provided that this section shall not apply to any duly licensed taxicab when
standing in any cab stand fixed by ordinance, nor to any ambulance, nor to any emergency vehicle of any governmental agency, nor to the vehicle of any
public utility while the operation of any such vehicle is engaged in the necessary performance of emergency duties. (1976 Code § 76.003)
7-3-4: PARKING DURING STREET MAINTENANCE:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle on any street in the village for a period longer than three (3) minutes for
the loading or unloading of passengers, or for thirty (30) minutes for the loading or unloading of property at any time after snow begins to fall and
exceeds one inch (1") of thickness, and said prohibition against parking shall continue until the snowplowing operations have ceased. Furthermore, for
the purpose of facilitating the cleaning of streets, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle upon any street
in the village between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Tuesdays and Fridays on any week of each year.
B. It shall be unlawful for any business or individual, while snowplowing their driveway or another's driveway within the corporate limits of the village, to
push, place, or shovel snow on or across any street within the village. (1976 Code § 76.004)
7-3-5: OFF STREET PARKING ZONES:
A. Off Street Parking Zones:
1. Zones Established: There are established the following zones within the village which shall be known and designated as off street parking zones:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 174/525
a. Part of lot 53 in County Clerk's Subdivision, between Broadway Street and the Antioch Shopping Plaza, except the north fifty feet (50') thereof,
with ingress and egress from and to Broadway Street and Orchard Street.
b. The north fifty feet (50') of that part of lot 53 in County Clerk's Subdivision between Broadway Street and the Antioch Shopping Plaza.
c. Lot 57 (except the south 25 feet of the east 140.9 feet thereof) and parts of lots 58, 59, 60, 62, and 65 of County Clerk's Subdivision of
unsubdivided lands in the village according to the plat thereof, recorded June 20, 1907, as Document 112577, in book "G" of plats, page 76; also
that part of lot 53 in said County Clerk's Subdivision described as follows, to-wit: Commencing at the northwest corner of lot 57, County Clerk's
Subdivision aforesaid; thence westerly along the northerly line of lot 57 produced sixty feet (60'); thence southerly to a point on the northerly line of
lot 58 in said County Clerk's Subdivision 17.2 feet easterly of the northwest corner thereof; thence easterly on said northerly line to the southwest
corner of lot 57 aforesaid; thence northerly along the westerly line of lot 57 to the place of beginning, all in Lake County, Illinois.
2. Two Hour Parking Limit: Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain parked in the off
street parking zones herein designated in subsections A1a and A1c of this section for a period longer than two (2) hours in any three (3) hour period
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day, except Friday when the hours shall be from eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
3. Twelve Hour Parking Limit: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to permit a vehicle to remain parked in the off street parking zone herein
designated in subsection A1b of this section for a period longer than twelve (12) hours in any thirteen (13) hour period on any day.
4. Exemptions: The chief of police is authorized to issue a parking permit to the residents or occupant of buildings adjoining the off street parking zone
herein designated in subsection A1c of this section the number of such permits not to exceed four (4) for each such building.
B. Time Limit: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle for longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of any day, except Sundays and public holidays, on the east two hundred feet (200') of that part of lot
53 in County Clerk's Subdivision lying west of Broadway Avenue, also known as the east two hundred feet (200') of the municipal parking lot in the
village. Suitable signs may be erected and maintained and suitable markings may be erected and maintained for the purpose of regulating the parking
of vehicles in accordance with this subsection B.
C. Unauthorized Use Of Parking Places Reserved For Handicapped Persons:
1. Unauthorized Use Prohibited: It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration plates or decals issued to a physically
handicapped person or to any disabled veteran as defined below as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled
veteran, in any parking place, including any private or public off street parking facility specifically reserved by the posting of an official sign, for motor
vehicles bearing such registration plates.
2. Removal Of Vehicles: Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or private off street parking facility may, after notifying the village
police, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by
the physically handicapped which does not display handicapped registration plates or decals as required under this section.
3. Definitions:
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED: Every person who has permanent loss of the use of a leg or both legs, or an arm or both arms, or any combination
thereof, or any person so severely disabled as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair.
VETERAN: A disabled veteran of WWI or WWII or the national emergency between June 25, 1950, and January 31, 1955, or any armed conflict
involving the armed forces of the United States, who has a service connected disability of such a nature that it would, if it had incurred in WWII, have
entitled him to be awarded an automobile by the United States federal government, or who is receiving compensation from the veterans'
administration for total service connected disability.
D. Parking Restriction:
1. Restriction: The two (2) hour maximum restriction for parking in the municipal parking lot on the east side of Main Street, located adjacent to the
businesses at 945 Main Street, is hereby changed from two (2) hours to four (4) hours, effective as of September 7, 1993. The parking restriction
affects approximately twenty (20) parking stalls.
E. Moving Of Vehicle: A vehicle shall be deemed to be parked in violation of any such limitation if it is moved with the purpose of evading such parking
time limitation to another parking space located within five hundred feet (500') from the closest point of the parking space at which such vehicle shall
have been so first parked. (1976 Code § 76.005)
7-3-6: RESTRICTED PARKING:
A. There shall be a maximum of two (2) hour parking along the north side of Ida Street from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday
through Friday.
B. There shall be no parking on the south side of Depot Street, between Pickard Avenue and Route 83 (Main Street) between the hours of eight thirty
o'clock (8:30) A.M. and nine thirty o'clock (9:30) A.M., eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) A.M. to twelve thirty o'clock (12:30) P.M. or three o'clock (3:00) P.M.
to four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through Friday.
C. There shall be a maximum four (4) hour parking limitation along the east side of Spafford Street.
D. There shall be a maximum ten (10) minute parking limitation along the east side of Victoria Street in front of the commercial building located at 957
Victoria Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 175/525
E. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on either side of Cameron Drive from Tiffany Farms Road to the
end of Cameron Drive between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through Friday.
F. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle along the west side of McMillen Road from Route 173 to the end of
the curve across from 67 McMillen Road at any time.
G. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle along the east side of Hillside Avenue from Crest Lane north to
Blackmann Terrace.
H. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on the south side of Heron Drive from Route 59 west to the
driveway of 1452 Heron Drive and on the north side of Heron Drive from Route 59 west to the driveway of 1451 Heron Drive. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
7-3-7: TRAIN STATION PARKING:
The per diem rate for parking a passenger motor vehicle in said parking lot shall be one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per twenty four (24) hour period. (1976
Code § 76.010)
7-3-8: SCHOOL PARKING AREAS:
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person or operator of any motor vehicle to park his vehicle in the parking areas operated by Antioch
Community High School, 1133 Main Street; Antioch Upper Grade School, 800 Highview Drive; or Antioch Lower Grade School, 817 Main Street,
without a valid parking permit issued by that school.
B. It shall be unlawful for any student or unauthorized person to park in areas designated as fire lanes, faculty, staff or visitor parking. It shall further be
unlawful to park in areas designated "no parking", or in any other areas not properly marked as parking areas.
C. For the purpose of this section, a "visitor" shall be defined as a nonstudent on school premises for school business or related activities.
D. It shall further be a violation of this section to park in any handicapped parking area, or to park in any area without the proper parking sticker or permit
attached to the right lower front portion of the windshield, except for those areas marked for visitors. (1976 Code § 76.008)
7-3-9: PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
A. Definitions:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial
enterprise, but does not include passenger automobiles, vans or trucks under one and a half (11/2) tons of rated load capacity used for the
transportation of the occupants of the residence or their guests, nor does it include emergency vehicles, such as ambulances, nor utility repair vehicles
such as Commonwealth Edison, North Shore Gas, Ameritech.
OFF STREET PARKING FACILITY ACCESSORY TO A RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: That area in front of the building line or that area where the
main driveway extends beyond the building line to the enclosed garage, carport or main parking area. It does not include areas adjacent to the sides of
the residence or in back of the residence.
B. Restrictions: An off street parking facility accessory to a residential structure shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles owned or
used by occupants of the dwelling structure to which the facility is accessory, or by guests of the occupants. Under no circumstances shall a required
parking facility accessory to a residential structure be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the
employees, owners, tenants, visitors or customers of business or manufacturing establishments adjacent to or in the vicinity of said residential
structures, except as permitted in subsection 10-11-3B of this code. (1976 Code § 76.012)
7-3-10: STOP STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into the intersection of the following named streets without first bringing such vehicle to a complete stop:
Street Stop At Direction
Alima Terrace First Street North
Alima Terrace Hillside Avenue East
Anita Avenue Depot Street North and south
Anita Avenue North Avenue South
Anita Street Ida Avenue North and south
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 176/525
Birchwood Drive Lakewood Drive East
Birchwood Drive Oakwood Drive West
Bishop Street Ida Avenue South
Bridgewood Drive Maplewood Drive North
Broadway Lake Street North
Broadway Orchard Street South
Buena Terrace Main Street West
Cedarwood Lane Maplewood Drive North
Cedarwood Lane Oakwood Drive South
Charles Street Main Street East
Cheri Lane Poplar Avenue North
Chestnut Street Bishop Street West
Chestnut Street Main Street East
Corona Avenue Depot Street North
Corona Avenue Williams Street North
Crest Lane Hillside Avenue East
Crest Lane Turner Drive West
Cunningham Drive Poplar Avenue South
David Street Lake Street North
Depot Street Main Street East
Drom Court North Avenue South
Dwight Court North Avenue South
Edgewood Drive Lakewood Drive East
Edgewood Drive Oakwood Drive West
Elmwood Lane Maplewood Drive North and south
Fillweber Court Spafford Street East
First Street Highland Avenue West
First Street Hillside Avenue East and west
First Street Main Street West
First Street Parkway Avenue West
Forest Court Lakewood Drive West
Gail Street Ida Avenue South
Garys Drive Depot Street North
Garys Drive North Avenue South
Harden Street Hillside Avenue West
Harden Street Main Street West
Harden Street Victoria Street West
Hazelwood Drive Lakewood Drive East
Hazelwood Drive Maplewood Drive North
Hennings Court Hillside Avenue East
Henry Street Lake Street North
Hickory Lane Cedarwood Lane North and west
Highland Avenue North Avenue South
Hillandale Lake Street North
Hill Court Lakewood Drive West
Hillside Avenue Harden Street North and south
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 177/525
Hillside Avenue North Avenue South
Hillside Avenue Orchard Street North and south
Ida Avenue Anita Avenue East and west
Ida Avenue Main Street East
Ida Avenue Soo Line Railroad crossing West
Lake Court Lakewood Drive West
Lake Street Route 59 West
Lake Street Tiffany Road East
Lakewood Drive North Avenue North
Laursen Court Ida Avenue South
Main Street North Avenue North and south
Maplewood Drive Lakewood Drive East
Maplewood Drive Oakwood Drive East and west
Meadow Court Maplewood Drive East
Municipal parking area Broadway West
Municipal parking area Orchard Street South
McMillen Road Anita Avenue West
McMillen Road Route 173 North
Naber Avenue Hillside Avenue East
Naber Avenue Spafford Street West
North Avenue Main Street East and west
Oakwood Drive Bridgewood Drive West
Oakwood Drive Maplewood Drive North
Oakwood Drive North Avenue North
Orchard Street Broadway West
Orchard Street Hillside Avenue East and west
Orchard Street Main Street West
Osmond Avenue Naber Avenue South
Osmond Avenue Route 173 North
Park Avenue Main Street East
Parkway Avenue First Street North
Parkway Avenue North Avenue South
Phillips Circle Hillside Avenue East (both ends)
Plumtree Lane Hillandale North
Poplar Avenue Hillside Avenue East and west
Poplar Avenue Main Street West
Poplar Avenue Winsor Drive West
Quality Street Main Street West
Quality Street Victoria Street East
St. Peter's Street Lake Street North
Second Street Main Street West
Second Street Parkway Avenue East
Sequoit Avenue Anita Avenue East
Spafford Street Harden Street North
Spafford Street Lake Street South
Sunset Lane Birchwood Drive North
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 178/525
Sunset Lane Edgewood Drive South
Timber Lane Bridgewood Drive West
Turner Drive Orchard Street North
Victoria Street Lake Street South
Williams Street Main Street East
Winsor Drive First Street South
Winsor Drive Poplar Avenue North
Winsor Terrace Main Street West
(1976 Code § 77.001; amd. Ord. 15-10-13, 10-19-2015)
7-3-11: SPECIAL STOPS:
When stop signs are erected at or near any entrance to Orchard Street and to Hillside Avenue from the Antioch Shopping Plaza, every operator of a
vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the roadway except when directed to proceed by a police
officer, yielding the right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles approaching on said street. (1976 Code § 77.002)
7-3-12: ONE-WAY STREETS:
A. Signs: Suitable signs may be erected and maintained for the purpose of regulating the movement of traffic in accordance with this section.
B. Violation Of Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in violation of such signs or other devices so placed in accordance with this
section.
C. Obstruction Of Traffic: No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any of said streets in such a manner as to form an unreasonable
obstruction to the traffic thereon.
D. One-Way Streets:
1. St. Peters Street is designated as a one-way street and vehicular traffic shall move only in a northerly direction upon said street and movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
2. Elizabeth Street is designated as a one-way street and vehicular traffic shall move only in a westerly direction upon said street and movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
3. Henry Street is designated as a one-way street and vehicular traffic shall move only in a southerly direction upon said street and movement of traffic
in the opposite direction is prohibited. (1976 Code § 76.003)
7-3-13: SPEED LIMITS:
With the exception of the streets and segments thereof shown on the following chart, all speed limits on Village controlled roads and streets within the
Village shall conform to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code1 as adopted by reference in section 7-1-1 of this title:
SCHEDULE OF REASONABLE AND SAFE
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPEED LIMITS
Street Name Location/Comments Speed Limit
Abbey Lane Entire length 25 mph
Amsterdam Drive Entire length 25 mph
Anita Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Autumn Drive Entire length 25 mph
Birchwood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Bishop Street Entire length 20 mph
Bowles Road Entire length 25 mph
Briar Terrace Entire length 25 mph
Bridgewood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Cedarwood Drive Entire length 25 mph
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 179/525
Chestnut Street Entire length 20 mph
David Street Entire length 20 mph
Deer Path Drive Entire length 25 mph
Depot Street Route 83 to Anita (includes school zone) 25 mph
Depot Street Anita to Center 30 mph
Depot Street Center to Deep Lake Road 35 mph
Drom Court Entire length 25 mph
Eagle Ridge Drive Entire length 25 mph
Edelweiss Drive Entire length 25 mph
Edgewood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Elizabeth Street Entire length 20 mph
Garys Drive Entire length 25 mph
Hague Drive Entire length 25 mph
Harden Street West of Main Street to Route 173 25 mph
Harden Street West of Route 173 to Hillside 25 mph
Harvest Drive Entire length 25 mph
Hawthorn Lane Entire length 25 mph
Hazelwood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Heron Drive Entire length 25 mph
Highland Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Highview Drive Entire length 20 mph
Hillandale Drive Entire length 25 mph
Hillside Avenue Harden to North 25 mph
Hillside Avenue Route 59 to Harden 25 mph
Ida Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Johelia Trail Entire length 25 mph
Joren Trail Entire length 25 mph
Lake Street Entire length 20 mph
Lakewood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Longview Drive Entire length 25 mph
Maplewood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Margate Entire length 25 mph
McMillen Road Entire length 25 mph
Mockingbird Drive Entire length 25 mph
Naber Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Nelson Road Entire length 35 mph
North Avenue Hillside to Rembrandt 30 mph
North Avenue Rembrandt to Nelson 40 mph
North Avenue Western Village limits to Hillside 35 mph
Oakwood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Old Mill Trail East Entire length 25 mph
Old Mill Trail West Entire length 25 mph
Orchard Street Hillside to David 20 mph
Orchard Street Skidmore to Hillside 25 mph
Park Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Park Terrace Entire length 25 mph
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 180/525
Parkway Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Pine Hill Drive Entire length 25 mph
Poplar Avenue Entire length 25 mph
Rembrandt Drive Entire length 25 mph
Ridgewood Drive Entire length 25 mph
Rotterdam Drive Entire length 25 mph
St. Peters Street Entire length 20 mph
Savage Road Entire length 35 mph
Skidmore Entire length 25 mph
Tiffany Farms Road Entire length 25 mph
Tiffany Road South of North Avenue to Woodcreek 35 mph
Tiffany Road South of Woodcreek Drive to Route 173 20 mph
Trevor Road Entire length 35 mph
Van Dyke Drive Entire length 25 mph
Vandemeer Drive West Entire length 25 mph
Victoria Street Entire length 25 mph
Woodcreek Drive Entire length 25 mph
Woodland Drive Entire length 25 mph
1st Street Entire length 25 mph
(Ord. 04-03-04, 3-1-2004; amd. Ord. 05-09-20, 9-6-2005; Ord. 18-02-08, 2-12-2018)
7-3-14: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this Code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this Code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each separate citation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-08, 4-5-2010)
7-3-15: SCHOOL SPEED ZONES:
A. The road known as Cameron Drive is hereby designated a school zone road and shall have a maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour on
school days when children are present and so close thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the motorized traffic.
1. For the purpose of this section a school day shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and shall conclude at four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
B. A first violation of this section shall carry a minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). A second or subsequent offense shall carry a minimum
fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of electrical speed detecting devices within five hundred feet (500') of signs within a school speed zone.
D. The department of public works is hereby directed to post signs giving notice that a school zone is being approached and signs indicating the school
zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during the school days when schoolchildren are present. (Ord. 05-11-25, 11-21-2005)
7-3-16: TRUCK ROUTES:
A. Certain roads within the village are, by their location, design and construction, amenable to vehicular traffic including heavy and/or large trucks, whereas
other local roads are not capable of accommodating these vehicles safely, and the roads could be unduly damaged by such traffic. For these reasons,
the village adopts and designates certain truck routes as the appropriate roads for truck traffic.
B. The operator of any vehicle bearing vehicle license plates other than class A, B and M shall drive such vehicle only upon the following roads, which are
hereby designated as truck routes except in compliance with directions of a police officer, or in compliance with an overload permit granted by the
village administrator in advance:
Anita Street
Bartlett Avenue
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 181/525
Bishop Street (south of Chestnut only)
Chestnut Street
Deep Lake Road (County Highway 36)
Drom Court
Dwight Court
Gail Street
Highview Drive
Hillside Avenue (between Route 173 and West Depot Street only)
Holbeck Drive
Ida (between Gail and Bartlett)
IDI Drive
Kairy Street
Lake Street
McMillen Road
Nelson Road
North Avenue (County Highway A2)
Orchard Street
Pickard Avenue
Railroad Avenue
Ram Road
Savage Road
Sequoit Avenue
State Highways 173, 83 and 59
Tiffany Road
Toft Avenue
Trevor Road
West Depot Street (between Hillside and Holbeck only)
Williams (between Route 83 and Pickard)
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to school buses or garbage trucks while in the course of routine pick ups, nor shall they apply to vehicles
making local deliveries, such as postal vehicles, express delivery vehicles, moving vans, construction vehicles working on local construction projects
and the like.
D. The village administrator may also designate additional roads (or sections thereof) which are susceptible to extraordinary damage due to matters such
as weather or construction as being prohibited from truck traffic or limited to trucks not exceeding specific weight classifications.
E. The village administrator shall provide for appropriate street markings and signage to guide and alert drivers of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 12-
11-23, 11-19-2012)
7-3-17: TRUCK AND TRAILER PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Certain roads within the village are, by their location, design and construction, amenable to vehicular traffic including heavy and/or large trucks and
trailers, whereas other local roads are not capable of accommodating these vehicles safely, and the roads could be unduly damaged by such traffic.
Additionally, many of the residential roads and smaller commercial roads are not wide enough to safely accommodate parking of larger trucks and
trailers and often larger trucks are powered with correspondingly large engines which make a lot more noise and can disturb the peace of
neighborhoods. For these reasons, the village finds it necessary to prohibit parking of large trucks and trailers on any roads other than those
specifically designated in subsection B of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 182/525
B. It is prohibited to park vehicles bearing vehicle license plates other than class A, B, C, D, TX, PT, LI, M and RV, or any trailer bearing license plates
other than class TB, TC and TD on any village street other than upon the following roads, which are hereby designated as truck routes:
Anita Street
Bartlett Avenue
Bishop Street (south of Chestnut only)
Chestnut Street
Deep Lake Road (County Highway 36)
Drom Court
Dwight Court
Gail Street
Highview Drive
Hillside Avenue (between Route 173 and West Depot Street only)
Holbeck Drive
Ida (between Gail and Bartlett)
IDI Drive
Kairy Street
Lake Street
McMillen Road
Nelson Road
North Avenue (County Highway A2)
Orchard Street
Pickard Avenue
Railroad Avenue
Ram Road
Savage Road
Sequoit Avenue
State Highways 173, 83 and 59
Tiffany Road
Toft Avenue
Trevor Road
West Depot Street (between Hillside and Holbeck only)
Williams (between Route 83 and Pickard)
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to school buses or garbage trucks while in the course of routine pick ups, nor shall they apply to vehicles
making local deliveries, such as postal vehicles, express delivery vehicles, moving vans, construction vehicles working on local construction projects
and the like.
D. For the purposes of this section, the words "parking" or "park" shall include stopping a motor vehicle alongside a public road, whether the wheels of the
vehicle are actually on the pavement or only on the shoulder or curb.
E. Nothing herein shall allow operations of any vehicle in violation of the truck route regulations established by section 7-3-16 of this chapter.
F. Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to violations of this section. (Ord. 14-08-17, 8-18-2014)
Chapter 4
BICYCLES, SKATES AND SCOOTERS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 183/525
7-4-1: BICYCLE REGISTRATION:
A. Registration Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful for any resident to operate a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the village
unless the bicycle is registered and tagged as provided in this chapter. The registration fee shall be fifty cents ($0.50). (1976 Code §§ 72.010, 72.013)
B. Method Of Registration: The owner of a bicycle shall annually, between May 1 and May 31, or within ten (10) days of the purchase of a bicycle, file with
the chief of police a complete description of his bicycle upon a blank form to be provided for that purpose. Such registration shall be serially numbered
and kept on file in the office of the chief of police as public records. (1976 Code § 72.011)
C. Inspections: The chief of police or his designee shall inspect each bicycle presented to him for registration and may refuse to register any bicycle found
to be in unsafe mechanical condition. (1976 Code § 72.014)
D. Identification Tags: Upon the registration of a bicycle in his office, the chief of police or person authorized by him shall affix to the bicycle a license tag or
emblem, serially numbered to correspond with the registration of the bicycle. Such tag shall remain affixed unless removed by the chief of police or his
designated representative for cause or for replacement with another tag upon reregistration. (1976 Code § 72.012)
E. Conditions Of Registration:
1. Cancellation: The chief of police or his designated representative may cancel the registration of and remove the license tag or emblem from any
bicycle operated in an unsafe manner or in violation of any statute or ordinance, and cancellation and removal of tag shall be in addition to other
penalties provided hereunder. (1976 Code § 72.015)
2. Change Of Ownership: Within ten (10) days after any bicycle has changed ownership or been dismantled, or taken out of operation, such information
shall be reported to the department of police by the licensee. (1976 Code § 72.016)
3. Loss Of License Tag Or Emblem: The licensee shall report immediately to the department of police the loss or destruction of the license tag or
emblem of the licensee, and the circumstances surrounding the loss or destruction thereof. Upon approval of the chief of police, or his designated
representative, a duplicate license tag or emblem may be issued at a fee of fifty cents ($0.50). (1976 Code § 72.017)
4. Removal Of License, Tag: It shall be unlawful for any person, wilfully or maliciously, to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer's serial
number of any bicycle licensed hereunder; or to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate issued hereunder during the time in which the
license plate is in force. The chief of police is authorized to stamp numbers on the frame of a bicycle in a legible manner for identification purposes,
upon which no manufacturer's serial number can be found, or upon which the manufacturer's serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification
purposes. (1976 Code § 72.032)
7-4-2: EQUIPMENT AND MECHANICAL CONDITION:
A. Mechanical Condition And Safety:
1. No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition so that it can be safely operated.
2. Every bicycle operated upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public way or place shall be in such condition and equipped as stated in this chapter.
(1976 Code § 72.018)
B. Brakes: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake adequate to control the movement of and to stop such bicycle whenever necessary. (1976 Code
§ 72.019)
C. Lights And Reflectors: No bicycle shall be operated within the period from sunset to sunrise without having a properly lighted headlight attached to the
front of the bicycle, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof, for a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'), nor
without having a red light or a red reflector attached to the rear of the bicycle, which is clearly visible in the headlight beam of a motor vehicle for a
distance of not less than two hundred feet (200') to the rear of the bicycle. (1976 Code § 72.020)
D. Audible Signals: Each bicycle shall be equipped with a horn, bell or other signaling device in good working order and audible at a minimum distance of
one hundred feet (100'); except that no bicycle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren, gong or whistle. (1976 Code
§ 72.021)
7-4-3: BICYCLE OPERATIONS:
A. General: Bicycles are classed as vehicles, and every person operating a bicycle in any public place and on any public way in the village shall be subject
to the provisions of all state vehicle laws and all traffic ordinances except such provisions in conflict with this chapter or which by their nature can have
no application. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to fail or refuse to comply with any order, signal or direction of a police officer, or
to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign, signal or other traffic control device. (1976 Code §§ 72.022, 72.023)
B. Riding On Bicycles:
1. Riding On Handlebars Or Frames: No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped. No driver of a bicycle shall carry any other person upon the handlebars or frame of such vehicle. This restriction is not applicable to
carrying other persons on a bicycle containing special equipment designed for such purpose. (1976 Code § 72.024)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 184/525
2. Riding On Sidewalks: Wherever a usable public path or sidewalk has been provided adjacent to a street or roadway, bicycle riders shall use such
path or sidewalk, but in single file only, and shall not use such street or roadway; except that no bicycles shall be operated upon sidewalks in the
central business district area. The central business district area includes Orchard Street from Hillside to Main Street; Main Street from Wilton Street
to Depot; and Lake Street from Hillside to Main Street. In such central business district area, all bicycles shall be ridden on the street or roadway.
(1976 Code § 72.025)
3. Riding On The Right: Every person operating a bicycle shall keep to the right and shall operate as nearly as practicable at the right hand edge of the
street, roadway, path or sidewalk.
4. Riding In Groups: When more than two (2) persons in a group are operating bicycles on a street or roadway, they shall ride single file and it shall be
unlawful for them to ride abreast of each other. (1976 Code § 72.027)
5. Riding On Private Property: No person shall operate a bicycle on private property without the consent of the owner of such property. (1976 Code
§ 72.037)
6. Speed: No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than is reasonable, proper and prudent under the conditions then existing, and every bicycle
shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the rider and of other persons, property and vehicles. (1976 Code § 72.034)
7. Stopping Or Turning: The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn, shall follow the right hand edge of the roadway, and the
operator of a bicycle on a roadway when making a left turn shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No
operator of a bicycle shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first indicating such movement as provided by state laws for the operation
of motor vehicles. (1976 Code § 72.035)
8. Carrying Packages: No driver of a bicycle shall carry any package or article which interferes with or prevents the safe operation of a bicycle. (1976
Code § 72.024)
C. Due Care For Pedestrians: Due and proper care shall at all times be exercised by the bicycle operator for the pedestrians. Under all circumstances,
bicycle operators, riding or walking their bicycles, shall yield the right of way to pedestrians using a sidewalk or path. When approaching a pedestrian
on the sidewalk, an audible signal shall be given at least twenty five feet (25') distant from the pedestrian, and the speed of the bicycle shall be reduced
to a momentum which is no greater than necessary to continue the operation of the bicycle without the rider dismounting, and shall not be increased
until the pedestrian has been passed. (1976 Code § 72.026)
D. Clinging To Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to cling to or attach himself, or the bicycle, to any other moving vehicle or
object. (1976 Code § 72.028)
E. Passing School Buses: Persons operating bicycles upon a roadway shall stop for school buses loading or unloading children, regardless of the direction
from which the bicycle driver is approaching such bus. (1976 Code § 72.036)
F. Parking:
1. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street, other than against the curb, or on a sidewalk in such a way as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2. No bicycle shall be parked within four feet (4') of a building located within a district zoned commercial, nor shall any bicycle be parked within four feet
(4') of any window or door or any building open to the public. This subsection shall not apply when bicycle racks are provided and used by operators
adjacent to said building, but the parking restrictions shall apply to those buildings bordering or adjacent to the building which has a bicycle rack.
3. No bicycle shall be parked in such a manner as to obstruct the ingress or egress from a building. (1976 Code § 72.038)
7-4-4: INSPECTIONS:
Any member of the police department is authorized to inspect any bicycle, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of verifying the presence and validity of
the license plate and license number, serial number, and for the purpose of determining the mechanical condition of the bicycle. (1976 Code § 72.031)
7-4-5: IMPOUNDMENT AND SALE:
A. Impounding: In addition to, or in lieu of, the penalties provided by this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter may be punished by the
impounding of the bicycle used in committing any such violation for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, as prescribed by the chief of police. (1976
Code § 72.030)
B. Sale Of Abandoned Bicycles: All abandoned bicycles and unidentified bicycles coming into the possession of the police department shall be held for a
reasonable time and then sold at public auction, under the direction of the chief of police, in accordance with state law. (1976 Code § 72.033)
7-4-6: SKATES:
No person shall skate in the village in violation of the following regulations:
A. Skating On Sidewalks: No person shall at any time operate or ride any skating device on the sidewalks of Orchard Street from Hillside to Main Street;
on Main Street from Wilton Street to Depot; and on Lake Street from Hillside to Main Street.
B. Traffic Signals: Any person on skates on a roadway shall obey the instruction of official traffic signals and signs unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 185/525
C. Reckless Driving: No person shall skate on a roadway or sidewalk in a reckless manner such as to endanger persons or property.
D. Due Care: Every person on skates on a roadway shall skate as near as possible to the right hand side of the roadway and exercise dup care when
passing a standing vehicle; and whenever a person on skates is operating upon a sidewalk, that person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian.
E. Clinging To Motor Vehicles: No person on skates shall attach himself to any motor vehicle located or moving upon a public roadway. (1976 Code
§ 72.039)
7-4-7: SKATEBOARDS:
A. Riding On Public Ways And Property: No person shall at any time operate or ride on a skateboard on any public or private road or public or private
parking lot, nor shall any person ride a skateboard on the sidewalks of Orchard Street from Hillside to Main Street; on Main Street from Wilton Street to
Depot; and on Lake Street from Hillside to Main Street. An operator of a skateboard shall only be allowed to operate on a private road or private
parking lot with the written consent of the owner.
B. Reckless Driving: No person operating a skateboard shall operate in a reckless manner such as to endanger persons or property.
C. Pedestrians: Whenever a person on a skateboard is operating upon a sidewalk, that person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian.
D. Clinging To Motor Vehicles: No person on a skateboard shall attach himself to any motor vehicle located or moving upon a public roadway. (1976 Code
§ 72.040)
7-4-8: SCOOTERS:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, a "scooter" shall include all wheeled vehicles, not licensed for use on public roads, and which are powered by
gas or electric motors. By way of illustration, and not limitation, scooters include all-terrain vehicles, go-carts, minibikes, motorized skateboards, off
road motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
B. Prohibited Uses: No person shall use, operate, or be in control of a scooter:
1. On any public street, parking lot, sidewalk, bike path or other public property;
2. On any property under the jurisdiction of a park board or school board;
3. On any private road or sidewalk;
4. On the tracks or right of way of any railroad;
5. On any property owned by a public utility company;
6. On any private property without the express consent of the property owner.
C. Exceptions: The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any of the above referenced devices when operated by a law enforcement officer in the
performance of official duties; nor shall they apply when the vehicle is driven by a participant in a publicly sanctioned event, such as a parade. (Ord. 04-
04-12, 4-5-2004)
7-4-9: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter; and any parent or guardian authorizing or knowingly permitting such violation shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be punished by imposition of the penalties provided for by this chapter. (1976 Code § 72.029; amd. Ord. 04-04-12, 4-5-2004)
7-4-10: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each separate citation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 5
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
7-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings specifically ascribed to them, unless otherwise expressly stated:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 186/525
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is left at any place for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear
to have been abandoned.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least ten (10) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been
removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power. Inoperable motor vehicle shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven
under its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations nor to any motor vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use, nor
to historic vehicles over twenty five (25) years of age, nor to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in wrecking or junking of
motor vehicles.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the village which is not a street or highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon. (1976
Code § 90.001)
7-5-2: ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
A. Abandonment Prohibited: No person shall abandon any vehicle within the village and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the village
for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. (1976 Code § 90.002)
B. Leaving Wrecked, Nonoperating Vehicles On Street: No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any
street or highway in the village. (1976 Code § 90.003)
7-5-3: INOPERABLE VEHICLES:
A. Nuisance Declared: Inoperable vehicles, as defined in section 7-5-1 of this chapter, whether on public or private property are declared to be a nuisance.
(1976 Code § 90.004)
B. Disposal Required: All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicles under their control upon written notice received from the
corporate authorities or from the chief of police or any member of his department designated by him commanding such disposition of said inoperable
motor vehicle. (1976 Code § 90.005)
7-5-4: IMPOUNDMENT:
The chief of police or any member of his department designated by him is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the
village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this chapter or which reasonably appears to be lost, stolen or unclaimed, or which is an inoperable
vehicle as defined herein. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with state law. (1976 Code § 90.006)
7-5-5: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 6
VEHICLE TOWING REGULATIONS
7-6-1: VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The village adopts the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 through 5/4-214 and 5/11-208.7 as the basic regulations to be applied by the
police department in arranging for motor vehicles described therein to be removed from the public streets of this village. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-2011)
7-6-2: LEVY OF ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
The registered owner or agent of the owner of a vehicle impounded pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.7 and this chapter shall be liable to
the village for payment of an administrative fee in the amount set forth in section 7-6-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-2011)
7-6-3: FEE SCHEDULE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 187/525
The administrative fee charged for all acts and recordkeeping relating to the towing of vehicles within the village by the police department shall be two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per vehicle, per tow. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-2011)
7-6-4: IMPOUND:
No towing company or tow operator shall release any vehicle towed at the request of the Antioch police department to any person unless that person shall
provide a receipt to the towing company or tow operator demonstrating that the administrative fee described and levied in this chapter shall have been
paid in full, or an order from the village's duly designated administrative hearing officer certifying that the fees do not apply to the towing of this particular
vehicle. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-2011)
7-6-5: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter and the fees described herein shall apply to vehicles which are being towed as a result of one or more violations of the Illinois vehicle code
set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.7(b), and further shall not apply to a simple traffic accident, roadway breakdown or other similar reason
which is wholly unrelated to any of the said violations. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-2011)
7-6-6: VIOLATION:
No person or company shall violate any provision of this chapter. For penalty, see section 7-6-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-2011)
7-6-7: PROCEDURES:
The following procedures shall be used in assessing any fees under this chapter:
A. Hearing: The registered owner or his/her agent shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing as described in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3
and title 1, chapter 6, article D of this code.
B. Notice: The registered owner or his/her agent shall be notified as follows:
1. Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle
to a facility authorized by the municipality.
2. At the time the vehicle is towed, the municipality shall notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself
or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the
fact of the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an administrative hearing.
3. The municipality shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing, unless
the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder posts with the municipality a bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by ordinance and
pays for all towing and storage charges.
C. Form Of Notice: The notice required by subsection B of this section shall conform to the following regulations:
1. It shall be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party's
address as registered with the secretary of state;
2. It shall be served upon interested parties within ten (10) days after a vehicle is impounded by the municipality; and
3. It shall contain the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than forty five
(45) days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
D. Hearings: In addition to the general administrative procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 6, article D of this code and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-208.3, the following specific procedures shall apply to vehicle towing and impoundment cases under this chapter:
1. Administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is an attorney licensed to practice law in this state for a minimum of three (3)
years;
2. At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment;
3. If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the release of the
vehicle shall be forfeited to the municipality;
4. All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of the administrative review law; and
5. Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage charges are paid.
E. Enforcement And Appeal: Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty, or administrative fee imposed under this section which
remains unpaid in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the administrative review law may be enforced in
the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 188/525
7-6-8: ABANDONMENT:
Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility within thirty five (35) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written decision
shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois vehicle code1. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-
2011)
7-6-9: PENALTY:
A person or company found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and shall further be liable for
any unpaid portion of any administrative fee charged on any vehicle. In addition to any fine or charge imposed by this section, any tow company or tow
operator found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall lose the right to conduct tows within the village for a period of three (3) months for a first
offense, for a period of six (6) months for a second offense and permanently for any third or subsequent offense. (Ord. 11-12-23, 12-19-2011)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS, PROPERTY AND UTILITIES
Chapter 1
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
8-1-1: MANDATORY CONNECTIONS REQUIRED:
A. Use Of Public Water Supply And Sewer Required: It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or party or parties in possession of any house, structure,
factory, industrial or commercial establishment or any other building of any other character located on property abutting on the public waterworks and
sewerage system, to cause such house, structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment or any other building of any other character to be
connected with the said waterworks and sewerage system within ninety (90) days from the date that water or sewerage facilities become available to
such property, whichever is the event last to occur. (1976 Code § 52.009)
B. Mandatory Water Supply And Sewer Extensions: Any person required under the provisions of this chapter to connect to the public water system of the
village or any person desirous of connecting to the public water system is required, at his expense, to extend any water line through the entire frontage
or depth of the person's property as the case may be, to the end of the person's property line. It is the intent of this subsection to provide that all
extensions of public water lines shall be to the end of any person's property, thus making future extensions more readily accessible to adjacent property
owners. (1976 Code § 52.011)
C. Enforcement: A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the village clerk, shall be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Lake County, and shall
be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system of the village on their properties, and it shall be the duty of the village clerk and such other officers of this village to take all action necessary or
required by the laws of the state of Illinois thereunto enabling to file all claims and liens for money due to the village and to prosecute and enforce such
claims in the manner, form and time as permitted by the laws of the state of Illinois. (1976 Code § 52.010)
8-1-2: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
No person shall make any connection to the water mains or the sewer mains of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village, except
upon written application to the village clerk and the issuance of a permit by the village clerk for the connection. Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, the permit desired, the location to be used, and the fees to be paid; and each application shall contain all additional information needed for the
proper guidance of the village officials in the issuing of a permit. (1976 Code § 52.001)
8-1-3: WATER AND/OR SEWER INSPECTION FEES:
See section 13-1-2 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
8-1-4: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES AND SUBCLASSES:
See section 13-1-3 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
8-1-5: TRUNK LINE IMPROVEMENT CHARGE:
A. There is established a trunk line improvement charge (TLIC), to provide the village with funds for the future expansion or improvement of sanitary sewer
facilities and the Main Street trunk line or the Poplar Avenue/Cunningham Lane interceptor sewer.
B. The TLIC shall apply to sanitary sewer connections from areas annexed to the village or presently within the village limits which are not served with
sanitary sewage facilities as of April 2, 1979, which areas are tributary to the Main Street trunk line or the proposed Poplar Avenue/Cunningham Lane
interceptor sewer. The TLIC will not include any area within the village presently served by sanitary sewer facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 189/525
C. The TLIC shall be payable at the time a building permit is requested in regard to any area which is tributary to the Main Street trunk line and the
proposed Poplar Avenue/Cunningham Lane interceptor sewer.
D. The final determination as to whether an area is tributary to the Main Street trunk line and/or the proposed Poplar Avenue/Cunningham Lane interceptor
sewer shall be made by the village engineer, and the opinion of the village engineer shall be binding on all applicants for building permits.
E. The TLIC shall be calculated on the "population equivalent" (PE), as defined in section 8-2-1-7 of this title, and charged as follows:
1. Seventy two dollars ($72.00) per PE connected in regard to any property tributary to the Main Street sanitary sewer. For the purposes of this section,
any property tributary to the Main Street sanitary sewer shall be considered as also being tributary to the proposed Poplar Avenue/Cunningham Lane
interceptor sewer.
2. Ten dollars ($10.00) per PE connected in regard to any property tributary only to the proposed Poplar Avenue/Cunningham Lane interceptor sewer.
3. The charges set forth herein shall be increased at an annual rate determined by the cost of living index as prepared by the federal government from
April 2, 1980, to the present date.
F. All fees collected pursuant hereto shall be kept in a separate TLIC account by the village treasurer and expended as hereinafter provided.
G. At such time that the mayor and village board of trustees shall determine that improvements are required to the Main Street trunk line or that the Poplar
Avenue/Cunningham Lane interceptor sewer shall be installed, those funds, or any portion thereof, as determined by the village board of trustees,
collected pursuant hereto, shall be used for said improvements. (1976 Code § 52.012)
8-1-6: REVENUE REGULATIONS:
See section 13-1-4 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
8-1-7: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No connection shall be made with the combined waterworks and sewerage system without the signed permit of the village clerk. Any connections or
opening made with the waterworks and sewerage system without such signed permit or in any manner different from the mode prescribed for such
opening or connection, shall subject the maker to a penalty hereinafter provided. (1976 Code § 52.006)
8-1-8: SPECIFICATIONS AND RULES:
The mayor and village board of trustees, and the superintendent of waterworks and sewerage system, are authorized to make such rules and regulations
consistent with this chapter for the connections to the waterworks and sewerage system, specifying the types and sizes of pipes and all the other
appurtenances and extensions thereto, and amend the same from time to time as may be deemed necessary. All service pipes and connections to the
combined waterworks and sewerage system shall comply with the said specifications and rules for connection to the waterworks and sewerage system
shall be subject to a penalty as hereinafter provided. (1976 Code § 52.007)
8-1-9: RIGHT OF ACCESS FOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM:
Employees of the waterworks and sewerage system shall have the right of access to any premises served by the combined waterworks and sewerage
system for the purpose of reading water meters at regular prescribed intervals, or for the purpose of making inspections in order to maintain in good
condition and provide for the protection of said combined system and the efficient management thereof. Where such inspections are not of an immediate
or urgent nature, employees of the combined system shall arrange for appointments mutually convenient to the persons of the premises served by the
employees. Any person refusing the right to permit the employees of the waterworks and sewerage system the above described right of access to his
premises shall be subject to cessation of utility services until the required opportunity to inspect is accorded the officers or employees of the village. (1976
Code § 52.008)
8-1-10: PROCEDURES FOR WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
Should any property owner, lessor or developer of any property outside the village limits request the village to extend its municipal sanitary sewer or water
supply so as to serve their property, then, prior to any hookup to the municipal sewer and water facilities, the property owner must agree to the following:
A. If the property owner is contiguous to the village, he is required to file a petition to annex his property to the village.
B. If the property owner is not contiguous to the village then the property owner must enter into a written agreement with the village that when they become
contiguous, they will petition to annex into the village. A form of the agreement is attached to ordinance 91-3-13, passed March 25, 1991.
C. In addition, the requesting property owner must pay for all costs for hooking up to the sanitary sewer system and municipal water supply including any
fees, costs of extending sewer and water lines, engineering costs, legal fees, annexation fees and any other fees requested by the village to connect
onto the sanitary sewer and water supply of the village. (1976 Code § 52.018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 190/525
8-1-11: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Subsoil Drains: Where subsoil drains are used to surround the outer walls of a building, they may be made of corrugated plastic drainage tubing and
fittings, not less than four inches (4") in diameter. When the building is subject to backwater, the subsoil drain shall be protected by an accessibly
located backwater valve. Subsoil drains may discharge in a properly trapped area drain or sump. Where a storm sewer is provided, the subsoil drain
will connect directly to the storm sewer. (1976 Code § 52.015)
B. Sump Pump Discharge:
1. Any new subdivision or planned unit development shall provide for all newly constructed buildings a sump pump discharge line which shall be
connected to a storm sewer, where said storm sewer is located within easements or rights of way immediately adjacent to the lot in question.
2. In existing subdivision or planned unit developments already approved by the village which have developed lots or vacant lots, said subdivisions or
planned unit developments shall provide on newly constructed buildings for connection to the storm sewers, as long as said storm sewers are
adjacent to the lot. If it is impractical to connect to the existing storm sewer because of expense or lack of proper hookup facilities, then the sump
pump discharge lines can be located on the surface of the lot at minimum distance from the property lines as determined by the setback and side
yard requirements for that principal structure or ten feet (10'), whichever is greater. The department of public works shall determine whether it is too
expensive or impractical to hook the sump pump discharge line to the storm sewer. (1976 Code § 52.019)
C. Lawn And Landscape Sprinkler Systems: Prior to the installation of any lawn sprinkling system a permit from the village must be obtained. The permit
fee shall be not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and may increase based upon the number of inspections. The installation of said lawn and landscaped
sprinkling systems must be in accordance with all state statutes and local ordinances, and the like. (1976 Code § 52.017)
D. Prohibited Drainage: Stormwater shall not be drained into sewers intended for sanitary sewers only. (1976 Code § 52.016)
8-1-12: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation is found to exist constitutes a separate violation. A determination by a court that a violation of this chapter has taken
place and the assessment of a penalty thereof shall not preclude the village from seeking a recovery of any unpaid charges, fees or other sums due the
village under this chapter or other ordinances because of the furnishing by the village of its utility services. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
ARTICLE A. WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
8-1A-1: WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES:
There are hereby established rates and charges for the use of the services supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the village,
based upon the amount of water consumed, as shown by water meters as follows:
A. Users Within Corporate Limits:
1. Water Service Charge Bimonthly: For each residential, commercial, industrial and municipal user of the water service of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system, there shall be a bimonthly charge or rate based upon the amount of water consumed each bimonthly period as follows:
The minimum charge for water service applicable to each single metered account shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) each bimonthly period and six
dollars ($6.00) each bimonthly period for each additional unit served through a single connection.
Metered water flow charges shall be two dollars fifty eight cents ($2.58) per each one thousand (1,000) gallons used effective August 1, 2013. On
each subsequent August 1, the rate will increase by three percent (3%) to meet the needs of the increasing operating costs without the need of
further action by the corporate authorities.
2. Sewer Service Charges Bimonthly: For each residential, commercial, industrial and municipal user of the sewer service of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system, there shall be a bimonthly sewer charge based upon the amount of water consumed each bimonthly period. This bimonthly
sewer charge shall consist of two (2) separate components, being a minimum charge and a user rate. The user rate is divided into two (2) service
areas, one serviced by the Antioch municipal wastewater treatment plant and one serviced by the Lake County public works wastewater treatment
plant.
a. Minimum Charges: The minimum charge applicable to each additional unit served through a single sewer tap shall be fifty percent (50%) of the
charge applicable to single metered connections. These are calculated as follows:
Each Metered User Each Additional Unit
$26.00 $13.00
b. Bimonthly User Rates:
(1) West Service Area: In the west service area, metered water flow charges shall be four dollars twelve cents ($4.12) per each one thousand
(1,000) gallons effective August 1, 2013. Each subsequent year the rate will increase by three percent (3%) to meet the needs of the increasing
operating costs without the need of further action by the corporate authorities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 191/525
(2) East Service Area: In the east service area, metered water flow charges shall be four dollars twelve cents ($4.12) per each one thousand
(1,000) gallons effective August 1, 2013. Each subsequent year the rate will increase by three percent (3%) to meet the needs of the increasing
operating costs without the need of further action by the corporate authorities. Additionally, in the event the Lake County department of public
works increases its treatment fees, the rate will increase proportionally to those increases without the need of further action by the corporate
authorities.
c. Appropriation Of Funds:
(1) East Service Area: The bimonthly sewer charges for sewer service applicable to each single metered connection in the east service area shall
be received as restricted funds to be used for the following:
(A) To pay fixed expenses applicable to the operation and maintenance and replacement of the sewer collection system;
(B) To pay the treatment charges imposed by the Lake County department of public works.
(2) West Service Area: The bimonthly sewer charges for sewer service applicable to each single metered connection in the west service area shall
be received as restricted funds to be used for the following:
(A) To pay fixed expenses applicable to the operation and maintenance and replacement of the sewer collection system;
(B) To pay fixed expenses applicable to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment plant; and
(C) To pay a proportional share of any applicable annual debt service requirements of bonds or loans applicable to the water treatment plant.
B. Users Outside Corporate Limits:
1. Each user of the combined system of the village located outside the corporate limits shall be billed at the rate of two hundred percent (200%) of the
rate charged to properties within the corporate limits as set out in subsection A of this section.
2. For those properties served by the Oakwood Knolls Water Association the minimum charge for water service applicable to each single metered
account shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) each bimonthly period and six dollars ($6.00) each bimonthly period for each additional unit served through
a single connection. Metered water flow charges shall be billed at the rate charged to properties within the corporate limits as set out in subsection A
of this section.
C. Water Service Only: For each user of the water service only of the combined system within the corporate limits there shall be a bimonthly charge based
upon the amount of water consumed each bimonthly period as follows:
Each one thousand (1,000) gallons at two dollars fifty eight cents ($2.58) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
Metered water flow charges shall be two dollars fifty eight cents ($2.58) per each one thousand (1,000) gallons used effective August 1, 2013. On each
subsequent August 1, the rate will increase by three percent (3%) to meet the needs of the increasing operating costs without the need of further action
by the corporate authorities.
The minimum charge for water service only shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) each bimonthly period.
D. Sewer Service Only: For each nonmetered user of the sewerage system within the corporate limits there shall be a flat rate charge of eighty six dollars
($86.00) each bimonthly period. The flat rate charge is computed in the following manner:
Basic user charges $16.00
Debt service charge 10.00
Usage rate to 15,000 gallons 60.00
Total nonmetered use $86.00
On August 1, 2014, and on each subsequent August 1 thereafter, the usage rate will increase by three percent (3%) to meet the needs of the increasing
operating costs without the need of further action by the corporate authorities.
In the event usage of the wastewater facilities is determined to be in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per bimonthly period, the village may
require such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of services supplied.
E. Multiple-Unit Users: A "multiple-unit user" is defined as any additional number of family or commercial units located on the same premises, or being
served through a single water meter or sewer connection, where there are no separate water meters for each unit, such as apartment buildings, more
than one commercial unit in the same building, or commercial and residential units located in the same building. In all such cases, there shall be an
additional basic user charge and debt service charge for each additional unit provided with water and sewer service and served by the single
connection. The additional charges applicable to the number of units served through the single connection shall be added to the single metered
connection for services. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-2: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
8-1A-2-1: BASIC DATA FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
The user charge system hereinafter set forth has been developed from data outlined in the report of McClure Engineering Associates, Inc., Waukegan,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 192/525
Illinois, entitled "Report On The Revisions Of The User Charges Of The Wastewater System Of The Village Of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois", said report
being incorporated herein by reference and which shall constitute the basis for determining user charges in the village. (1976 Code § 51.005)
8-1A-2-2: BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
A. The wastewater service charges for the use of and for services supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of a basic user charge to
pay expenses for operation, maintenance and replacement of the system, a fixed debt service charge, variable debt service rate and a surcharge, if
applicable.
B. The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal volume
and concentrations:
1. A flow of four thousand (4,000) gallons per bimonthly period.
2. A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
3. A suspended solids content of two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/l).
4. Ammonia nitrogen content of thirty milligrams per liter (30 mg/l).
5. A phosphorus content (P) of twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l).
C. It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement, and shall be computed as follows:
1. Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund, for the next fiscal
year for all works categories.
2. Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids, BOD5 and phosphorus.
3. Estimate waterworks volume, pounds of SS, pounds of BOD5 and pounds of phosphorus to be treated.
4. Compute units costs for volume (dollars per 1,000 gallons), for SS (dollars per pound), for BOD5 (dollars per pound), for ammonia nitrogen (dollars
per pound), and for phosphorus (dollars per pound).
5. Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for volume, SS, BOD5, NH3 and phosphorus at normal sewage strength. Add these costs to
determine the charge for operation and maintenance, including replacement. (1976 Code § 51.006)
D. There is hereby established a debt service charge in the amount as established in section 8-1A-1 of this article per bimonthly period for each single
metered user served by the sanitary sewer system of the village, and in the amount as established in section 8-1A-1 of this article per bimonthly period
for each additional user or unit served through a single meter. A component of the debt service charge in the amount of four dollars ($4.00) per
bimonthly period applicable to each single metered or multiple-unit user shall be separately allocated by the village for payment of a loan under the
Illinois environmental protection agency revolving loan program. (1976 Code § 51.006; amd. Ord. 02-03-10, 3-18-2002; Ord. 08-04-07, 4-7-2008)
E. 1. In the event use of the wastewater facilities by nonresidential users is determined by the superintendent to include wastes in addition to average
strength domestic waste, the user shall pay a surcharge cost in addition to the debt service charge, the basic user charge and the basic user rates.
2. A surcharge will be levied upon all users whose wastes exceed the normal concentrations for BOD5 (200 mg/l), SS (240 mg/l), NH3 (30 mg/l) and
phosphorus (25 mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed
the concentrations for BOD5, SS, ammonia nitrogen and phosphorus content, respectively. Section 8-1A-2-5 of this article specifies the procedure to
compute a surcharge. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-2-3: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
A. The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments
of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
B. If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks system, all
or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the
superintendent for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
C. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the superintendent if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from
the metered water consumption records.
D. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and installation,
these meters may not be removed without the consent of the superintendent. (1976 Code § 51.007)
8-1A-2-4: SURCHARGE RATE:
The rates of surcharge shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 193/525
For biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) $0.19 per pound
For suspended solids (SS) 0.10 per pound
For ammonia nitrogen (NH3) 0.53 per pound
For phosphorus content (P) 0.82 per pound
(Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-2-5: COMPUTATION OF SURCHARGE:
A. The surcharge per person shall be computed by the following formula:
S - V (0.00834) (A (BOD5-200) + B (SS-240) ) + C (NH3-30) + D (P-25), where
S = Amount of surcharge
V = Wastewater volume in 1,000 gallons/billing period
0.00834 = Unit weight of water x 10-6/1,000 gallons
A = Unit charge per pound for BOD5
BOD5 = 5 day biochemical oxygen demand, mg/l
200 = Allowable BOD5 strength
B = Unit charge per pound of SS, mg/l
240 = Allowable SS, mg/l
C = Unit charge per pound of NH3 mg/l
D = Unit charge per pound of P mg/l
30 = Allowable NH3 mg/l
25 = Allowable P mg/l
B. The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as
may be deemed necessary by the superintendent, and shall be binding as a basis for surcharge. (1976 Code § 51.010)
8-1A-2-6: COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE:
The wastewater service charge per person shall be computed by the following formula:
W = D + M + (V-4,000) R + S, where:
W = Amount of wastewater service charge ($)/billing period
D = Debt service charge1
M = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
V = Wastewater volume in 1,000 gallons/billing period
4,000 = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge
R = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement
S = Amount of surcharge2
Notes:
1.Section 8-1A-1 of this article.
2.Section 8-1A-2-5 of this article.
(1976 Code § 51.011)
8-1A-3: REGULATIONS RELATING TO RATES:
A copy of the ordinance codified herein, properly certified by the village clerk, shall be filed in the office of the recorder of deeds of Lake County, Illinois. It
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 194/525
shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system of the village on their properties. (Ord. 11-07-10, 7-5-2011)
8-1A-4: FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED:
No free service of any of the services supplied by the combined waterworks and sewer system including nonreturned water to the sanitary system shall be
supplied by the village to any person, firm, organization or corporate entity, public or private. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-5: CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS:
During construction of any building, and before any water meter is installed as is herein provided, the contractor so constructing the building may be
permitted to use the village water supply by making application therefor and paying the flat fee prescribed by the village board of trustees. (1976 Code
§ 51.038)
8-1A-6: BILLING AND PAYMENT:
A. Bills Rendered:
1. For the purpose of the operation of the combined waterworks and sewerage system, the calendar year shall be divided into six (6) bimonthly periods
containing two (2) calendar months and said bimonthly periods shall begin on May 1, July 1, September 1, November 1, January 1 and March 1 of
each year. The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the service on such premises and the services furnished to the premises by the
village of Antioch.
All bills for service shall be billed to the owner of the property and rendered bimonthly within the first seven (7) working days of the month succeeding
the period for which the service is billed, and shall be payable no later than the close of business on the thirtieth day following the rendition of the bill.
If payment is not made within said thirty (30) day period, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto and a late
notice will be mailed to the owner. If payment is not made after sixty (60) days a notice of intent to record a lien and intent to shut off services shall be
mailed. If payment is not made after ninety (90) days a notice to lien and shut off service with payment due in five (5) days will be mailed.
2. It is hereby made the duty of the village treasurer of the village of Antioch to render a bill for service and for all rates and charges in connection
therewith and to collect all monies due thereon.
B. Delinquent Charges: In the event the charges for service are not paid within ninety (90) days after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges
shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such
service is supplied, and the village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a sworn statement showing such delinquencies in the office of the
recorder of deeds of Lake County, Illinois, and the filing of such statement shall be deemed a lien and public notice for the payment of such charges for
such service. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the payment of fees to record and release such liens as well as an administrative fee
of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-7: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
A. Nonpayment: If the rates or charges for such service are not paid within ninety (90) days after the rendition of the bill for such service, such service shall
thereafter be discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all past due bills including the penalties thereon are paid in full
together with payment made of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for reinstating such service. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
B. Notice Of Delinquency; Lien:
1. Whenever a bill for water or sewer service remains unpaid for ninety (90) days for bimonthly service after it has been rendered, the village treasurer
shall file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the
amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the
bill.
2. If the consumer whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the village treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner
of the premises if his address is known to the village treasurer, whenever the bill remains unpaid for the period of ninety (90) days, or a bimonthly bill
after it has been rendered. (1976 Code § 51.039; amd. Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
3. The failure of the village treasurer to record the lien or to mail the notice, or the failure of the owner to receive the notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in subsection B2 of this section. (1976 Code § 51.039)
C. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the lien, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied
to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. The foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the
village. The village attorney is authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over such
matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid ninety (90) days for a bimonthly bill after it has been rendered. (1976 Code
§ 51.040; amd. Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-8: WATER SHUTOFF; APPLICATION AND FEE:
Any owner desiring for his convenience a shutting off of the water supply shall make application therefor to the village treasurer and a charge of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be made for shutting off and turning on of the water at the request of any such user. Such shutting off of the water shall not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 195/525
avoid the imposition of and the liability for the payment of minimum basic user charges elsewhere provided in this article. The village reserves the right to
refuse to turn water off in the event persons other than the one requesting the shut off are residing in the property. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-9: REVENUES AND ACCOUNTING:
A. Revenues:
1. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks and sewer system shall be held by the village treasurer separate
and apart from her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village, and all of said sum, without any deduction whatever, shall
be delivered to the village treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to
time be directed by the mayor and board of trustees.
2. The village treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined waterworks and sewer system and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of said system as the same may be delivered to her and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage
fund of the village of Antioch" and said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the applicable provisions of
division 139 of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code, approved May 29, 1961, and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto and as
provided in the ordinances heretofore adopted authorizing the issuance of bonds and the loan agreement of said village.
B. Accounting:
1. a. The waterworks and sewerage fund is the principal accounting designation for all revenues received and expenses incurred in the operation of the
waterworks and/or sewerage system. These revenues and expenses shall be accounted for so that water system revenues and expenses shall be
recorded separately in the waterworks account of the fund and revenues and expenses of the sewerage system shall be recorded separately in the
sewer account of the waterworks and sewerage fund. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
b. The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and
correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks and sewerage system. At regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the waterworks and sewerage system.
(1976 Code § 51.044; amd. Ord. 08-02-02, 2-19-2008)
2. In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the separate revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the user charge system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
a. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.
b. Billing data to show total number of thousand gallons billed.
c. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
d. Number of users connected to the system, metered and additional units served.
e. Number of nonmetered users.
f. A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users) and volume of wastewater discharged.
3. The annual audit report shall contain such other financial information consistent with future guidelines to be established by the Illinois environmental
protection agency. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-10: RATE ADJUSTMENT:
The water and sewer rates and charges described herein shall be increased by three percent (3%) each subsequent year to reflect an increase in
operating costs incurred in either the water department or sewer department as shown in the audit report of the waterworks and sewerage fund of the
preceding fiscal year, or an increase which may be due to an increase in debt service charges. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-11: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The environmental protection agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village which
are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions of any state grant. (1976 Code § 51.049; amd. Ord. 08-02-02, 2-19-2008)
8-1A-12: APPEALS:
A. The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user charges shall be made available to a user within twenty (20) days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the computation thereof shall be remedied by the utilities committee
within twenty one (21) days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies. (1976 Code § 51.050; amd. Ord. 08-02-02, 2-19-
2008; Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
B. At the sole discretion of the village administrator or his designee, under reasonable terms, portions of the service charges may be negotiated when the
situation warrants, or payment plans may be established. (Ord. 13-12-24, 12-16-2013)
8-1A-13: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 196/525
Whoever violates any provisions of sections 8-1A-6 through 8-1A-9 of this article shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this
code for each offense. (1976 Code § 51.999; amd. 2003 Code; Ord. 08-02-02, 2-19-2008)
Chapter 2
SEWER USE AND PRETREATMENT
8-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
8-2-1-1: ENACTMENT:
Pursuant to the requirements of the federal clean water act and regulations promulgated thereunder, the Illinois environmental protection act of 1970, as
amended, and in accordance with Illinois municipal code, this chapter, hereafter known as SEWER USE AND PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE, is hereby
enacted by the board of trustees of the village of Antioch. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-1-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the village of Antioch, hereafter referred to
interchangeably as the village. This chapter provides for the use of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, and authorizes the
installation and continuing of connections into the sewage works of the village upon certain conditions, including permission thereof; providing for the
installation and maintenance of such connections and enforcements thereto; regulating the use of municipal and private sewers and drains; individual
wastewater disposal, the installation, connection and disconnection of building sewers, the discharge of water and waste in the public sewer system
providing for penalties for violation therefor; and providing for penalties for violation thereof; and providing for termination of permits issued by the village
pursuant to the provisions hereof.
This chapter enables the village to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the clean water act (33 United States Code section 1251 et
seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 code of federal regulations part 403). Additional objectives of this chapter are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) that will interfere with its operation;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately
treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
C. To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by air, wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and
the general public;
D. To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
E. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works;
F. To enable the village to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any
other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject; and
G. To regulate private wastewater disposal systems.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works and provides for the enforcement of general requirements for users. This
chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater connection and discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting
from the programs established herein. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-1-3: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the pretreatment coordinator and duly authorized agent(s) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the pretreatment coordinator and duly authorized agent(s) may be delegated by the village or
pretreatment coordinator to other village personnel or agents of the village. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-1-4: JURISDICTION:
This chapter shall apply to the village and to persons outside the village who are, by contract or agreement with the village, users of the village POTW.
(Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-1-5: FUNDING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 197/525
It is the intent of the village to pass some of the costs of the pretreatment program to industrial users. The charges that shall apply to those users subject
to the pretreatment program are based on SIU classification and are established in article C of this chapter. Billing shall be based on the billing cycle for
water and sewer and shall be added onto the water and sewer bill. The rates or charges for pretreatment service shall be payable bimonthly. The owner of
the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service
is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and severally
liable therefor to the village. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-1-6: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings:
BOD - biochemical oxygen demand
CFR - code of federal regulations
COD - chemical oxygen demand
FOG - fats, oils and grease, interchangeable with oil and grease
gpd - gallons per day
IAC - Illinois administrative code
IEPA - Illinois environmental protection agency
mg/l - milligrams per liter
NPDES - national pollutant discharge elimination system
POTW - publicly owned treatment works
ppm - parts per million
RCRA - resource conservation and recovery act
TSS - total suspended solids
USC - United States Code
USEPA - U.S. environmental protection agency
VE - village engineer
(Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-1-7: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT, THE ACT, CLEAN WATER ACT, OR FEDERAL ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the clean water act, as amended, 33
USC section 1251 et seq.
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER: A. If the user is a corporation, by a responsible corporate officer:
1. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
B. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
C. If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
D. The individuals described in subsections A, B and C of this definition, may designate another authorized representative, if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the village of Antioch.
E. If an authorization under subsection D of this definition is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection D of
this definition must be submitted to the village of Antioch. If an authorization under subsection D of this definition is no longer accurate because the
individual described in subsections A, B and C of this definition has changed, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection D of this
definition must be submitted to the village of Antioch.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures approved in 40 CFR 136 for five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
BIOSOLIDS: Refers to the stabilized organic solids removed from the wastewater treatment plant and disposed of on agricultural land or at a landfill.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls
of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of the
building wall. Discharge of storm water runoff to the building drain is prohibited.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 198/525
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment or pretreatment facility.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
USEPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC section 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40
CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): Chemical oxidization under standard laboratory procedures as described in 40 CFR 136 usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).
COMBINED SEWER: A pipe or conduit that is designed and constructed to carry both polluted water, including sanitary sewage and nondomestic waste,
and unpolluted water, including storm water, surface water and ground water and cooling water.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The formula set forth in 40 CFR section 403.6(e).
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A sample of wastewater composed of two (2) or more discrete samples collected, based on a flow proportional or time
proportional method.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DIRECTOR: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
DISCHARGE PERMIT: Permit issued to a user which specifies the requirements for discharge of wastewater or the requirements for zero discharge of
wastewater as appropriate.
DISCHARGER: Any person, firm, establishment or institution that discharges wastewater, excluding inflow and infiltration, into the POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act and 35 Illinois administrative code (IAC) 307.
DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT: The mayor and board of trustees or the village administrator of the village of Antioch and designated employees and agents
of the village.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: Those criteria defined in any applicable "NPDES" permit.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act.
FATS, OIL, AND GREASE (FOG): Is used interchangeably with "oils and grease".
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly treated, and wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
FLOW: Volume of wastewater per unit of time.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE): Any user engaged in the activities of manufacturing, preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs that use one or more of the following preparation activities: blending, cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling,
sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching and infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any
other food preparation or servicing activity that produces a consumable food product in or on a receptacle requiring washing to be reused. A limited food
preparation establishment is not considered to be an FSE when only engaged in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a
result, there is no wastewater discharge containing significant amounts of oil and grease.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage, and
sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time
not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
HAULED WASTE: Sanitary wastewater transported as a commercial venture.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c)
or (d) of the act.
INDUSTRIAL USER (IU): A source of indirect discharge from a nondomestic source.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: A combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial user, including the
wastewater from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge by any user which alone or in conjunction with discharges by other sources, both: a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use of disposal and b) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of wastewater or sludge use or disposal by the
POTW in accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):
section 405 of the clean water act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and
recovery act (RCRA) and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D or SWDA) the clean
air act, the toxic substance control act, and the marine protection research and sanctuaries act.
MEDICAL WASTES: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent representing 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand
milliliters (1,000 ml) of water.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 199/525
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES: The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing,
terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits from point sources to waters of the United States, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements,
under sections 307, 402, 318 and 405 of the federal act.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT): A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the CWA, or
section 12(f) of the act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307 (c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that one of the following is true:
1. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site which no other source is located;
2. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installations are substantially independent of an existing
source at the site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with
the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a
new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
C. Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has done one of the following:
1. Begun, or caused one of the following to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program:
a. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
b. Significant site preparation work including, clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary
for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
D. New sources shall install and have in operating condition and shall "start up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment
standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources shall meet all applicable standards.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
NONRESIDENTIAL USER: All users not defined "residential users".
OILS AND GREASE: Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils and any other material that is extracted by a solvent in a method approved in
40 CFR 136.
OVERHEAD SEWER: A sewer that does not discharge to a public or private sewer main through the use of gravity. Overhead sewers utilize a pump to lift
the sewage to an elevation where gravity can then carry away the wastewater.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT: The village facilities designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) to wastewater.
ppm: Parts per million.
PASS-THROUGH: The discharge of pollutants that exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or
any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in
standard units.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is
one hundred (100) gallons (380 liters) of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pound (77 g) of BOD5 (5-day biochemical oxygen demand), 0.20 pound (91 g) of
total suspended solids and 0.021 (10 g) of phosphorus. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated or defined as the highest population equivalent of
the four (4) parameters.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, wastewater sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 200/525
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentrations of the
pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR: The village engineer of the village of Antioch or his designee.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Means that for any specified pollutant, village prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in section 8-
2-5-2 of this chapter, village specific limitations on discharge as set forth in section 8-2-5-5 of this chapter, state of Illinois pretreatment standards in Illinois
administrative code section 307, or the national categorical pretreatment standards, whichever standard is most stringent.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in
any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries that
serve one or more persons and, ultimately discharge into the village sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with village funds.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): The "treatment works", as defined by section 212 of the act, owned by the village and any devices
and systems used in the conveyance, storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature that are
connected to the village POTW regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected to the village POTW
treatment plant.
RESIDENTIAL SOURCE OR RESIDENTIAL USER: Any single-family or multi-family dwelling unit designed primarily as a place of human habitation which
discharges to the village's system domestic wastewater only.
SANITARY SEWER: A pipe or conduit designed and/or intended to carry wastewater from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, and to which storm water, surface water, ground water and unpolluted noncontact cooling water are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY WASTEWATER: See definition of Wastewater.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.) Used interchangeably with "sanitary wastewater".
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface, and ground water drainage.
SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the POTW who:
A. Is subject to any national categorical pretreatment standards; or
B. A user that:
1. Has an average process wastewater discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blow-down wastewater) or more per workday; or
2. Has a discharge flow of process wastewater that makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of
the POTW treatment plant; or
3. Is designated as such by the village on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
C. Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the village may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
SLUDGE: See definition of Biosolids.
SLUG OR SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of water or wastewater which is nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge that could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 8-2-5-2 of this chapter.
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries rainwater, snowmelt and surface drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling
water.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation, snowmelt, and surface drainage.
TAP: The connection to the sewer main through the use of a factory "wye" or "tee", a saddle connection, an Inserta tee®, or other plumber connection (i.e.,
hammer tap).
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): Total suspended matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in
water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration, under standard laboratory procedures approved in 40 CFR 136.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS: The summation of all quantifiable values greater than the practical quantitation limit for the toxic organics specified in the
applicable regulation.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 201/525
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER: Any person or source that contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW. It may also include such persons or
sources that are prohibited from discharging specific pollutants or waste streams to the POTW.
VILLAGE: The village of Antioch and any reference to "within the village" shall mean all territory within the corporate limits of the village.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: An individual or corporation designated by the village that holds a professional engineering license.
WASTEWATER: The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing plants and
institutions, whether treated or untreated including which are contributed to the POTW.
A. Sanitary wastewater means the combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
B. Industrial wastewater means a combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged from any industrial user, including the wastewater from
pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: The "treatment works", as defined by section 212 of the federal act, owned by the village and any devices and
systems used in the conveyance, storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature that are
connected to the village POTW regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected to the village POTW
treatment plant. Synonymous with publicly owned treatment works and wastewater facilities.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: The document or documents issued to a user by the village pursuant to sections 8-2-7 and 8-2-8 of this chapter.
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Those standards defined in the water pollution regulations of Illinois, title 35, subtitle C, chapter I.
WATERS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state of Illinois or any portion thereof. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006; amd. Ord. 16-07-19, 7-18-2016)
8-2-2: SEWER EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS:
8-2-2-1: APPLICABILITY:
The extension of a sanitary sewer by any entity that will serve or in the future may serve more than one building and that will connect either directly or
indirectly to the sewage works of the village shall be made only after an application for a village permit has been made in writing on forms prescribed and
furnished by the village and an extension permit is issued by the village. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-2-2: REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application: Persons desiring such extension of the sewer system shall file with the village engineer (VE) two (2) copies of the following documents:
1. Detailed plans and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer registered in the state of Illinois.
2. IEPA permit application with such supporting documents required by the IEPA, completely filled out and ready for village signature.
3. Detailed estimate of the cost of the extension.
The person or persons extending the sewer shall pay all costs of plan review by the village engineer to the village prior to the village or duly
authorized agent signing the IEPA permit application.
B. Issuance: The village engineer will issue an extension permit in accordance with the following:
1. It has been demonstrated that the downstream treatment works, including village sewers and pump stations, have sufficient reserve capacity to
adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
2. A permit has been issued by the Illinois environmental protection agency. The village permit shall expire on the expiration date of the Illinois
environmental protection agency permit. Those portions of the work, for which a village permit has been issued and the work has been approved by
the village shall be completed within the permit time. Future construction on the project for which the original permit was issued shall require a new
permit that will be issued in compliance with the ordinances of the village at the time of the application for the new permit. All fees and charges
assessed under the conditions of the village permit are forfeited by the applicant/owner upon the expiration of the permit.
3. The village has received an agreement and bond executed by the permittee wherein he agrees to make and install the improvements in accordance
with plans and specifications identifying a completion date not more than six (6) months after the date of the agreement unless the village board
determines, on the basis of the recommendation of the village engineer, that a longer time is necessary.
The guarantee for completion of the improvements by the permittee shall be in the principal amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated
cost as approved by the village engineer; and secured by either:
a. An escrow account at a federally insured bank or savings and loan association subject to draw by the village administrator or designee to
complete the improvements if it is not completed within the prescribed time limit.
b. A clean, nondeclining, irrevocable letter of credit issued by a federally insured bank or savings and loan association. The letter shall be approved
by the village treasurer and provide that funds may be drawn only by the village administrator or treasurer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 202/525
The bond shall remain in effect for a period of one year after acceptance of the work by the village engineer as a guarantee of good faith of the
permittee to correct defects. At the discretion of the village board, the bond may be reduced during the maintenance period.
4. The village engineer has received copies of all permits, insurance and bonds required for street openings or stream crossings and any other permits
required by an agency having jurisdiction.
5. The village engineer has received certificates of insurance protecting the village from any liability or damage whatsoever from injury, including death,
to any person or property. The amount of the insurance shall be as established by the village board.
6. The village engineer has received payment for the cost of the permit and the estimated cost of inspection. The cost of inspection shall include
resident supervision if deemed necessary by the village engineer. The estimated cost of inspection, approved by the village engineer, shall be
deposited with the village treasurer prior to the start of work and additional funds added during the work if required. The permittee, however, shall pay
only the actual costs of such services based on standard engineering fees. At the completion of the work any unused portion of the amount
deposited shall be returned. No interest shall be paid on deposited funds.
C. Construction Requirements:
1. The rules, regulations, ordinances and policies listed hereafter and issued by the authorities indicated are incorporated herein by reference and shall
govern the work so far as they apply to said work.
2. The village's rules, regulations, resolutions, policies, directives and instructions that may be adopted or issued from time to time by the village
engineer, administrator or village board of trustees.
a. "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", latest edition.
b. The Illinois environmental protection agency's rules, regulations, technical releases and requirements.
c. "The Illinois Recommended Standards For Sewage Works", IEPA, latest edition.
d. The state of Illinois plumbing code, latest edition.
3. The permittee agrees that they shall provide adequate inspection during the entire construction period which, at the option of the village engineer,
may require a full time resident engineer. The village engineer reserves the right to review the construction.
4. Changes in the work to be done or materials to be used from those shown on the plans or set forth in the specifications, as submitted to the village
engineer, shall be approved by the village prior to the changed work being done or the changed materials being installed.
5. The contractor or the contractor's representative, constructing the sewer extension shall notify the village engineer twenty four (24) hours prior to
commencing construction. When the construction of the sewer extension is interrupted for a period of seven (7) calendar days or more, the village
engineer shall be notified twenty four (24) hours prior to continuing construction of the sewer extension.
6. At the time a sewer extension is connected to an existing sewer, the connection shall be made at an existing manhole or in a manhole constructed
over the existing sewer. If an existing manhole is the point of connection and a suitable stub is not provided for the extension, the existing manhole
shall be core drilled and a suitable connection stub installed. The sewer extension shall be plugged with a watertight concrete plug by the contractor
at the time the connection to the existing sewer is made. The plug shall be maintained in place at all times until the sewer extension is approved in
writing by the village engineer. If the plug is not maintained in place, the village engineer shall install a concrete plug and charge a fee to the
contractor for each time a plug is installed by the village engineer. The fee for the installation of a plug is established by the village in article C of this
chapter. Mechanical plugs are also an acceptable means of plugging the sewer to maintain it out of service.
7. Upon completion of construction, the contractor shall notify the village engineer requesting final review of the work. The contractor shall televise the
completed extension in the presence of a village engineer or his designee who will take immediate possession of the videotape prior to leaving the
site. The village engineer shall review the work for conformance with the village's requirements and adherence to the approved plans and
specifications for which the village's sewer extension permit was issued. If deficiencies are found in the work, the village engineer shall furnish the
contractor with a listing of such deficiencies. When the contractor believes that the deficiencies have been corrected, the contractor shall request a
rereview of the work. Should the rereview of the work show that the deficiencies as set forth have not been corrected, the contractor shall make the
necessary corrections, and subsequent to that, shall notify the village engineer and request another review. The village engineer shall charge a fee
for each additional inspection after the first inspection following the issuance of the list of deficiencies. The fee for each additional review is published
as part of article C of this chapter.
8. All sanitary sewers shall be constructed within public rights of way or within easements dedicated for public utilities. No sanitary sewer mains shall
be installed nor their easements established in the rear or side yard of any property unless first approved by the VE.
9. Minimum sanitary sewer main size shall be eight inch (8") diameter for public sewer mains or sewer mains serving more than one building.
10. Manholes shall be precast reinforced concrete sections meeting ASTM C-478 and ASTM C-443 standards. Manholes for sanitary sewers twenty
four inches (24") or less in diameter shall have a minimum inside diameter of forty eight inches (48"). Sanitary sewers greater than twenty four inches
(24") in diameter shall have a minimum inside diameter of sixty inches (60") and be spaced at a maximum of four hundred feet (400'). Additionally,
manholes will be installed under the following conditions: termination of existing and future lines, changes in direction (horizontal or vertical), changes
in shape or pipe size, or junctions with other sewers. Curved sections of sewers are not allowed.
Drop manholes shall be provided for manholes with any pipe having a difference in invert elevation more than twenty four inches (24") above the
invert of the sewer leaving the manholes. All drop manholes shall be of the external type. No internal drop manhole connections will be allowed.
D. Project Completion: No connection permits shall be issued or building permits released until such time that final approval of the improvement has been
made in writing by the village engineer. Final approval is contingent upon the following:
1. All punch-list work has been completed;
2. As built or project record drawings prepared by a registered Illinois professional engineer are furnished to the village engineer;
3. The sewer has been televised by the contractor or by the entity in the presence of the village engineer or his designee; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 203/525
4. A video record of the television inspection has been provided to the village. In addition to a video record, air exfiltration testing as outlined in division
III, section 31-1.11 of the standard specifications for water and sewer, will be completed prior to acceptance.
E. Connections To Extension: No connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer until sewer connection permits have been issued by the village under
section 8-2-3 of this chapter.
F. Performance Bond Release: The performance bond will not be released until the guarantee period has expired and the following documents are filed
with the village clerk and approved by the village engineer:
1. As built drawings: one reproducible set, two (2) sets of prints and one electronic copy in a version acceptable to the village;
2. Release of all permits; and
3. Copies of all tests required by the village engineer. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-3: SEWER CONNECTION PROCEDURES:
8-2-3-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the village or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, without the express approval
from the village engineer (VE) that all state and federal effluent limitations have been met and there are no reasonable alternative methods of disposal.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
C. The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the village
and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the village, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two
hundred feet (200') (61 m) of the property line. If such public sewer benefits other properties, the village board may enact a recapture ordinance and
make best efforts to assure that the benefited property owners pay to the owner amounts as required. All public sewer extensions shall be made in
accordance with section 8-2-2-2 of this chapter.
D. It shall be unlawful to discharge any sanitary waste, including, without limitation, any residential, commercial or industrial liquid waste product into any
storm sewer, drainage facility, retention pond, detention pond or other stormwater control structure or device located within the village limits. (Ord. 13-
01-02, 1-21-2013)
8-2-3-2: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
No person shall construct a wastewater treatment facility within the corporate limits of the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village for the
purpose of treating wastewater and discharging same to a watercourse unless the following provisions are met:
A. For the purpose of treating industrial wastes, the VE determines that the wastewater treatment facilities have inadequate capacity, and issues a permit
for the construction and operation of a wastewater treatment facility. No village permit shall become effective until:
1. The VE has approved the plans and specifications in writing,
2. Approval has been obtained from the Lake County department of health,
3. An IEPA permit issued to construct the facility has been received,
4. An IEPA NPDES permit to operate the facility has been issued and received, and
5. The final inspection has been completed and the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the VE.
Persons operating a wastewater treatment facility shall file copies of all operating reports sent to the USEPA and IEPA with the VE and such other
reports as the VE deems necessary.
B. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 8-2-3-1 of this chapter and the wastewater source to be treated is
domestic in nature, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system employing subsurface absorption facilities.
No person shall construct a private wastewater treatment facility with subsurface disposal without previous approval from the VE. If approval is given
the person must adhere to the following limitations:
1. Permit Requirements:
a. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the VE. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the village engineer which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the village engineer. A permit and inspection fee as published in title 13 of this code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 204/525
or reimbursement of costs shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed. The permit shall not be issued until applicable state and
county permits are on file.
b. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all regulations and provisions of the state of Illinois
private sewage disposal licensing act and code, with the state of Illinois environmental protection agency and the Lake County health department,
latest revision. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of
the lot is less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
c. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the village
engineer. The village engineer shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the village engineer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be
made within twenty four (24) hours of the receipt of written notice by the village engineer, except that no inspections will be made at any time other
than regular village working hours.
C. Where development is possible but gravity sewers and conventional sewer systems are not practical:
Accordingly, it is the policy of the village to approve grinder pump systems on a discretionary case by case basis. In order to implement a grinder pump
system, a developer or individual homeowner must prove to the village engineer that a grinder pump system is the only viable option other than a
conventional sanitary sewer system. A permit for a private wastewater treatment facility employing a grinder pump system shall not be issued until the
design and installation is completed to the satisfaction of the village engineer.
1. Installation: The village engineer shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of the construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit
shall notify the VE when the grinder pump system is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
2. Operation And Maintenance: The VE or his designee shall be entitled to inspect the grinder pump system if said VE has any reason to believe that
the grinder pump system is not operating properly or pursuant to a routine inspection protocol developed by the VE. Should the grinder pump system
fall into disrepair or otherwise need maintenance as determined by the village engineer, and the owner refuses to repair, replace or otherwise fix the
grinder pump system to the specifications of the village, the village may do so at its own expense and obtain reimbursement from the individual
owner. In that regard, and as a condition of obtaining a village permit for a grinder pump system, the individual owner shall enter into a contractual
agreement indemnifying the village for any costs the village may incur with regards to maintaining the grinder pump system, and further allow the
village engineer reasonable access to the grinder pump system for inspection purposes.
D. Other provisions:
1. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the village.
2. As provided in subsection B of this section, at such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal
system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty (60) days in compliance with this section. Any septic tanks, cesspools and
similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material such as clean bank run gravel or dirt.
3. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Lake County
department of health. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-3-3: BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Requirements: No person shall construct a new wastewater source and connect same to the wastewater facilities of the village without first
making application for the privilege of making said connection to the village.
1. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into; use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the VE and an IEPA permit when required under 35 Illinois administrative code 309.
2. No addition to or alteration of any building sewer shall be made or caused to be made by any person without a permit from the VE and then only
through a sewer contractor. No permit shall authorize anything not explicitly stated in the application.
3. All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act, the Illinois environmental protection act and regulations promulgated thereto, and this code.
4. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: For residential wastewater service, and nonresidential (at a minimum commercial,
institutional/governmental or industrial) wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the VE.
5. Persons desiring to construct a new waste source and connect it to the wastewater facilities of the village shall state the quantity, quality and rate of
discharge into the sewer. The nonresidential user, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics and type of activity per sections 8-2-4-1 and 8-2-4-4 of this chapter. In the case of any fraudulent representation upon
the part of the user, the permit fees will be forfeited and the use of the sewer stopped.
6. A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle
the additional anticipated waste load based on the population equivalent.
7. The applicant will secure a building permit if the waste source is new equipment to be installed in an existing building with an existing sewer.
8. Each excavation for any of the purposes set out in this subsection shall require a separate permit.
9. The building permit will be issued for a period of twenty four (24) months consistent with the IEPA permits.
B. Building Sewer Connections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 205/525
1. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer and may be done only with the
explicit approval of the VE.
2. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the VE or his designee, to
meet all requirements of this chapter. All costs shall be borne by the applicant.
3. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" shall apply.
4. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet (3') of any bearing wall. No building sewers shall be installed in any place where they
may be subject to freezing temperatures unless adequate provisions are made to protect them from frost. Changes in direction shall be made only
with properly curbed pipe and fittings, or a manhole, as determined by the VE.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be
lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. Where possible, all building sanitary services shall be "overhead"
installations. Buildings having basements will have a pump or ejector provided to pump the wastewater to the sanitary sewer service for gravity
transport to the sewer main.
5. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be a saddle connection and conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American
Society of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois". All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
C. Construction Requirements: Construction may not be started until all fees are paid consistent with section 8-2-3-4 of this chapter, and title 13 of this
code and a written permit is issued by the village after issuance and receipt of an IEPA permit for the project when applicable. The following conditions
are also required:
1. The applicant shall secure a public right of way opening permit from the VE when appropriate in conformance with the provisions of section 13-1-5 of
this code.
2. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. Failure to
properly barricade will be cause for the job site to be shut down and a penalty, as established in title 13 of this code, must be paid before any further
work can commence.
3. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the VE twenty four (24) hours prior to the start of any underground piping installation and
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of a
qualified duly authorized agent of the village during regular village working hours.
4. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
5. The applicant shall file a certificate of liability insurance in the amount of a minimum of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) with the village engineer or
clerk to protect the village from any liability or damage whatsoever for injury, including death, to any person or property.
6. Minimum building sanitary service sewer size shall be six inch (6") diameter. All cleanouts shall be installed on the owner's property and not in village
ROW. The maximum distance between cleanouts is one hundred twenty feet (120').
7. Sewer services shall not be connected to manholes. All sanitary sewer services serving single-family residences shall have "blind" connections to
the sewer main (as stated in subsection C8 of this section). Only exceptions are when homes are located in a cul-de-sac and the connection to the
sewer main would be impractical. This exception must be approved by the VE or his designee.
8. Sewer service connections to existing sewer mains shall be made by the installation of a strap on saddle with stainless steel banding in accordance
with manufacturers' recommendations. Romac "CB" style saddles with stainless steel bands, Geneco "Sealtight" strap on saddles, PVC saddles
meeting ASTM D3033/ASTM S3034, or other approved manufacturers may be accepted.
The installation of the new saddle fitting will be use of a circular saw cut by proper tools ("sewer tap" machine or similar device). All such connections
shall be done in the presence of the VE, or his designated representative. After the saddle connection has been made, encasement in four (4) to six
inches (6") of concrete may be required to provide a secure and watertight connection collar, if in the opinion of the inspector, the existing pipe is not
sufficiently stabilized. Factory wye/tee, Inserta tee® will be allowed on eight (8) or ten inch (10") sewer main pipe. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-3-4: FEES:
Fees shall be charged for when permitting and constructing a new wastewater source and connecting it to the wastewater facilities of the village and are
found in title 13 of this code for the following activities:
A. A permit review and inspection fee in accordance with the current fee schedule for sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the residential
application is filed. Permit review costs for nonresidential permits will be determined on a case by case basis by the VE.
B. An inspection fee in accordance with the current fee schedule shall be paid for any additional inspections. This includes, but is not limited to, inspections
of sampling manholes, flow metering or sampling equipment, garbage grinders, grease, oil and sand interceptors, and grease traps.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 206/525
C. Connection fees: Title 13 of this code shall be used for determining appropriate fees to be paid for connections to the village sewer system.
1. For uses involving extra strength wastewater:
a. The VE may require industrial or commercial sewer users to report to the VE concentrations and flow rates of wastewater discharged to the village
collection system. For wastewater, the strength of which exceeds normal domestic wastewater in any constituent, the fees shall be based as
follows. In the event that the wastewater exhibits a ratio of BOD5 to COD of less than 0.3, the BOD5 population equivalent will be calculated on the
basis of one-third (1/3) of the COD value. A permit connection fee then will be charged on the basis of the impact on a treatment works as the
equivalent of the highest population equivalent of the three (3) parameters: flow, BOD5, TSS or phosphorus.
b. When the volume and strength of the wastewater to be discharged to the public sanitary sewers is not known at the time of the connection, the fee
shall be estimated and adjusted to reflect actual conditions during the billing period just prior to a full year of operation.
c. The volume and strength of the wastewater for fee purposes shall be the reasonable maximum daily discharge of constituents.
d. When a connection is made based on the applicant's statement that the strength of the wastewater does not exceed normal domestic wastewater
in any constituent, and at the end of the billing period just prior to a full year of operation it is determined that the wastewater does exceed
domestic wastewater in strength, the VE may accept or reject the wastes and backcharge the applicant for fees plus penalties for the extra
strength waste or have the service disconnected and the premises closed. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-3-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to any facility served by the village, without having first complied with the terms of this
chapter. At minimum, all users are subject to the prohibited discharge standards in section 8-2-5-2 of this chapter, change notification in section 8-2-9-6
of this chapter and hazardous waste notification in section 8-2-9-9 of this chapter if applicable. Spill/slug control planning may also be necessary for
some nonresidential users as identified in section 8-2-6-3 of this chapter. All nonresidential users are subject to notification of potential problems in
section 8-2-9-7 of this chapter.
B. No user(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to
a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-3-6: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. An inspection fee as provided in section 8-2-3-4 of this chapter shall be paid to the village prior to issuance of the permit should it be determined that
the user is required to install any of the following structures:
1. Sampling Manhole Requirements: All users located in areas zoned industrial and such other users as required by the VE, except domestic users,
are required to install a monitoring manhole for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with the plans and specifications
approved by the VE. Each manhole shall be situated on the user's premises in an easement dedicated to the village.
Where such a manhole location would be impractical or cause extreme hardship on the user, the VE may concur with the manhole being constructed
in the public street or sidewalk area providing that the manhole is located so that it shall not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. In
those cases where a sampling manhole must be in a parking lot, a permanent barricade, such as a vertical pipe shall be placed around the manhole
to prevent vehicles from driving or parking over the manhole cover. A waiver for a sampling manhole will be handled on case by case basis by the
VE when it is determined that the discharge is solely from a domestic source and the site is not in an area zoned B-3, M-1, or M-2.
The sampling manhole shall be located on the sewer connection pipe at a point where there are no changes in grade or alignment for at least fifteen
(15) pipe diameters upstream and downstream from the manhole. The grade (slope) of the pipe shall not exceed one percent (1%) (1 foot per 100
feet) through the manhole and for a distance of fifteen (15) pipe diameters upstream and downstream from the manhole.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The manhole shall
be installed and maintained by the owner/user at his sole expense so as to be safe and accessible to the village engineer at all times. The failure of a
user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
2. Liquid Quantity Measurements: All significant industrial users may be required to install an open channel flow measuring device in said sampling
manhole. When required, the sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus or Parshall flume or equivalent, unless a weir or similar device is
approved by the village engineer.
The village engineer may, at his option, based on the water usage and/or waste loadings, require the user to install a device with a recording and
totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity. The device shall include a circular chart recorder, suitable to record seven (7) days of flow.
The equipment required to indicate, record and totalize the flow shall be located in a warm, dry location and be accessible to the village engineer for
reading. This equipment shall be installed and maintained by the user at his sole expense. Should the requirement be made, the user shall complete
installation of the flume and secondary flow measuring device based on the installation schedule approved for such device by the village engineer.
The user shall be required to calibrate and maintain the flow metering equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended procedures
and frequencies. Users who operate flow measuring devices will submit the procedure for operation and maintenance (O&M) to the village engineer.
The user shall further document O&M in a log which shall be available for inspection by village engineer or his designee. At minimum, the user shall
submit a semiannual calibration report performed by an outside representative by the deadline defined in the user's discharge permit. The user shall
submit flow records to the pretreatment coordinator monthly.
3. Sampling Equipment: The village engineer may, at his option, based on water usage and/or waste loadings or when the waste loads cannot be
accurately evaluated by time composite samples, require the user to install sampling equipment. This equipment shall be installed and maintained by
the user at his sole expense.
Users shall submit the procedure for operation and maintenance to the village engineer. The user shall further document O&M in a log which shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 207/525
available for inspection by village personnel. At minimum, the user shall submit an annual report confirming the accurate operation of the equipment
performed by an outside representative by the deadline defined in the discharge permit. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-3-7: ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES REQUIRED FOR THE USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. An inspection fee as provided by section 8-2-3-4 of this chapter shall be paid to the village engineer prior to issuance of the permit should it be
determined that the user is required to install any of the following structures:
1. Garbage Grinders: Garbage is required to be properly shredded in order to be approved to be discharged to the public sewer. Wastes classified as
properly shredded garbage contain all particles being carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any dimension. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of threefourths
(3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and approval of the village engineer.
2. Grease, Oil, And Sand Interceptors: Interceptors shall be provided in services connected to the village sewer system where it is determined that they
are necessary for the proper handling of the wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the village engineer and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as
needed, by the owner at his expense.
3. Grease Traps And Interceptors; Food Service Establishments: Grease traps and interceptors (collectively referred to as grease traps) are required to
be installed in all new food service establishments (FSE). All grease traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the VE based on an
evaluation of the volume and characteristics of the discharge in conjunction with the operating plan of the FSE. Grease traps may be required to be
installed or modified in existing FSE, FSE that have caused or contributed to overflows and/or blockages, and FSE that perform remodels as
determined by the pretreatment coordinator.
Each grease trap will be sized so that it will continuously produce an effluent containing less than one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) of fats,
oil and grease (FOG). All grease traps units shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such grease traps shall be
inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense. In the event that actual operations of the grease traps fail to
produce results that prevent prohibitive discharges as defined in section 8-2-5-2 of this chapter, the owner of the FSE will be required to install
additional pretreatment as necessary.
Waivers for installations at establishments only serving beverages and snack bars with no food preparation other than food warming will be handled
on a case by case basis by the VE. Variances will be issued based on installation limitations, grease generating capabilities and pumping frequency.
While variances may result in an alteration of the grease trap requirements, it will not waive the requirement to prevent prohibitive discharges through
alternate technologies and practices.
4. Neutralizing Basins: Laboratory and facilities commonly using acid or alkaline chemicals or compounds must install a neutralizing basin. All basins
shall be of type and capacity approved by the village and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such basins shall be
inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense.
Equipment and devices installed under this section shall not be considered to provide pretreatment to wastewater. Any user operating devices
installed in this section shall submit operating data as may be required by the village.
B. If the village engineer requires the equalization or pretreatment of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the village engineer, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. Said facilities shall
also be subject to approval by IEPA consistent with IEPA regulations.
Where flow equalizing or pretreatment facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner
at his expense. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-3-8: SEWER LINE MAINTENANCE/REPLACEMENT:
A. The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the private sewer line from their structure to the main sewer or public sewer
including the tap into the main/public sewer.
B. In the event the property owner finds it necessary to excavate the private sewer line for maintenance or replacement that shall be the property owner's
responsibility.
C. In those instances when the property owner has had to excavate and as a result the sidewalk, curb and street have been dug out, the property owner
will be responsible for the restoration of the street (surface and subsurface) curb and sidewalk.
D. In those instances where subsection C of this section is involved, it is recommended tunneling under the curb and sidewalk whenever practical.
Sidewalk and curb must be cut when removal is required.
E. All work, as it is related to the replacement and/or repair of the private sewer line, shall be in conformance with the village standard construction
specifications.
F. No work of any kind may be commenced on any sewer line without first notifying the village's public works department. This includes, without limitation,
any replacement of pipe, any repair of pipe, any flushing of pipe and any rodding or reaming of any pipe. In the event of an emergency occurring after
hours and requiring immediate attention, the property owner and/or the contractor shall contact the village by calling 911 and shall take only such action
as is necessary to halt the discharge of pollutants until directions are given by the superintendent of public works or a designee thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 208/525
G. All work, once complete, shall be inspected by a duly authorized agent of the village, and shall be approved only when it fully meets all applicable
codes, including those of the state of Illinois and the village.
H. The property owner and any contractor working for him, her or it, shall be jointly responsible for the notifications required under the terms of this section.
I. The property owner and any contractor working for him, her or it, shall be jointly liable for any discharge of pollutants caused by any violation of this
section.
J. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in sections 8-2-14-1 through 8-2-14-5 of this chapter. (Ord.
12-10-21, 10-15-2012)
8-2-4: INFORMATION REQUIRED OF NONRESIDENTIAL USERS:
8-2-4-1: INITIAL SURVEY (QUESTIONNAIRE):
A. The initial survey shall be completed in order to ensure that said users of the wastewater treatment works of the village adhere to and comply with the
restrictions and prohibitions set forth in section 8-2-5-2 of this chapter pertaining to prohibited discharges into the wastewater treatment works of the
village, and to facilitate the village engineer's investigation of apparent or suspected violations thereof. The requirements are as follows:
1. All existing or new nonresidential users, or in areas receiving sewer service from the village, shall complete and submit an initial survey on a form
provided by the village when requested by the village.
2. All users defined in subsection A1 of this section seeking to establish a new account for sanitary sewer service from the village or to establish a new
connection to the wastewater treatment works of the village shall file a completed initial survey with the village as a condition to the establishment of
such new sanitary sewer service account or connection to the wastewater treatment works of the village.
3. The initial survey shall contain a statement affirming the truth, completeness and correctness of information submitted signed by an authorized
representative of the "user" as defined in section 8-2-1-7 of this chapter.
4. All users defined above that fail to complete and submit to the village an initial survey shall be in violation of the provisions of this section and shall
be subject to all of the applicable penalties thereof, including, but expressly not limited to, the revocation of all permits and approvals previously
granted to the commercial or industrial user in question for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the wastewater treatment works of the village.
(Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-4-2: AFFIRMATION TO INITIAL SURVEY:
A. The village shall determine based on building, zoning and occupant usage whether the user shall be required to file a biennial affirmation of survey. The
users status will be defined by the village after review of the initial survey submitted as required in section 8-2-4-1 of this chapter.
B. Any user, defined in section 8-2-4-1 of this chapter, having filed an initial survey where the information remains true, complete and correct in all respects
may be required to submit a statement that the information remains current.
1. The statement is required to be signed by an authorized representative of the firm.
2. The statement will be due not later than January 31 of each year required.
3. All users defined above that fail to file an affirmation with the village shall be in violation of the provisions of this section and shall be subject to all of
the applicable penalties thereof, including, but expressly not limited to, the revocation of all permits and approvals previously granted to the
commercial or industrial user in question for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the wastewater treatment works of the village. (Ord. 06-01-
01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-4-3: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
A. Any user, defined in section 8-2-4-1 of this chapter, that makes any changes determined to be substantial as defined in section 8-2-9-6 of this chapter
shall report said changes as required in section 8-2-9-6 of this chapter. Reports of changed conditions are required to be made prior to the change. The
user may be required to file an updated survey as a result of changed conditions. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-4-4: ADDITIONAL SURVEY INFORMATION:
A. After review of the initial survey completed per section 8-2-4-1 of this chapter, all nonresidential users that have the potential to be defined a significant
industrial user shall be required to complete and file a more detailed wastewater survey on a form provided by the village. At a minimum, a description
of processes, water usage and wastewater characteristics for the facility will be required to be submitted. This information will be evaluated by the
village for determination of the requirement to issue a wastewater discharge permit per sections 8-2-7 and 8-2-8 of this chapter.
B. The information provided in the wastewater survey may be required to be revised and/or updated for the following conditions:
1. A report of changed conditions is filed as required in section 8-2-9-6 of this chapter,
2. An application for a wastewater discharge permit is required to be filed per sections 8-2-7 and 8-2-8 of this chapter, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 209/525
3. A reissuance of a wastewater discharge permit occurs per section 8-2-8-7 of this chapter.
C. In addition to the wastewater survey defined in section 8-2-4-1 of this chapter, categorical industrial users may be required to complete a category
specific survey that identifies subprocesses and processes performed at the site in order to define which subprocesses and processes are regulated by
a USEPA effluent guideline category. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-5: GENERAL DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS:
8-2-5-1: APPLICABILITY:
It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to any facility served by the village, without having first complied with the terms of this chapter.
Users must meet the most stringent applicable requirements and limitations at all times either as set forth in this chapter, or in individual wastewater
discharge permits, federal pretreatment standards as established by 40 CFR 403, or state of Illinois standards as codified in 35 Illinois administrative code
307. Said users shall provide the necessary wastewater treatment to achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations, and with any other pretreatment standards including local
limits and requirements, by applicable deadlines. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-5-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly to the village sewage works, any pollutant or wastewater contaminant which will
pass through, cause interference with, inhibition of, or upset to the operation of the POTW;
B. No user shall increase the use of potable or process water in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment in order to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard; and
C. No user shall contribute, or cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly, any of the following described pollutants, substances or wastewater into
the POTW:
1. Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, uncontaminated noncontact cooling water, storm water, surface and ground waters, subsurface
drainage, roof runoff, spill contaminant area runoff, footing drains or construction drainage except as specifically permitted by the pretreatment
coordinator;
2. Any solids, solid wastes, liquids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause
safety hazards, fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the facilities or personnel of the village, or to the operation of village POTW.
Materials considered in this regard are those with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty degrees
Celsius (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
3. Any solid, solid waste or viscous substance which shall or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer, or other interference to the operation of the
wastewater system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to: grease, grease trap wastes, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch
(1/2") in any direction, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains or hops, paper, wood, plastics, residues from gas,
tar or asphalt, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oils, mud or glass grinding or polishing waste, fatty acids or esters of fatty
acids, or any material which can be disposed of as trash;
4. Any wastewater containing noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases, which either singly or by their interaction are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or to interfere with, inhibit or upset any operation of POTW, including, but not limited to, prevention of entry into sewers for
their maintenance and repair;
5. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems or which necessitates the village taking special measures to counteract and/or alleviate the impact of the pollutant(s);
6. Any wastewater containing substances in sufficient quantity to interfere with the POTW;
7. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure, interfere with or upset any wastewater
treatment processes or facilities, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed limitation as set forth in the existing act, or the act as it may
be amended;
8. Any wastewater having a temperature which shall inhibit biological activity in the village's POTW facilities, but in no case heat in such a quantity that
the influent temperature at the sewage treatment plant to which the user discharges will exceed forty degrees Celsius (40°C) (104°F);
9. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel in the system. The pH limits shall be met at all times, and are not subject to averaging;
10. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or concentration (including any slug load), either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants which may interfere with, inhibit, or upset the POTW;
11. Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. Wastes prohibited
in this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW;
12. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
13. Any wastewater containing any organism, including viruses, considered pathogenic and/or detrimental to process organisms other than by direct
excrement and any other wastes defined as medical waste;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 210/525
14. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except in accordance with village, state and federal rules governing such
discharges;
15. Wastewater or wastes containing iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
16. Any leachate or remediation wastewater;
17. All trucked or hauled wastes;
18. Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of nonresidential wastes;
19. Any solid, solid waste or viscous substances that have caused an obstruction to the flow in a sewer that is eliminated by a professional service or
contractor;
20. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
21. Any substance with objectionable color which is not removed in the treatment processes, such as, but not limited to: dye waste, ink waste and
vegetable tanning solutions;
22. Any substances that inhibit the use of UV for disinfection purposes;
23. Wastewater or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters;
24. Any substance or combination of substances which shall cause the village facilities to be in violation of its NPDES permit(s), or to cause the
village's POTW to violate receiving stream water quality and/or general effluent discharge standards;
25. Any wastewater causing the POTW effluent to fail a toxicity test; or
26. Any substance which may cause the village's POTW effluents or sludges to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or interfere with the
reclamation processes. In no case shall a substance discharged to the village's POTW cause the village to be in noncompliance with any sludge use
or disposal regulations developed under section 405 of the act; or any regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the
resource conservation and recovery act, solids waste disposal act, toxic substance control act, or any state or local standards applicable to any
sludge management methods either being used or considered by the village.
D. Wastes prohibited in this section shall not be processed or stored in such manner that they could be discharged to the POTW treatment works. All
users with prohibited wastes in this section or those that have hazardous wastes as defined in section 8-2-9-9 of this chapter shall develop and
implement a spill prevention/slug control containment and countermeasures plan consistent with the requirements in section 8-2-6-3 of this chapter.
Notice requirements shall be permanently posted as provided in section 8-2-9-7, "Reports Of Potential Problems", of this chapter. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-
2006)
8-2-5-3: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
The pretreatment requirement shall apply to all nondomestic users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, promulgated by the USEPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act, currently discharging or scheduled to discharge to the village. The national categorical pretreatment
standards, found in 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405 - 471 are hereby incorporated into this chapter.
Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to the discharge from the process regulated by the standard or as otherwise specified by the
standard. Compliance with national categorical pretreatment standards is mandatory. The national categorical standards are contained in the IEPA
operating permit.
A. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
pretreatment coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c) unless specifically restricted by the
categorical standard. These equivalent limitations calculated in accordance of the following requirements are deemed pretreatment standards. Users
shall be required to comply with the equivalent limitations instead of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were
derived. An alternative pretreatment limit shall not be used if the alternative limit is below the analytical detection limit for any of the regulated
pollutants.
B. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit production, the village engineer may
convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating
effluent limitations applicable to individual users.
The village engineer, in calculating equivalent mass per day limitations, shall calculate such limitations by multiplying the limits in the standard by the
user's average rate of production. This average rate of production shall be based not upon the designed production capacity, but rather upon a
reasonable measure of the user's actual long term daily production during a representative year. For new sources, actual production shall be estimated
using projected production.
The village engineer, in calculating equivalent concentration limitations, shall calculate such limitations by dividing the mass limitations by the average
daily flow rate of the user's regulated process wastewater. This average daily flow rate must be based upon a reasonable measure of the user's actual
long term average flow rate, such as the average daily flow rate during the representative year.
C. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, pretreatment
coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) provided that the regulation allows the
wastewaters to be mixed and the user can supply the information necessary to issue an alternative limit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 211/525
D. A user may request a variance from USEPA based on fundamentally different factors. The request must comply with the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
E. A user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40
CFR 403.15.
All users that are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards are required to file reports as required in section 8-2-9-2 and subsection 8-2-9-3B
of this chapter, signed by an authorized representative. These reports shall include all information that the village deems necessary to make compliance
determinations. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-5-4: STATE LIMITS:
A. All users are subject to state standards and requirements as defined in 35 Illinois administrative code (IAC) 307. Specifically, the standards for
discharge of mercury and cyanide are as follows:
1. Mercury (35 IAC 307.1102)
a. Except as provided below, no person shall cause or allow the concentration of mercury in any discharge to a publicly owned or publicly regulated
sewer system to exceed the following level, subject to the averaging rule contained in 35 Illinois administrative code 304.104(a):
Constituent
STORET
Number
Concentration
Mercury 71900 0.0005 mg/l
b. It shall be an exception to subsection A1a of this section if the discharge is to a publicly owned or publicly regulated sewer system which is
required to meet a limitation less stringent than the 0.0005 milligram per liter mercury concentration in which case the discharge limitation shall be
the same as that applicable to the publicly owned or regulated sewer system to which it discharges.
c. It shall be an exception to subsection A1a of this section if all the following conditions are met:
(1) The discharger does not use mercury; or, the discharger uses mercury and this use cannot be eliminated; or, the discharger uses mercury only
in chemical analysis or in laboratory or other equipment and takes reasonable care to avoid contamination of wastewater; and
(2) The discharge mercury concentration is less than 0.003 milligram per liter, as determined by application of the averaging rules of 35 Illinois
administrative code 304.104(a); and
(3) The discharger is providing the best degree of treatment consistent with technological feasibility, economic reasonableness and sound
engineering judgment. This may include no treatment for mercury; and
(4) The discharger has an inspection and maintenance program likely to reduce or to prevent an increase in the level of mercury discharges.
d. The discharge of wastes from medicinal or therapeutic use of mercury, exclusive of laboratory use, shall be exempt from the limitations of
subsection A1a of this section if all the following conditions are met:
(1) The total discharge is less than two hundred twenty seven grams (227 g) (1/2 pound) of mercury (Hg) in any year;
(2) This discharge is to a public sewer system; and
(3) The discharge does not, alone or in conjunction with other sources, cause the effluent from the sewer system or treatment plant to exceed
0.0005 milligram per liter of mercury.
e. No person shall cause or allow any discharge of mercury to a publicly owned or publicly regulated sewer system which, alone or in combination
with other sources, causes a violation by the sewer treatment plant discharge of the water quality standard of 35 Illinois administrative code 302 for
mercury applicable in the receiving stream.
f. For purposes of permit issuance the agency may consider application of the exception of subsection A1b or A1c of this section to determine
compliance with this section. The agency may impose permit conditions necessary or required to assure continued application of the exception.
When subsection A1b or A1c of this section applies, the agency may impose an effluent limitation in the permit which allows the discharge of a
concentration of mercury greater than 0.0005 milligram per liter but not more than 0.003 milligram per liter.
2. Cyanide section (35 IAC 307.1103):
a. No waste to any public sewer system shall contain more than ten milligrams per liter (10 mg/l) total cyanide (STORET number 00720) provided
any sample tested shall not release more than two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) of cyanide when tested at a pH of 4.5 and at a temperature of sixty
six degrees Celsius (66°C) (150°F) for a period of thirty (30) minutes, except as permitted by subsection A2b of this section.
b. Upon application by a county, municipality, sanitary district or public utility and approval by the agency, based upon determination by the agency
that no violation of the effluent standards of 35 Illinois administrative code 304 will result and that no hazard to workers in such sewage works will
result, limited additional amounts of cyanide exceeding the standards in subsection A2a of this section may be discharged to the sewage works of
such county, sanitary district, municipality or public utility.
c. Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the authority of any county, municipality, sanitary district or public utility to impose any more
stringent standards or limitations on cyanide discharges to its sewage works.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 212/525
d. Any actions undertaken pursuant to subsection A2b of this section shall be subject to the limitations of 35 Illinois administrative code 307.2400(b)
(7). (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-5-5: LOCAL LIMITS:
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and interference. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
A. Nontoxic Limits For Discharge: No user should discharge any wastewater containing concentrations greater than the local limits as set forth in section
8-2A-2-1 of this chapter into any sewers that connect either directly or indirectly to the POTW. (Ord. 16-07-19, 7-18-2016)
B. Toxic Pollutants: No user should discharge any wastewater containing concentrations greater than the local limits as set forth in section 8-2A-2-2 of this
chapter into any sewers that connect either directly or indirectly to the POTW.
C. Quantities And Rates Of Discharge: The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in a wastewater discharge permit, to require control over
the quantities and rates of discharge.
D. Mass Limitation On Discharges: The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in a wastewater discharge permit, mass limitations rather
than concentration limitations on discharges. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
E. Additional Pollutants: The village reserves the right to set specific limits for those pollutants not identified in section 8-2A-2-1 or 8-2A-2-2 of this chapter
on a case by case basis for impacts caused to the treatment works including, but not limited to, interference, upset, pass-through and prevention of
beneficial sludge reuse. Those limits shall be set forth in a wastewater discharge permit per section 8-2-8 of this chapter.
1. Local limits for additional pollutants not identified in section 8-2A-2-1 or 8-2A-2-2 of this chapter will be noticed to the permit holder a minimum of
thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the wastewater discharge permit. In the event that the village receives written comment on said limit
during the comment period, the limit will take effect within sixty (60) days of the public notice date to allow review and comment by the village.
2. The village may alter the implementation date of a new site specific limit to another date as a provision of an implementation schedule that is
included as an attachment to the wastewater discharge permit as a result of pretreatment construction provided the waste does not exceed
prohibitive discharge limitations in section 8-2-5-2 of this chapter and the village can meet its limitations for water and biosolids in the interim.
3. In the event that the village can mitigate the impact for an interim period by using additional treatment alternatives, the user will be required to pay
those additional costs as a result of the mitigation. (Ord. 16-07-19, 7-18-2016)
8-2-5-6: RIGHT OF REVISION:
The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the POTW. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-5-7: SAMPLING FACILITIES:
A. Applicability: All nonresidential users may be required to install a monitoring manhole for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance
with the plans and specifications approved by the village engineer and subsection 8-2-3-6A1 of this chapter.
When required by the village engineer, a categorical industrial user shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber for the regulation location of the
categorically regulated discharge in the building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village.
B. Sampling Facility Operation And Maintenance:
1. Such facilities will be installed and maintained at all times at the user's expense. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that the sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. Installation will be consistent with the
requirements of section 8-2-3-6 of this chapter.
2. The manhole or chamber located on a building sewer discharge shall be easily accessible to authorized representatives of the village twenty four
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week and shall be located in dedicated easements.
3. The manhole or chamber for a categorical industrial user at a discharge location within the building shall be accessible to authorized representatives
of the village during normal operating hours.
4. Metered water supply may be used to determine wastewater flow if it is substantiated to the village that the metered water supply and wastewater
quantities are approximately the same, or where an adjustment agreed to by the village board of trustees is made in the metered water supply to
determine wastewater flow. In the event that the wastewater flow cannot be substantiated at any regulated location, the user will be required to install
flow monitoring consistent with subsection 8-2-3-6A2 of this chapter.
5. The sampling chamber, flow metering device, sampling equipment and documentation of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analysis
of samples shall be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection by the village engineer. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-5-8: MONITORING REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 213/525
A. Applicability: At minimum, all significant industrial users are required to sample based on the frequency stated in the wastewater discharge permit.
Other users are required to sample upon the request of the village engineer.
B. Frequency: All users with wastewater discharge permits must sample their effluent and report the results to the POTW at least twice yearly for those
parameters specified in the user's permit. The village shall have the right to perform its own sampling at any time.
C. Sample Collection:
1. Except as indicated in subsection C2 of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques.
2. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the pretreatment coordinator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling at minimum
collecting samples every fifteen (15) minutes during a twenty four (24) hour workday; or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. A proportional number of samples shall be collected for
wastewater discharges less than twenty four (24) hours. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
discharge limits.
3. Samples for fats, oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-5-9: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR
part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with
procedures approved by USEPA. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-5-10: PROTECTION OF VILLAGE SAMPLING AND FLOW METERING EQUIPMENT FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is owned or contracted by the village. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 06-
01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-6: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER:
8-2-6-1: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Each user shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 8-2-5 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by USEPA, the state, or the
pretreatment coordinator, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator for review, and shall be
acceptable to the pretreatment coordinator before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the user for the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the village engineer under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-6-2: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the pretreatment coordinator may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial
waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
B. The pretreatment coordinator may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the pretreatment coordinator, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the pretreatment coordinator and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (Ord.
06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-6-3: SPILL PREVENTION CONTAINMENT AND COUNTERMEASURES/SLUG CONTROL PLAN:
At minimum, any user that has on site either prohibited discharge materials as defined in section 8-2-5-2 of this chapter or hazardous waste as defined in
section 8-2-9-9 of this chapter shall develop and implement a spill prevention containment and countermeasures/slug control plan hereafter referred to as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 214/525
spill plan. At least once every two (2) years the pretreatment coordinator shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a revision to its spill
plan. The pretreatment coordinator may require any user to submit such spill plan or require modification of an existing spill plan based on changes that
have occurred at the site or in response to an incident that had the potential to impact the POTW. Review of such plans and operating procedures by the
village engineer shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility or spill plan as necessary to meet all requirements of this
chapter. A spill prevention containment and countermeasures/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals, including quantity of chemicals and type and number of storage containers;
C. Site diagram showing location of all tanks holding greater than or equal to two hundred fifty (250) gallons or areas containing eight (8) drums or more of
raw materials, prohibited wastes, hazardous wastes or final product. Identification and location of all liquid materials, as well as locations of drains to
the sanitary sewer in the vicinity of the storage area(s), is mandatory;
D. Procedures for immediately notifying the pretreatment coordinator of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 8-2-9-7 of this chapter;
E. Location of notice/signs posted in conspicuous places advising employees in English and the language of common use whom to call in the event of a
spill, accidental discharge of prohibited materials or a bypass of any part of a pretreatment system;
F. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response. Building containment structures or production equipment changes are considered procedures to prevent adverse spills. If
containment structures are connected to the sanitary sewer, a valve normally left in a closed position is required;
G. Documentation to ensure that all employees who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such discharge are advised of the emergency
notification procedures;
H. Documentation such as logs to verify inspection and maintenance procedures to prevent adverse impacts and confirm that said procedures are being
performed on a regular basis must be maintained incorporated. Logs are required to verify valves, if present, are closed in containment structures; and
I. Emergency telephone number (24 hour) off site and backup telephone number. If the spill plan has been submitted, any change in the telephone
numbers should be submitted within five (5) working days when revised. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-7: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION:
8-2-7-1: WASTEWATER INFORMATION AND ANALYSIS:
When requested by the pretreatment coordinator, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days
of the request. The pretreatment coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
Consistent with subsection 8-2-5-2C17 of this chapter, hauled waste is not permitted to be discharged. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-7-2: REQUIREMENT:
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the pretreatment
coordinator except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to this chapter may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.
B. The pretreatment coordinator may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
Any user subject to national categorical pretreatment standards that opts not to discharge said waste shall obtain a zero wastewater discharge permit
issued by the pretreatment coordinator. Holders of wastewater discharge permits issued under this section shall not be classified as significant
industrial users.
C. Other nonresidential users that may be required to obtain discharge permits, include, but are not limited to, noncategorical zero process dischargers,
food service establishments and those users or groups of users required to eliminate or control specified pollutants from their wastestream through the
development and implementation of a best management practice (BMP) plan. Holders of wastewater discharge permits issued under this section shall
not be classified as significant industrial users.
D. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 8-2-13 through 8-2-15 of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state,
and local law. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-7-3: EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 215/525
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date hereof and who
wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the pretreatment coordinator for a wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with section 8-2-7-5 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred
eighty (180) days of the effective date hereof except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 06-
01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-7-4: NEW CONNECTIONS:
Any user who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 8-2-7-5 of this chapter, must be filed at least ninety (90) days
prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommend pending review by the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-7-5: APPLICATION CONTENTS:
A. Application Requirement: All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit or zero wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application to the pretreatment coordinator. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
B. Application Contents: The pretreatment coordinator may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
1. All information required by sections 8-2-4-1 and 8-2-4-4 of this chapter;
2. Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the
facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
3. Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;
4. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
5. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
6. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation, and all points of discharge;
7. Time and duration of discharges; and
8. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. (Ord.
06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-7-6: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION:
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-7-7: DECISIONS:
The pretreatment coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a
complete wastewater discharge permit application, the pretreatment coordinator will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The
pretreatment coordinator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. If the pretreatment coordinator fails to act within ninety (90) days, a
request for permit application shall be deemed to be denied. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-8: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS:
8-2-8-1: DURATION:
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, likely for three (3) years, at the discretion of the pretreatment coordinator. Each
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-8-2: CONTENTS:
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to prevent pass6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 216/525
through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permit must contain:
1. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years;
2. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the village administrator in accordance with section
8-2-8-5 of this chapter, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
3. Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to
be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and
5. A statement of applicable civil penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such
schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
B. Wastewater discharge permit may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
1. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
2. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
3. Requirements that allow the use of bypass of the pretreatment system conditions consistent with 40 CFR 403.17 and section 8-2-16-3 of this
chapter;
4. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill prevention containment and countermeasures/slug control plan or other special
conditions including best management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
5. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
6. Development and implementation of best management practices plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
7. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
8. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;
9. Requirements for the zero discharge of process waste regulated by a national categorical pretreatment standard or local standard;
10. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
11. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the pretreatment coordinator to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules,
and regulations. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-8-3: APPEALS:
The pretreatment coordinator shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the
pretreatment coordinator to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the pretreatment coordinator fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be
considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the circuit
court for Lake County as applicable within sixty (60) days. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-8-4: MODIFICATION:
The pretreatment coordinator may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 217/525
B. To address substantial alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater
discharge permit issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the village's POTW, village personnel, or the receiving waters;
E. Violation of any terms or condition of the wastewater discharge permit;
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
I. To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation to either a new owner or operator as provided by section 8-2-8-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 06-
01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-8-5: TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permit shall not be transferred, assigned, or sold to a new owner or new user in different premises or to a new or different operation
in the same or different premises without the expressed written approval of the village administrator. If the premises sold or otherwise transferred by the
permittee to a new owner who will maintain the operation in the same premises, whether or not the seller will continue to operate the equipment or the
equipment is leased to another entity for its operation at the site of the original permittee, then the permit held by the seller and/or owner shall be reissued
by the village to the new owner and/or operator as a temporary permit; provided:
A. The new owner and/or operator notified the village administrator thirty (30) calendar days in advance of the transaction, and
B. The new owner and/or operator confirmed to the village administrator, within twenty four (24) business hours of the transaction, of completion of the
date of sale or execution of an operating contract, and
C. The new owner and/or operator shall immediately apply for a new permit in accordance with this chapter.
Failure to provide the sale/transfer notification defined in subsections A and B of this section, renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of said
sale/transfer date. It is further provided that the temporary permit shall only be effective for ninety (90) days after the date of sale or transfer. The village
shall have the same remedies for violation of temporary permits as it has for violation of other discharge permits. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-8-6: REVOCATION:
The pretreatment coordinator may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. Failure to notify the pretreatment coordinator of substantial changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the pretreatment coordinator of changed conditions pursuant to sections 8-2-9-4 and 8-2-9-6 of this chapter;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F. Refusing to allow the pretreatment coordinator timely access to the facility premises and records;
G. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to pay sewer charges;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 218/525
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business or operation ownership of a permitted facility; or
M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permit shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business or operation ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-8-7: REISSUANCE:
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, in accordance with section 8-2-7-5 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-8-8: REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
A. If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the village board of trustees shall enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the contributing municipality.
B. The village administrator shall request the following information from the contributing municipality at a frequency determined by the village board of
trustees:
1. A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharge to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
2. An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
3. Such other information as the pretreatment coordinator may deem necessary.
C. An intergovernmental agreement, as required by subsection B1 of this section, shall contain the following conditions:
1. A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits which are
at least as stringent as those set out in sections 8-2-5-2 and 8-2-5-5 of this chapter for the area to be served by the village. The requirement shall
specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the village's ordinance or local limits.
2. A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised nonresidential user inventory on at least an annual basis;
3. A provision specifying that pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement, will be conducted by the pretreatment coordinator;
4. A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the pretreatment coordinator with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
5. Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
6. Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge;
7. A provision ensuring the pretreatment coordinator access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator; and
8. A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intergovernmental agreement. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
Each user of the treatment works and facilities of the village shall provide reports as necessary to comply with this chapter and any wastewater discharge
permit. Reporting requirements may apply to users that are not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-1: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NONCATEGORICAL USERS:
Should the village find that a user, not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, does not meet pretreatment standards and requirements
applicable to its discharge, causes or contributes to a sewage treatment plant upset, or when analysis of waste or observation of the effect of such wastes
on the POTW indicate that said wastes cannot be treated satisfactorily at such works, or that said wastes are injurious to the POTW, or to the treatment
processes, or pollute the natural waters within the village, its service areas or the waters of the state of Illinois. Additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required by the village to meet pretreatment standards and requirements. Such facilities as the village may deem necessary for pretreatment of the wastes
shall be furnished by and at the expense of the user as a condition of the discharge of said wastes into the POTW or to any natural water within the village
service area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 219/525
A. Pretreatment Review: The pretreatment coordinator will require the user to initiate a pretreatment review through a telephone call, letter or certified
letter to the authorized representative of the user.
B. Pretreatment Initiation Meeting: A pretreatment initiation meeting will be held between the pretreatment coordinator and the user to discuss the problem
and the solution to said problem. If it is determined that changes in operation and maintenance, plant modifications, and/or the installation of
pretreatment equipment shall occur to resolve noncompliance, a schedule shall be established with events and completion deadlines agreeable to both
parties to resolve the noncompliance. A compliance agreement defining the agreed upon schedule will be sent from the village engineer to the user
shortly after the meeting. If a schedule for compliance acceptable to the pretreatment coordinator cannot be established, the matter will be referred for
further enforcement action consistent with the provisions of section 8-2-13 of this chapter as appropriate.
C. Progress Reports: Progress reports will be filed by the user on a schedule agreed to by the pretreatment coordinator and the user concerning the
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation). The user shall identify whether or not
it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule.
D. Final Report: A final report will be filed with the pretreatment coordinator by the user within ninety (90) days from the end of the schedule deadline to
verify the success or failure or the schedule objective chosen by the user. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-2: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USERS:
In the event that either the village, EPA or a user determines that the user is regulated as a categorical industrial user by standards and requirements
promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act, the following reports are required to be filed by the user with both the
village and USEPA in the event that the village does not have an approved pretreatment program status from USEPA:
A. Baseline Monitoring Reports: Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently
discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report which contains the information listed below.
At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report which contains the information listed
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
1. Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
2. Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
3. Description Of Operations: A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes.
4. Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
5. Measurements Of Pollutants:
a. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the pretreatment
coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and sampling must be
performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 8-2-5-8 of this chapter and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
section 8-2-5-9 of this chapter.
6. Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or pretreatment is required to
meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
7. Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
subsection 8-2-9-1B1 of this chapter.
8. Signature And Certification: All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 8-2-7-6 of this chapter.
B. Compliance Schedule Progress Reports: The following condition shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection A7 of this section:
1. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 220/525
2. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
3. The user shall submit a progress report to the pretreatment coordinator no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
4. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the pretreatment coordinator.
5. All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 8-2-9-6 of this chapter.
C. Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report containing the
information described in subsection A of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with section 8-2-7-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-3: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS/SELF-MONITORING REPORTS:
A. Significant Noncategorical Industrial Users:
1. Significant noncategorical industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the pretreatment coordinator but in no case less than twice per year
(on dates specified by the village) submit a report with a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by
the village. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with
the techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the village in lieu of
significant noncategorical industrial user. In such cases, the village will issue an attachment to the wastewater discharge permit that specifies the SIU
has determined the village will perform sampling and analysis semiannually. Where the village itself collects all the information required for the report,
the significant noncategorical industrial user will not be required to submit the report.
B. Categorical Industrial Users:
1. All categorical industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the pretreatment coordinator but in no case less than twice per year (in July and
January), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. At the recommendation of the village engineer and in
consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the village may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are to be submitted. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 8-2-7-6 of this chapter.
2. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order
shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
3. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the pretreatment coordinator,
using the procedures prescribed in sections 8-2-5-8 and 8-2-5-9 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
4. Where the village has imposed mass limitations on users as provided for by 403.6(d), the report required by subsection B1 of this section shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by the pretreatment standards in the discharge from the industrial user.
5. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the village in accordance with the procedures in 403.6(c), the report
required by subsection B1 of this section shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
the report required by subsection B1 of this section shall include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period.
C. Other Non-SIU Users:
1. Noncategorical zero dischargers, FSE and any firms regulated by BMP shall, at a frequency determined by the pretreatment coordinator, submit a
periodic report as defined in their wastewater discharge permits.
2. Reports may require sampling and analyses or some other measure to determine compliance. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-4: AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE CHANGE NOTIFICATION:
Any significant industrial user which changes the authorized representative of its company as defined in section 8-2-1-7 of this chapter shall file a change
notice with the village within thirty (30) calendar days. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-5: REPORTS FROM NONPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the pretreatment coordinator as required. (Ord. 06-01-
01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-6: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 221/525
Each user must notify the pretreatment coordinator of any planned substantial changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) calendar days before the change that results of an increase or addition. Shutdowns or deletions of
products are required to be noticed within five (5) working days of determination.
A. The pretreatment coordinator may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 8-2-7-5 of this chapter.
B. The pretreatment coordinator may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 8-2-7-7 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under section 8-2-8-4 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
C. For purposes of this requirement, substantial changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, the addition or
deletion of a shift, the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, the addition of a new process regardless of waste discharge or lack of
discharge, shutdown of a process, or addition or deletion of a product. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-7: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
A. Initial Accidental Discharge Notification: In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, any user shall immediately
telephone and notify the pretreatment coordinator of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, physical state of
discharge, chemical composition, concentration and volume, if known, and date and time of discharge as well as duration of the discharge, and
corrective actions taken by the user. The notification shall include what federal, state and local entities have also been notified by the user.
B. Written Accidental Discharge Notification: Within five (5) working days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the pretreatment
coordinator, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. The report may also include further defined dates when updates or progress reports will be submitted for activities not completed at the
time of the written notification.
C. Notification Not A Relief Of Liability: Such notifications shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred
as a result of damage to the POTW works, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
D. Employee Notification Procedure: A notice/sign shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees
in English and the language of common use whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection A of this section. Employers shall ensure
through documentation that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 06-
01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the pretreatment coordinator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the pretreatment coordinator within thirty
(30) calendar days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the pretreatment coordinator monitors at the user's facility
at least once a month, or if the pretreatment coordinator samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this
sampling. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-9: NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
A. Pursuant to 40 CFR 40 3.12(P) any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the USEPA regional waste
management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40
CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one
hundred kilograms (100 kg) of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent
such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents
in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred
eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 8-2-9-6 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this
section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of
subsections 8-2-9-2A, C, and 8-2-9-3B of this chapter.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40
CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
1. In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the pretreatment coordinator, the USEPA regional waste management waste division director,
and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 222/525
2. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
3. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-9-10: REPORT SUBMITTAL DUE DATES:
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility
serviced by the United States postal service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. In order to meet deadlines, reports may be faxed on the due
date to the village. The original of the fax is required to be mailed to the village postmarked within one working day of the fax. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-10: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
8-2-10-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The pretreatment coordinator and his designee(s), duly authorized agents of the village, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the United States
environmental protection agency, hereafter referred to as above named entities, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine
whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the
above named entities ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, analyses, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the above named entities will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
B. The village shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the user's operations.
C. The pretreatment coordinator may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated twice yearly (at 6 month intervals) to ensure their accuracy. The user shall submit these calibration reports semiannually to
the village with the periodic compliance reports required in section 8-2-9-3 of this chapter.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the pretreatment coordinator and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the pretreatment coordinator and his designee access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord.
06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-10-2: RECORD KEEPING:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the
results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the village, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the pretreatment
coordinator. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-10-3: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the pretreatment coordinator has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then the pretreatment coordinator may seek issuance of a search warrant from the circuit court of Lake County as appropriate. (Ord. 06-
01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-11: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring
programs, and the pretreatment coordinator inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the pretreatment coordinator and village attorney, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 223/525
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
"effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 06-01-01,
1-17-2006)
8-2-12: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
8-2-12-1: PUBLICATION FREQUENCY:
The pretreatment coordinator shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the
users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. (Ord.
06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-12-2: SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE DEFINITION:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other discharge violation that the pretreatment coordinator believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the pretreatment coordinator
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s) which the pretreatment coordinator determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-13: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
These remedies apply to the provisions of this chapter and to the local limits provisions of article A of this chapter. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-13-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pretreatment coordinator may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. The user shall respond in writing to the pretreatment coordinator by the date required, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the pretreatment coordinator to take
any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-13-2: COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS:
The pretreatment coordinator may enter into compliance agreements, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to
sections 8-2-13-4 and 8-2-13-5 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-13-3: SHOW CAUSE ORDER:
The pretreatment coordinator may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the village board and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 224/525
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) working days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-13-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pretreatment coordinator may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance
of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-13-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the pretreatment
coordinator or village attorney may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
A. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or be a prerequisite for, taking any other action at law or in equity against the user. (Ord.
06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-13-6: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The pretreatment coordinator may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons. The pretreatment coordinator may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the pretreatment coordinator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance
of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The pretreatment
coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the pretreatment coordinator that
the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 8-2-13-7 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
B. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing
the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the pretreatment coordinator prior to the date of
any show cause or termination hearing under section 8-2-13-3 or 8-2-13-7 of this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-13-7: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
In addition to the provisions in section 8-2-13-6 of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
C. Failure to report substantial changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 8-2-5 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 225/525
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 8-2-13-3 of this chapter
why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the pretreatment coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-14: PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
These penalties apply to the provisions of this chapter and to the local limits provisions of article A of this chapter. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-14-1: FAILURE TO REPORT OR NOTIFY:
A.
Reports Or Notifications Required By Nonsignificant Industrial Users: Any nonsignificant industrial user who fails to file any report of notification
so required by this chapter shall be subject to the following late filing fees:
1. First offense Issuance of warning citation
2. Recurring reporting violations $ 100.00
NOV response noncompliance 250.00
Cost per additional day past final
request deadline
50.00
3. Substantial changes
No written notification of substantial
changes whether discharged or not:
At startup or shutdown 500.00
Per each additional 15 days in
excess of 30 calendar days
100.00
B.
Reports Or Notifications Required By Significant Industrial Users: Any significant industrial user who fails to file any report of notification so
required by this chapter shall be subject to the following late filing fees:
1. First offense Issuance of warning citation
2. Recurring reporting violations $ 250.00
NOV response noncompliance 500.00
Cost per additional day past final
request deadline
100.00
3. Substantial changes
No written notification of substantial
changes whether discharged or not:
At startup or shutdown 1,000.00
Per each additional 15 days in
excess of 30 calendar days
200.00
C.
Notification Specific To Industrial Users With Wastewater Discharge Permits:
1. No written notification of change in
ownership and/or operation of facility,
or any portion thereof
$1,000.00
(Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-14-2: RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED:
Any entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or who causes damage to or impairs the village's wastewater works shall be liable to the village for
any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The village engineer or treasurer shall bill the entity for the costs incurred by the
village for any cleaning, repair, replacement or other investigative and/or corrective actions as a response to the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the
assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter enforceable under the provisions of section 8-2-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-14-3: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pretreatment coordinator may petition the circuit court of Lake County as
applicable through the village attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The pretreatment
coordinator may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 226/525
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 06-
01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-14-4: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the village for a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and of not more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation, per day per section 1-3-1 of this code. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
B. The pretreatment coordinator may recover costs, including, but not limited to, filing fees, witness fees, attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the village.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm
caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-14-5: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The pretreatment coordinator may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the village's enforcement response plan. However, the
pretreatment coordinator may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the pretreatment coordinator is empowered to
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-15: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
8-2-15-1: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The pretreatment coordinator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first
files a satisfactory bond, payable to the village, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the pretreatment coordinator to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-15-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The pretreatment coordinator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first
submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-
2006)
8-2-15-3: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. The user shall pay the entire expense incurred by the village for the shutoff and restarting of service before
the water will be turned on again. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-15-4: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is
hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the pretreatment coordinator. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance
shall be subject to the provisions governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the village for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying
said nuisance. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-15-5: CONTRACTOR LISTING:
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are hereby declared to be nonresponsible users and
therefore are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the village. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services
to the village held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of
the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-16: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 227/525
8-2-16-1: UPSET:
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of
subsection C of this section are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
3. The user has submitted the following information to the pretreatment coordinator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written report must be provided within 5 days):
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
and
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-16-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in subsection 8-2-5-
2A of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in subsections 8-2-5-3C1 through C26 (excluding subsections C2, C9 and C17) of this chapter if it can prove
that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or
interference or that either:
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or
interference; or
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the village was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-16-3: BYPASS:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. Bypass Allowances: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections C and D of this section.
C. Bypass Notifications:
1. Anticipated: If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the pretreatment coordinator, at least ten (10) working
days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 228/525
2. Unanticipated: A user shall submit oral notice to the pretreatment coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within twenty four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5)
working days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue;
and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The pretreatment coordinator may waive the written report
on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
D. POTW Actions:
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the pretreatment coordinator may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and
c. The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section.
2. The pretreatment coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the pretreatment coordinator determines
that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection D1 of this section. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2-17: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
8-2-17-1: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The village board may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the village's pretreatment program which may
include:
A. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring
reports submitted by users;
B. Fees for reviewing plans or construction relating to spill prevention containment and countermeasures/slug load plans as defined in section 8-2-6-3 of
this chapter;
C. Fees for responding to report of potential problems as defined in section 8-2-9-7 of this chapter;
D. Fees for filing appeals; and
E. Other fees as the village may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the village. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
ARTICLE A. LOCAL LIMITS REGULATIONS
8-2A-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
8-2A-1-1: ENACTMENT:
Pursuant to the requirements of the federal clean water act and regulations promulgated thereunder, the Illinois environmental protection act of 1970, as
amended, and in accordance with Illinois municipal code, this chapter establishing the local limits for the sewer use and pretreatment, hereafter known as
limits ordinance, is hereby enacted by the board of trustees of the village of Antioch. (Ord. 06-01-01, 1-17-2006)
8-2A-2: LOCAL LIMITS:
8-2A-2-1: NONTOXIC POLLUTANTS:
A. Standards: The following are the standards established by the board of trustees pursuant to the authority granted by subsection 8-2-5-5A of this
chapter. No user shall discharge any wastewater containing concentrations greater than the local limits as set forth below into any sewers that connect
either directly or indirectly to the POTW.
Pollutant
(Total Unless Otherwise Listed) Concentration
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 229/525
Oil and grease at non-food service establishment (FSE) or food manufacturing sites 100 mg/l
Oil and grease at FSE 200 mg/l
B. End Of Pipe Discharge Location: The village reserves the right to apply the FSE local limit as appropriate above at an end of pipe discharge location
that connects to the public sewer system in the event that a unique sampling location in the end compartment of a grease interceptor (GI) is not
available or there is no external GI.
C. Next Manhole Downstream: The village also reserves the right to apply the FSE local limit to the wastewater in the next sanitary sewer manhole
downstream of the facility in the event that there is neither a GI sampling location nor a sampling manhole at the site.
D. FSE Twenty Five Percent Requirement: The village reserves the right to use the twenty five percent (25%) rule in lieu of the FSE oil and grease local
limit in either FSE, non-FSE or manufacturing situations where an external grease interceptor exists.
1. The last section of an external GI at an FSE shall be measured to determine that the total volume of the GI being used for any food derived solids to
settle or accumulate plus the floatable grease derived materials that rise and accumulate, identified as a solids blanket and grease cap respectively,
is less than twenty five percent (25%) of the total design hydraulic depth as measured from the effluent discharge pipe to the bottom ("twenty five
percent requirement").
2. The village will apply the twenty five percent (25%) requirement above normally at the discharge side of the external grease interceptor prior to
mixing with any other wastewater from the contributing FSE's property. (Ord. 16-07-19, 7-18-2016)
8-2A-2-2: TOXIC POLLUTANTS:
The following are the standards established by the board of trustees pursuant to the authority granted by subsection 8-2-5-5B of this chapter. No user shall
discharge any wastewater containing concentrations greater than the local limits as set forth below into any sewers that connect either directly or indirectly
to the POTW. Multiple industrial discharges from a permitted facility may be combined with the following limitations upon approval by the POTW:
Pollutant
(Total Unless Otherwise Listed)
Concentration (mg/l)
Daily
Maximum Instantaneous
Arsenic 0.1
Cadmium 0.1
Chromium 8.5
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.3
Copper 1.0
Cyanide 0.3
Lead 0.6
Mercury 0.0005
Nickel 0.7
Selenium 1.3
Silver 0.5
Zinc 1.3
Individual wastewater discharge permits identify requirements for testing of these pollutants. (Ord. 16-07-19, 7-18-2016)
ARTICLE B. NORTHEAST SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
8-2B-1: NORTHEAST CONNECTION CHARGES:
A. Payment Obligation: The village northeast connection charge shall be paid by any owner of properties in the Antioch northeast service area and
properties contiguous to said area that:
1. Are not original county SSA parcels;
2. Have been lawfully annexed to the county SSA; and
3. Connect, directly or are tributary, to the village northeast sewer system.
B. Amount Of Payment: The village northeast connection charge shall be:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 230/525
1. One thousand four hundred forty dollars ($1,440.00) for each PE unit of sewer service capacity needed to serve the property (necessary PE units)
for which the charge is paid, provided that the village transfers to the owner of such property the number of connection fee credits that is equal to the
number of necessary PE units; or
2. If the village does not own or have the ability to acquire the number of connection fee credits that is equal to the number of necessary PE units, then
the charge shall be equal to the sum of nine hundred twenty nine dollars ($929.00) for each necessary PE units, plus five hundred eleven dollars
($511.00) for each PE unit of connection fee credit transferred to such property owner; or
3. If connection fee credits are no longer available for acquisition by the village, then the charge shall be equal to the sum of nine hundred twenty nine
dollars ($929.00) for each necessary PE unit.
C. Time Of Payment: The village connection charge shall be paid at or before the time of, and as a condition to, the execution by the village of an
application to the Illinois environmental protection agency for a permit to connect the property for which the village northeast connection charge is paid.
D. Acquisition Of Connection Fee Credits: The village is hereby authorized to acquire connection fee credits from the owners of original SSA parcels that
are located in the Antioch northeast service area for the price of nine hundred forty dollars ($940.00) for each PE unit of connection fee credit acquired.
(Ord. 02-10-43, 10-28-2002)
ARTICLE C. FEES FOR NONRESIDENTIAL SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS AND
USAGE
8-2C-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
8-2C-1-1: ENACTMENT:
Pursuant to the requirements of the federal clean water act and regulations promulgated thereunder, the Illinois environmental protection act of 1970, as
amended, and in accordance with Illinois municipal code, this article establishing the fees and charges for this chapter, hereafter known as fees ordinance,
is hereby enacted by the board of trustees of the village of Antioch. (Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-2: SEWER EXTENSION AND CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
8-2C-2-1: CAPITAL RECOVERY FEES:
The following are the fees established and assessed by the board of trustees pursuant to the authority granted by section 8-2-3 of this chapter for
properties connected to the village of Antioch treatment works through a sewer owned by another entity:
Capital recovery fees See subsection 13-1-3C of this code
Each nonresidential connection for each population equivalent.
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-2-2: ANNEXATION FEES:
The following are the fees established and assessed by the board of trustees pursuant to the authority granted by sections 8-2-2 and 8-2-3 of this chapter.
The fees will be calculated on the estimated population of the property to be served by the village, using the following schedule:
Annexation fees See subsection 13-1-8B of this code
Each nonresidential connection for each population equivalent.
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-2-3: BUILDING SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT FEES:
The following are the fees established and assessed by the board of trustees to be charged for sanitary sewer connections pursuant to the authority
granted by section 8-2-3 of this chapter:
Connection fees See section 13-1-3 of this code
Each nonresidential connection for each population equivalent.
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-2-4: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 231/525
Application and inspection fee Permit and 1 inspection, $50.00
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-2-5: MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
See section 13-1-2 of this code.
Application and inspection fee Permit and 1 inspection
Additional inspection fee if outside
regular 40 hours
Per inspection
Reinspection for deficient work Per inspection
Inspection fee for monitoring facilities Per location
Inspection fee for additional structures
per section 8-2-3-7 of this chapter
Per structure
Failure to properly barricade fee Per incident
Inspection fee when no permit obtained
prior to digging
Per inspection
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-3: SEWER CONNECTION PROCEDURES:
8-2C-3-1: PRETREATMENT FEES:
The following charges shall apply to those users subject to the pretreatment program with discharge permits based on water usage:
Monthly Water Usage (Gallons) Monthly Charge
0 _ 1,000 $200.00 (minimum)
1,000 _ infinity Reserved
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-3-2: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION:
Wastewater discharge permit application Per application $100.00
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-4: INFORMATION REQUIRED OF NONRESIDENTIAL USERS:
8-2C-4-1: MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
The following are miscellaneous fees established and assessed by the board of trustees pursuant to the authority granted by this chapter:
Sampling and preparation fees Per hour, $50.00
Sampling and preparation fees Per analyses, as quoted by lab
Costs of sample analyses Per analyses, as quoted by lab
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
8-2C-4-2: RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED:
Any cleaning, repair, replacement as a
response to the violation or discharge
Per hour, $100.00
Any other investigative and/or corrective Per hour, $100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 232/525
actions
Fees for review plans or construction
relating to SPCC/slug control plans
Per hour, $100.00
Fees for responding to report of potential
problems
Per hour, $100.00
Fees for preparing enforcement actions
or filing appeals
Per hour, $100.00
(Ord. 06-02-02, 2-6-2006)
Chapter 3
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
8-3-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is:
1. To protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants
which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply system;
2. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety;
3. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and
consumer's potable water systems;
4. To provide for a single sourced data compliance provider to ensure safety of the water supply and improved accountability for testing, maintenance,
and recordkeeping; and
5. To ensure that duly authorized users of cross connection devices bear the entire cost associated with the use, testing, and maintenance of such
devices.
B. Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the village. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-2: PUBLIC POLICY:
The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back siphonage
of contaminants through the customer's water service connection. If, in the judgment of the superintendent of water or his authorized representative, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water shall give notice to the
consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such
approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall
constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of
installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in subsection 8-3-6D of this chapter for a period of at least five (5) years. The superintendent of
water may require the consumer to submit a cross connection inspection report to the village to assist in determining whether or not service line protection
will be required. All cross connection inspections shall be conducted by a cross connection control device inspector certified by the Illinois environmental
protection agency. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED: Overflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation For Cross Connection Control Of The University Of
Southern California, Association Of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the
National Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the
water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system; water from a source such as
wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted, contaminated, objectionable, or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW COMPLIANCE MANAGER: An independent company designated by the village board via resolution from time to time and charged with the
responsibility for periodically advising water consumers of the need for periodic testing of any backflow prevention device, and which maintains the
database of testing information that the village is required to maintain pursuant to applicable regulations of the agency.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 233/525
used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois plumbing code and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public
water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's
water system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable
water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the other.
DIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection formed when a water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE standard 1015. A
double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water tightness
of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of
the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well being
of consumers. The word "severe", as used to qualify health hazard, means a hazard to the health of the user that could be executed to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
INDIRECT CROSS CONNECTION: A cross connection through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced
into a safe potable water system.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a
plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 604.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to, and including, pressure tanks in water supply systems.
Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and updated ventilation system of any
building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble, from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private
sewage disposal system five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate
extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID: Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as
would constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters;
B. Process waters;
C. Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
D. Cooling waters;
E. Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
G. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well
structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or
intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per year. A public water supply to either a community water supply or a
noncommunity water supply.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 234/525
together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard
1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of
leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check
valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be
fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system
and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross connection control devices and methods located within that
customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water
supply system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
VILLAGE: The village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-4: WATER SYSTEM:
A. The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
B. The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the potable water
system under the control of the superintendent of water up to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
C. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water supply
distribution system.
D. The public water supply distribution system shall include the network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water system.
E. The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-5: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
Connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality
are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
A. No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and
chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency.
B. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-6: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
A. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the approved cross connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross connections within the consumer's premises and testing, repair and maintenance of cross connection control devices
within the consumer's premises.
B. On request by the superintendent of water, or his authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or
systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the superintendent of water for
the verification of information submitted by the consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross connection inspection results.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are
actual or potential cross connections to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable water
system. All cross connection control or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3.
D. It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water system by ensuring that:
1. Removal Or Approval: All cross connections are removed; or approved cross connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and
back siphonage.
2. Proper Installation: Cross connection control devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 235/525
3. Inspection: Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the agency
as a cross connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
4. Testing And Records:
a. Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually, or more frequently, if recommended by the manufacturer.
b. Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4.
c. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
d. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
(1) Date of each test;
(2) Name and approval number of person performing the test;
(3) Test results;
(4) Repairs or servicing required;
(5) Repairs and date completed; and
(6) Servicing performed and date completed. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-7: REQUIRED PROTECTION:
A. An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative
code 890, and the agency's regulations, 35 Illinois administrative code 680. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the superintendent of water, actual or potential hazards to
the public water supply system exist.
B. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
1. Premises having in auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the superintendent of water and the
source is approved by the agency;
2. Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall include
premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under
the sanitary control of the superintendent of water;
3. Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of the superintendent of water and/or the cross connection control device inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist;
4. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross
connection survey; or
5. Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
C. An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to the public water supply as described in the plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890, and the agency's regulations 35 Illinois administrative code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the
superintendent of water determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
Car washes
Chemical plants
Factories
Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks
Food or beverage processing plants
Gas stations
Grocery stores
Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes
Laboratories
Meat markets
Metal plating industries
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 236/525
Pesticide, herbicide or extermination plants and trucks
Petroleum processing or storage plants
Piers, docks, waterfront facilities
Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors
Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping stations
Stores where water is used for processing products (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-8: TYPES OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
A. The type of protection required under section 8-3-7 of this chapter shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
1. An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard;
2. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard; or
3. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not
dangerous to health.
B. The type of protection required under section 8-3-7 of this chapter shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device.
C. Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
1. The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals;
2. Water is pumped into the system from another source;
3. Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; or
4. There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into the fire safety system.
D. All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines and a
double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-9: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
A. All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this chapter shall be approved by the Research Foundation For Cross Connection Control Of
The University Of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society Of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards
Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specification.
B. Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer
of the device shall be performed. The manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on site. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-10: INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE AND REPORTING:
A. It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow prevention devices required by this chapter are installed to have inspections,
tests, maintenance and repairs made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in the
manufacturer's instructions:
1. Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or bypassed air
gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
2. Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five (5) days.
3. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5) days.
B. Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing.
C. Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent test or visual inspection, name of tester and type and date of repairs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 237/525
D. A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
1. Date of each test or visual inspection;
2. Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual inspection;
3. Test results;
4. Repairs or servicing required;
5. Repairs and date completed; and
6. Servicing performed and date completed.
E. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this chapter are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay, as required by subsection A of this section.
F. Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
superintendent of water.
G. It shall further be the duty of the water consumer to provide a complete record of all inspections and repairs performed under this chapter to the
village's designated backflow compliance manager. Such reporting shall be made by the duly licensed contractor performing the inspection or repair
work, but the consumer remains ultimately responsible to ensure that complete and accurate records are provided in a timely fashion. Any fees
charged for this service by the backflow compliance manager shall be promptly paid by the water consumer. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-11: BOOSTER PUMPS:
A. Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device
designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
B. It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the superintendent of
water, at least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-12: VIOLATIONS:
A. The superintendent of water shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any
backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the superintendent
of water, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cutoff required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working order.
B. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with
these regulations and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of water, and the required reconnection fee is paid.
C. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this
chapter and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of water utilities/operations.
D. Neither the village, the superintendent of water or its assents or assigns shall be liable to any customers of the village for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not said
termination of the water supply was with or without notice.
E. The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost
of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
8-3-13: PENALTY:
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violation.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the fine provided, shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the village by reason of such violation, whether the same was caused before or after notice. By way of example and not
limitation, any such expenses may include all costs associated with any isolation or shutoff of service, cleanup of contaminated water, disposal of
contaminated water, testing of the village water supply and restoration of service.
C. In addition thereto, the village shall be entitled to injunctive relief as may be appropriate in order to prevent the contamination of the water system, and
may institute a cutoff of water service without notice if, in the opinion of the water superintendent, a significant hazard exists to the jeopardy of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 238/525
public health and safety.
D. If the village files any suit or is involved in any legal action to enforce any provision of this chapter, the entire cost of the same, including attorney fees,
and all related expenses, shall be awarded to the village as a part of any judgment or other award entered by any court or jurisdictional tribunal, and
the same shall become a charge and lien upon the property of the water consumer sued or claimed against. (Ord. 14-03-04, 3-3-2014)
Chapter 4
PUBLIC PARKS
8-4-1: REGULATIONS:
A. Hours: From April 1 of each year to October 31, village parks shall be open from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. From November 1
of each year to March 31 of the following year, village parks shall be open from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Any person in the
parks at any other time that is not specifically authorized to be there by the parks director or pursuant to other statutory authority (such as police, fire or
paramedic personnel) shall be deemed to be guilty of a trespass to land.
1. The village may post longer hours for certain parks or for certain occasions, which shall extend the hours that particular park may be open. Such a
posting shall not affect the hours for any park other than the posted park.
2. Extended hours for the use of a park may be obtained through special arrangement with the village parks director, or may be posted on special
occasions by the parks director.
3. In the event of an emergency, the village reserves the power to close parks to protect the public or public property, and to open appropriate park
shelters or facilities as may be needed to provide emergency shelters. (Ord. 12-07-14, 7-16-2012)
B. Use Of Park Assets: All use of park equipment, trails, grounds, buildings, equipment and other facilities is at the sole and complete risk of the users,
and all persons intending to use any such park assets are cautioned to ensure that they understand the risks of the use of such assets prior to using
the assets or allowing their children or wards to use the assets.
1. Participation in any and all park sponsored programs is at the sole and complete risk of the users or their parents or guardians, and all persons
intending to participate in any such programs, or to allow their children to participate, are cautioned to ensure that they understand the risks of the
use of such assets prior to using the assets or allowing their children or wards to use the assets.
2. The village has a park watch program in effect, and all persons using the park assets should be aware that improper use of park equipment,
trespassing or criminal damage to any park assets will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
3. All children under the age of ten (10) years must be accompanied by an adult at all times unless the child is in a class or other program being offered
at that time by the parks department.
4. Certain park equipment is not appropriate for the use of younger children and for that reason, parents and guardians are cautioned to exercise
reasonable discretion in allowing their children to use the equipment, because the risk of the use falls upon the user as noted above.
C. Pets: All pets must be on leashes at all times, and all excrement must be picked up and disposed of properly by the owner of the pet.
D. Smoking: Smoking is prohibited in or on any park building, shelter or designated grounds. (Ord. 05-02-02, 2-7-2005)
8-4-2: PROHIBITIONS:
The following activities are expressly prohibited in all parks:
A. Climbing on roofs, trees, buildings or equipment other than play equipment specifically designed for climbing activities;
B. Throwing any objects other than frisbees or sports balls (baseballs, softballs, tennis balls, basketballs, badminton birdies and the like), including, but not
limited to, sand, stones, sticks and woodchips;
C. Jumping off of or onto any equipment other than equipment that is specifically designed for such an activity, such as climbing areas or skatepark ramps;
D. Fires, other than charcoal or propane cooking fires in proper grill equipment;
E. Consumption of alcoholic beverages unless a proper permit is first obtained from the parks director;
F. Snowmobiles, dirt bikes, scooters, so called "pocket bikes", all-terrain vehicles and any other gasoline powered equipment that is not licensed for on
street driving by the Illinois secretary of state;
G. Driving any licensed vehicle on any area other than the roads, parking lots and driveways provided in the parks for such purposes;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 239/525
H. It is strictly forbidden to rollerskate, in-line skate, skateboard or ride a bicycle or scooter on any tennis court, basketball court, pavilion area, bench,
picnic table or other park equipment, provided however, that skateboards, bicycles and in-line skates may be used only in the designated skatepark in
strict accordance with posted rules for the use of such equipment;
I. Driving any licensed vehicle on any road or parking lot in any park at a speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour;
J. Driving any licensed vehicle larger than a one ton pickup truck in any park unless the same is being used at that time to maintain, improve or operate
that park;
K. Disobeying any regulatory sign posted on the roadways by the parks department to regulate traffic within any park;
L. Repairing any vehicle within any park except for minor repairs to any vehicle which, after entering the parks and properties, breaks down, such as
changing a flat tire;
M. Hindering any village employee from performing his or her duties within any park;
N. Offering any articles for sale, exchange or barter within any park except when authorized by special permit from the village board;
O. Advertising any product or service within any park by distributing fliers, using loudspeakers or other means, except when authorized by special permit
from the village board;
P. Harming any animal or bird;
Q. Planting any vegetation or removing any vegetation without the express public consent of the village board or park commission;
R. Marking, defacing or otherwise damaging any park equipment, building, roadway, parking area, washroom or portable toilet, plant, structure or facility;
S. Sleeping in any park overnight;
T. Obstructing the flow of traffic or the free passage of any person moving lawfully within any park;
U. Dumping any articles of any kind within any park;
V. Entering into any restricted area of any park;
W. Being intoxicated while in any park or under the influence of illegal drugs;
X. Having a blood alcohol content greater than 0.08 percent while in any park;
Y. Creating any excessive and unnecessary noise or otherwise disturbing the peace while within any park; (Ord. 05-02-02, 2-7-2005)
Z. Parking of any motorized vehicle owned by any person or entity other than the village of Antioch in any park at any time that the park is not open. (Ord.
12-07-14, 7-16-2012)
8-4-2-1: LIGHTNING CONDITION:
When a lightning condition is detected in the vicinity of an outdoor facility then all activity must cease and coaches should seek shelter for all participants.
Activity should not resume until thirty (30) minutes after the last observed lightning or thunder (recommended by the National Lightning Safety Institute).
(Ord. 06-12-48, 12-18-2006)
8-4-3: AQUA CENTER AND SKATE/BIKE PARK:
Due to the nature of the dangers inherent in swimming and other water related activities, and due to the nature of the dangers inherent in rollerskating, inline
skating and skateboarding, the parks director is specifically empowered to post a supplemental set of rules governing all activities at the Aqua Center
and at the skate/bike park, and to take appropriate action to enforce such rules, including, but not limited to, the expulsion of violators and the revocation of
pool, skating and/or biking privileges for repeated or gross violations. (Ord. 10-05-17, 5-17-2010)
8-4-4: PERMITS; REGISTRATION:
The parks director is empowered with the discretion to grant permits for the exclusive use of the parks facilities, including the pavilions, grassy picnic areas
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 240/525
and other facilities.
A. Issuance Of Permits: The parks director may establish routine practices, reservation lists and supplemental rules for the issuance and management of
permits for the exclusive use of parks facilities. (Ord. 05-02-02, 2-7-2005)
B. Antioch Skate/Bike Park: The village specifically recognizes the practical difficulty of enforcing safety rules in a facility such as the skate/bike park, and
as such, the rules for the use of the skate/bike park shall be enforced by appropriate village authorities to the extent practicable. In no circumstances
shall the village be considered the guarantor or insurer of the safety of the facilities in the skate/bike park or of the persons using those facilities. (Ord.
10-05-17, 5-17-2010)
C. Alcohol In The Parks:
1. The parks director is empowered with the discretion to grant permits for the serving of alcoholic beverages for private functions only in the parks,
provided, however, that no such license shall be granted for a private function in the Aqua Center.
2. The parks director may establish routine practices and supplemental rules for the issuance and management for the granting of permits to serve
alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, ensuring that the applicant is at least twenty one (21) years of age, that the serving of such
beverages will not violate any laws of the state of Illinois nor any ordinances of the village of Antioch, and that any required insurance policy be
issued and filed with the parks department.
3. All requests for the issuance of a liquor license for public service of alcoholic beverages must be presented to the liquor commissioner pursuant to
the local and state liquor codes.
D. Violation: Any violation of a permit for exclusive use of a park facility or area or for the serving of alcohol shall be deemed a prohibition on that person
(and his or her immediate family) from obtaining any further permit from the parks director. (Ord. 05-02-02, 2-7-2005)
8-4-5: FEES:
Any and all programs for which a fee is charged, as well as all licenses issued by the parks director, shall be subject to the fees shown on the fee schedule
posted in the parks office and as set from time to time by the parks department with the approval of the village board.
A. Schedule Of Fees: Due to the fact that the village parks are funded by the tax dollars contributed from property taxes paid by village residents, the fee
schedule on file with the parks director may set forth two (2) levels of fees: one charged to nonresidents and a discounted fee offered to residents. For
the purpose of the assessment of fees, and for the simplicity of administration by the parks department, any person with a postal zip code of 60002 is
considered a resident and anyone else is considered a nonresident. The parks department may request photo ID or other proper identification in
determining the amount of fees to charge any person. The parks director may, in conjunction with the joint management of shared parks pursuant to
the intergovernmental agreement between the village and Antioch Township, also provide for a third level of fees for persons who are residents of
Antioch Township, but who are not residents of the village. Such a fee level shall be maintained on file in the same manner as all other fee levels.
B. Waiver Of Fees: The parks director has only the following limited discretion to waive any fees for any group or organization for any activity or license
which is subject to the fee schedule on file in the parks office:
1. For bona fide religious groups and churches whose status as such has been recognized by the internal revenue services of the United States;
2. For charitable organizations who have been granted nonprofit status under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of the United States;
3. Only in circumstances where there is no profit motive intended or obtained by the applicant for the use of the parks or the activity;
4. The village board reserves all other power to waive any fees on a case by case basis upon petition therefor.
C. Refund Policy: No refunds will be granted unless a program is canceled or changed by the parks and recreation department. In certain cases of
hardship, consideration can be given by the parks director and will take into account the specific effect on the program the refund is requested for.
D. Discount Policy: The parks director shall provide a ten percent (10%) discount on selected designated programming for multichild registrations to
families in the same program. The discount will only apply when registering for programs within the same time frame and it will be deducted from the
least expensive program participant. Proof of family relationships and residency in the same household may be required. (Ord. 16-05-14, 5-16-2016)
8-4-6: WAIVER OF LIABILITY:
All participants using park equipment or enrolled in any park program are deemed to do so voluntarily and with full knowledge of the risks of use of any
equipment and the inherent risks of any physical activity. The parks director, with the assistance of the village attorney, shall prepare and keep on file a
routine waiver of liability form that must be signed by all participants prior to their enrollment in any organized activity sponsored by the parks department.
Such a waiver shall advise the participants of the fact that the activity or equipment is used of their own volition, that the village does not provide any
health insurance or accidental injury coverage to the participants and that the participant agrees to indemnify and hold the village and the parks
department harmless from any and all injuries and claims arising out of the use of the equipment or the participation in the program. A waiver form must be
signed by the parent or guardian of any minor prior to the minor being accepted as a participant in any program. A minor is a person defined as such by
755 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1. (Ord. 05-02-02, 2-7-2005)
8-4-7: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 241/525
The following provisions shall apply to any violation of this chapter, provided, however, that any act that is otherwise a violation of any other provision of
this code or of any state or federal law may be prosecuted as such as a separate offense in addition to the prosecution of any action brought hereunder:
A. General Penalty: Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates
any provision of this chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty
set forth in section 1-3-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed to have occurred on each day the violation occurs or continues.
B. Restitution: In addition to any fine imposed, the court in any prosecution resulting in a finding of guilt involving any violation of any provision of this
chapter shall include as a part of the sentence an order upon the offender to pay restitution to the parks department, consisting of the costs and labor
for any damage done to any park property.
C. Parental Responsibility: In the event a fine or order of restitution is levied by the court upon any minor pursuant to subsections A and/or B of this
section, the parents and/or legal guardians of any such minor shall bear joint and several liability for the entire fine and/or order of restitution.
D. Other Remedies: The foregoing fine and restitution provisions shall not limit the power of the village to pursue any and all other remedies provided at
law or in equity for any violation of this chapter or for any damage or other harm to the property of the parks department. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
ARTICLE A. CROSS LAKE
8-4A-1: BOATING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
NO WAKE SPEED: That speed at which a boat moves in order that wake or wash is not created while maintaining steerage control.
SHORE ZONE: That water area within two hundred feet (200') of the shoreline or in a water area clearly marked by buoys or signs as a bathing, fishing
or otherwise restricted area.
TRAFFIC LANE: That water area beyond two hundred feet (200') of the shoreline, where power craft may operate and create wakes and washes
during the hours set forth under this section.
B. No Wake Area Designated: The entire waters of Cross Lake, located in the state of Illinois, are hereby designated a no wake area as follows:
1. No Wake Hours: No person shall operate any watercraft at more than slow no wake speed between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. The no wake hours are to be in effect during all periods of open (ice free) water.
2. No Wake Speed: No wake speed shall be maintained by all power craft within the shore zone of the Illinois side of Cross Lake at all times.
C. Direction Of Movement: All power craft must proceed in a counterclockwise pattern on the lake, in the traffic lane, whenever the power craft is engaged
in towing a skier, aquaplane or similar device, or simply cruising.
D. Signs And Buoys: The village shall supply the marker buoys, and said marker buoys shall be placed in the waters of Cross Lake by the Oakwood Knolls
Homeowners' Association under the supervision of the Antioch police department.
Signs and other postings relative to the provisions of subsection B of this section shall be placed at the entrance to and exit from the Oakwood Knolls
Channel and at the boat launch areas by the Oakwood Knolls Homeowners' Association under the supervision of the Antioch police department. (1976
Code § 103.001)
E. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section will be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. Each violation of
this section shall be considered a separate offense. (1976 Code § 103.001; amd. 2003 Code)
8-4A-2: FISHING:
A. Each person fishing in the waters of Cross Lake shall be allowed to take and keep no more than five (5) largemouth bass and five (5) walleye per day,
and the fish to be kept must be of a length of fourteen inches (14") or more. This fish limitation is for the purpose of increasing of brood stock and
increasing the size of fish desirable to be taken by hook and line.
B. Anything in this section not to the contrary, this section adopts by reference 515 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-5 et seq. (1976 Code § 94.045)
8-4A-3: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 242/525
ARTICLE B. WILLIAM E. BROOK MEMORIAL WETLAND SANCTUARY AND
ENTERTAINMENT CENTER
8-4B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the wetland sanctuary restoration project is to enhance and restore wetland and to attract bird and other wildlife, to create a habitat for
wildlife and to increase access for the use and enjoyment of the general public. (Ord. 00-06-10, 6-5-2000)
8-4B-2: REGULATIONS:
The use of the William E. Brook memorial wetland sanctuary and entertainment center and its facilities shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Traffic:
1. Wetland Property: Pedestrian traffic is limited to walking paths and boardwalks. Only authorized personnel may encroach on the wetland areas for
the purpose of maintenance, restoration and scientific research.
2. Entertainment Center: No bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades or motorized vehicles of any type, except official government vehicles, shall be allowed
in the sanctuary.
B. Hours: The William E. Brook memorial wetland sanctuary and entertainment center shall be open yearround as follows:
1. Spring, summer and fall from March 1 through December 14. During spring, summer and fall, the center is open from sunrise to sunset.
2. Winter from December 15 through February 28. The sanctuary's sledding hill, toboggan hill and ice skating pond shall be open to the public for the
winter from December 15 through February 28. Hours shall be daily from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
C. Use Of Ice Skating Pond And Sledding Hills:
1. Ice Skating Pond: The ice skating pond will only be used when posted by the village as safe for skating. If not posted, no individual may use the
skating pond. Posting shall be by signage.
2. Sledding Hills: The use of the sledding or toboggan hills shall only be authorized when posted by the village pursuant to subsection B2 of this
section. No ropes shall be used to tie sleds together.
D. Fire And Heating Devices: No fires or other heating devices shall be used unless authorized in writing by the village.
E. Smoking: There shall be no smoking in the sanctuary.
F. Alcoholic Beverages: No alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be carried upon, delivered or consumed within the entertainment center before, during or
after performances, except as provided by vendors authorized by license through the village. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed at any time in the
sanctuary.
G. Additional Rules And Regulations: The use of the center shall be subject to all of the rules and regulations outlined in this chapter 4, excepting article A
relating to Cross Lake. (Ord. 00-06-10, 6-5-2000)
8-4B-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Commercial Activities: No peddlers shall be authorized to sell any type of services, goods, foods, beverages, etc., within the entertainment center or
sanctuary without a special permit from the village. Any vendor without such a permit shall not sell such above stated goods or services within three
hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the entertainment center or sanctuary. This provision shall apply at all times.
B. Performance Restrictions:
1. Areas Described:
a. The entertainment center includes parking lots east of the easement road, south of Orchard Street, north of the Park Avenue mall, west of
Skidmore Drive and the grassy area in front of and surrounding the entertainment center. Also included is the westerly slope of the sledding hill
from the top to Skidmore Drive.
b. The wetland sanctuary is the area east of Skidmore Drive bordering Sequoit Creek on the north and the railroad tracks on the east, the Centegra
property on the south and the bottom of the sledding hill on the west.
2. Prohibition: It is prohibited for any person to stand, sit or stay within the public area parking lots, described in subsection B1 of this section, during
performances. Those observation areas for performance described below shall be fenced off and spectators will be allowed only within the fenced
area. The seating area or fenced area shall include the area designated by green fencing described as the south edge of the north parking lot
extending in front of the entertainment center to the north edge of the south parking lot for a distance of two hundred ten feet (210') from Skidmore
Drive directly in front of the entertainment center and the westerly slope of the sledding hill extending from the top west to Skidmore Drive. (Ord. 00-
06-10, 6-5-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 243/525
8-4B-4: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Should any provisions contained within this article be in conflict with any provisions contained in this chapter 4, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
(Ord. 00-06-10, 6-5-2000)
Chapter 5
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
8-5-1: SIDEWALKS:
A. Specifications: All sidewalks constructed in the village, except when otherwise specially directed by the village board, shall be constructed under the
supervision of the public works and utilities committee under the following specifications:
1. Option being allowed the property owners to construct cement walks on any of the public streets in lieu of plank or boards, where the specifications
call for board or plank walks, said walks, if laid of cement, on the east and west side of Main Street from Sequoit Creek, south to the southeast
corner of the Wilton Opera House, to be of a uniform width of five and one-half feet (51/2'); from the intersection of Main Street and Lake Avenue, on
the north and south sides of said Lake Avenue, to the road leading south to the cemetery, to be of a uniform width of four and one-half feet (41/2'). On
the south side of Depot Street (so called) from the intersection of Main Street, east to the intersection of the Wisconsin Central Railway right of way,
to be of uniform width of five feet (5'). On all other streets and parts of streets not otherwise specified, said walks, if laid of cement, shall be of a
uniform width of four feet (4'). All walks to conform to an established grade.
2. All sidewalks on the west side of Main Street from Sequoit Creek south to the southeast corner of the Wilton Opera House, to be six feet (6') wide,
composed of sound two inch (2") plank, laid crosswise and resting on three (3) two inch by six inch (2" x 6") bearers securely nailed with 20-penny
wire spike, not less than six (6) spikes to each plank. All sidewalks on the east side of Main Street from Sequoit Creek south to the intersection of
Main Street and Park Avenue, to be six feet (6') wide, composed of sound two inch (2") plank, laid crosswise and resting on three (3) two inch by six
inch (2" x 6") bearers securely nailed with 20-penny wire spike, not less than six (6) spikes to each plank.
3. All sidewalks on the south side of Lake Avenue from the intersection of Main Street and Lake Avenue west to the intersection of the east line of
Victoria Street and Lake Avenue to be five feet four inches (5'4") wide, composed of sound undressed inch boards or two inch (2") plank, laid
crosswise and resting, if plank, on three (3) two inch by six inch (2" x 6") bearers, securely nailed with 20-penny wire spike, not less than six (6)
spikes to a plank. If composed of inch boards to rest on four (4) two inch by four inch (2" x 4") bearers, securely nailed with 10-penny wire nails, not
less than eight (8) nails to a board.
4. All sidewalks on the north side of Lake Avenue, beginning at the intersection of Main Street and Lake Avenue, west to the west line of lands owned
by Rockwell D. Emmons, to be five feet four inches (5'4") wide, composed of sound undressed inch boards of two inch (2") plank, laid crosswise and
resting, if plank, on three (3) two inch by six inch (2" x 6") bearers, securely nailed with 20-penny wire spike, not less than six (6) spikes to each
plank. If composed of inch boards to rest on four (4) two inch by four inch (2" x 4") bearers, securely nailed with 10-penny wire nails, not less than
eight (8) nails to each board.
5. All sidewalks on the south side of Depot Street, (so called) rom the intersection of Main Street east to the west line of the right of way of the
Wisconsin Central Railway, to be five feet (5') wide, composed of sound two inch (2") plank, laid crosswise on three (3) two inch by six inch (2" x 6")
bearers, securely nailed with 20-penny wire spike, not less than six (6) spikes to each plank; that portion of said walk east of the east line of lands
owned by J.C. James, Sr., east of the west line of the right of way of the Wisconsin Central Railway to be constructed on posts securely driven in the
ground, of a height sufficient to raise the surface level of said walk to a level with the center of the highway and form an easy incline to the level of
the Wisconsin Central tracks in front of the Antioch depot of said Wisconsin Central Railway.
6. All sidewalks other than those mentioned in subsections A2, A3, A4 and A5 of this section to be four feet (4') wide, composed of sound undressed
inch boards or two inch (2") plank, laid crosswise on three (3) two inch by four inch (2" x 4") bearers, securely nailed with 10-penny wire nails, if of
boards, and if of plank with 20-penny wire spike, not less than six (6) nails or spikes to each board or plank. (1976 Code § 95.015)
B. Materials: All material used in the construction of sidewalks under the provisions of this section, where plank or boards form the surface of the walk, to
be sound undressed pine or hemlock not less than eight inches (8") nor more than twelve inches (12") wide, the outer and inner ends of said walks to
be laid in a straight line, the surface of said walks to be made uniformly level, or uniformly a level incline, by blocking where needed under the bearers.
The outer bearer under said walks to be laid not more than two inches (2") from the end of the board or plank and the other bearer or bearers so laid to
equally divide the space between the two (2) outer bearers. All plank or boards forming walks under the provisions of this section to be laid not more
than one-fourth inch (1/4") apart. (1976 Code § 95.016)
C. Cost Of Construction: The cost of construction and maintenance of the several walks under the provisions of this section shall be borne by the several
property owners along all the streets and alleys within the corporate limits of the village unless otherwise provided for by special direction of the village
board, according to the frontage that each of the several property owners may own or control along the several streets or alleys within the corporate
limits of the village. (1976 Code § 95.017)
D. Persons Required To Remove Snow And Ice:
1. The owner, occupant, lessee or other person otherwise legally in possession and/or control of any lot or parcel in the village shall remove and clear
away, or cause to be removed or cleared away, all snow and ice on the public sidewalk fronting or abutting any such lot or parcel in a manner
consistent with the provisions of this subsection D.
2. Snow and ice shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after the cessation of two inches (2") or more of snow, sleet, or freezing rains; provided,
however, in the event snow or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot reasonably be removed without damaging the sidewalk, the
responsible person shall within the twenty four (24) hour time period cause a reasonable amount of sand, salt or other abrasive material to be placed
upon the entire sidewalk in order to make pedestrian travel thereon reasonably safe; and as soon thereafter as weather permits, said person or entity
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 244/525
shall cause the removal of snow and ice as provided herein. After initial removal, the responsible person shall maintain the sidewalk in a reasonably
clear condition.
3. When snow, ice or freezing rain is required to be removed, it shall be removed from the full width of the sidewalk, or an area at least seventy two
inches (72") wide, whichever is less in width, along the entire length of the public sidewalk which is upon, fronts or abuts the property. For owners of
property most closely abutting sidewalk ramps, owners shall clear the ramps in the same fashion as the sidewalk.
4. A violation of this subsection D is not intended to provide evidence of negligence in any claim for personal injury, death, property damage or
destruction grounded in the premises liability of the owner, occupant, lessee or other person otherwise legally in possession and/or control of any lot
or parcel in the village. (Ord. 08-10-24, 10-20-2008)
8-5-2: STREET LIGHTING:
A. System: Every public or private street or thoroughfare, or any area which primarily serves, or is intended to serve, as a vehicular and pedestrian access
to abutting lands, shall be improved with streetlights erected and installed in accordance with specifications provided in this section. (1976 Code
§ 95.020)
B. Equipment: A street lighting system shall consist essentially of the following equipment: luminaires, lamps, poles, cable, steel conduit and
miscellaneous items. The installations shall be made in conformance with local codes and in a workmanlike manner. The installation shall be complete
and ready for operation, including all required connections to existing power sources. (1976 Code § 95.021)
C. Equipment Standards:
1. Luminaires: The luminaires shall be Joslyn Manufacturing and Supply Co., style 141 and four hundred (400) watt mercury vapor lamps where type A
lights are shown on the plans, Joslyn Manufacturing and Supply Co., style 143 with two hundred fifty (250) watt mercury vapor lamps where type B
lights are shown, and Joslyn Manufacturing and Supply Co., style 142 with one hundred seventy five (175) watt mercury vapor lamps where type C
lights are shown. The luminaires shall have a built in constant wattage ballast wired for one hundred twenty (120) volt supply. The luminaire of the
first light on a given circuit shall be equipped with a Fischer-Pierce photoelectric cell, cadmium tubeless type. All luminaires shall be IES type II 4-way
distribution unless otherwise indicated on the plans. (1976 Code § 95.022)
2. Poles: The poles shall be American Concrete #800-B23 Modified U where type A and type B lights are specified and American Concrete #800-B23-
H8 where type C lights are specified. The poles shall be prestressed, with twenty three foot (23') polished shaft aboveground and five foot (5') butt
base below final grade level. The poles shall have a handhole aboveground with a cable entrance belowground. The poles shall be erected with the
handholes on the property side and the center of the handhole eighteen inches (18") above the top of the curb. A weatherproof pigtail socket with
fuse shall be placed in the handhole of each light pole. Sufficient slack cable shall be provided so the socket splices may be removed from the
handhole for inspection and maintenance. The brackets shall be of two inch (2") galvanized steel pipe with split clamp for attachment to shaft, twelve
feet (12') long for type A and type B lights and eight feet (8') long for type C lights. Mounting height to be twenty five feet ten inches (25'10") above
the pavement. (1976 Code § 95.023)
3. Cable: The cable shall be Okolite #6 or #8 as shown on the plans, direct burial, single conductor, stranded, six hundred (600) volt insulation (4/64
inch) with two-sixty fourths inch (2/64") neoprene jacket, nonmetallic armored for installation directly in the ground. Cable shall be installed in two inch
(2") galvanized steel under walks, driveways and easements. The cable within the pole from the handhole to the luminaire shall be Okoprene #10 six
hundred (600) volt insulation, solid neoprene jacketed. All underground cable shall be continuous. Necessary splices shall be made above ground
poles. (1976 Code § 95.024)
4. Steel Conduit: The steel conduit shall be National Electric Products galvanized rigid or equal, two inch (2") diameter with proper accessories for
coupling individual length ninety degree (90°) elbows if required, shall be two inch (2") diameter. The steel conduit shall be jacked under existing
walks and driveways or placed prior to construction of walks and driveways. Conduit shall be sealed with two inch (2") insulated fiber bushings. The
steel conduit shall be installed, whenever possible, prior to the placement of black dirt and sod in easement or parkway. (1976 Code § 95.025)
5. Risers And Weatherheads: Steel risers and weatherheads shall be installed on public service company poles at locations designated, in
conformance with public service company requirements. (1976 Code § 95.026)
6. Circuit Switch Box: Each circuit shall have a switch box installed on the pole designated as the service pole. The switch box shall be installed
approximately ten feet (10') above established grade on the street side of the service pole. The switch box shall be made of cast aluminum and shall
measure eight inches by six inches by four inches (8" x 6" x 4") as manufactured by O.Z. or Lew Electrical Fittings Company. (1976 Code § 95.027)
D. Contract Security: The contractor shall furnish a surety bond in an amount at least equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the contract price as
security guaranteeing the faithful performance of all the terms and conditions of the contract as set forth in the contract documents and the payment of
all persons performing labor and furnishing materials in connection with the contract. (1976 Code § 95.028)
E. Light Locations: A streetlight shall be installed at each and every corner and at intervals of two hundred fifty feet (250') to three hundred feet (300').
(1976 Code § 95.029)
8-5-3: CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No street, sidewalk, water main, sewer, lighting system or any other public improvement on public property by private contract, shall
hereafter be constructed in the village until a permit therefor shall have been obtained. (1976 Code § 95.035)
B. Permit Fee: See title 13 of this code.
C. Bond Requirements: See title 13 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 245/525
D. Specifications And Requirements: No improvements shall be constructed which do not conform with the requirements set forth in the subdivision code
and/or building code of the village as adopted1, and all such plans and specifications shall be prepared by and all such work shall be done under the
supervision and direction of the village engineers or such village employee as may be designated to supervise said improvement. In any case where
plans and specifications shall be prepared by an engineer other than the village engineers then in that event, such plans and specifications shall be
reviewed by the village engineers and the person submitting said plans shall pay to the village a sum equal to one percent (1%) of the estimated cost of
such improvements and a deposit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) of which the one percent (1%) shall be paid to the village engineers for reviewing
said plans and the deposit shall be drawn upon to pay the village employee rendering the supervision of said work at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per
hour. In the event the cost of supervision exceeds the amount of the deposit, the balance of said supervision cost shall be paid to the village prior to the
acceptance of such improvement. (1976 Code § 95.036)
8-5-4: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
No plat shall be approved by the village board of trustees until streets designated thereon, which shall be not less than sixty feet (60') in width, shall be
graded, graveled and hard surfaced to a width of eighteen feet (18'). Such graveling, which shall be and consist of all crushed road gravel not to exceed
one inch (1") in size, shall be no less than eight inches (8") in depth and approved by the superintendent of streets; such hard surface shall be and consist
of a surface treated with coats of oil consisting of one prime coat and one seal coat, to be then covered with pea gravel and rolled. Prior to the approval of
any plat, the owner may, with the consent of the village board of trustees, furnish satisfactory bond for the grading, graveling and hard surfacing of said
streets, and such grading, graveling and hard surfacing shall be completed before any permits are issued for any new construction on the property. (1976
Code § 95.046)
8-5-5: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
A. Underground In New Subdivisions: All utility distributions lines for telephone and electric service to be installed within the village shall be placed
underground within easements or dedicated public ways. The installation of such facilities shall be made in accordance with applicable orders, rules
and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission now or hereafter effective, and the owner or subdivider of any property to be served from such
underground installations shall be responsible for compliance with the rules and regulations, now and hereafter effective and filed with said commission
pursuant to the Illinois public utilities act, of any public utility whose services will be required with respect to the provision of such underground facilities.
All transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (1976 Code § 95.040)
B. Other Areas: Every public utility company occupying a public way and other public places within the village with its poles, wires, posts, piers, abutments,
conduits, electrical conductors and other fixtures and appliances shall hereafter annually place underground a minimum of five percent (5%) of its
existing plant consisting of its poles, wires, posts, piers, abutments, conduits, electrical conductors and other fixtures and appliances used in the
furnishing of electricity or telephone service within the village. (1976 Code § 95.041)
8-5-6: STORM WATER DISCHARGE:
A. No person, corporation, individual, lessee, lessor, agent, landlord, owner and the like, shall increase or divert the rate of flow of storm water running on
any private or public rights of way, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleyways and the like, such as to cause any injury to persons or
property or create a dangerous situation such as storm water discharge freezing on public or private rights of way.
B. Any person, corporation, individual, lessee, lessor, agent, landlord, owner and the like, violating this section shall be responsible for all cleanup costs
and removal of the water and ice from said public or private rights of way and in addition, all costs for damage to private or public property as a result of
the diversion or increase in the flow of said storm water. (1976 Code § 95.047)
8-5-7: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Rollerskating On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of the sidewalks of any street or avenue within the village for the purpose of
rollerskating, and no person or persons shall propel himself or be propelled along and upon such sidewalks by means of roller skates. (1976 Code
§ 95.042)
B. Riding On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any of the sidewalks of the village for the riding or running upon of any bicycle, tandem,
buggy or wagon, or leading or driving of horses or cattle thereon. (1976 Code § 95.043)
8-5-8: STREET NAMES:
A. All of the streets, avenues and roadways within the village shall be named, and the names thereof respectively be approved, confirmed and established,
all as they are set forth and shown on the plat of the village hereto attached and made part thereof.
B. The names of all of such streets and avenues may be placed upon tin, glass or metal strips or plates firmly attached to posts or other markers for that
purpose at intersections when and as may be provided by the mayor and village board of trustees.
C. Such streets shall be known by the names established in all ordinances, proceedings and records of the village until otherwise changed or amended.
(1976 Code § 95.044)
8-5-9: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 246/525
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1976 Code § 95.999; amd. 2003 Code)
ARTICLE A. EXCAVATIONS
8-5A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall change the grade or level, or injure or tear up, any pavement of any street, sidewalk, crosswalk or curb or any part thereof, dig any hole,
trench, ditch or drain in, or dig or remove any sod, stone, curb, earth, sand or gravel from any street or public ground in the village without first obtaining a
permit from the village clerk as hereinafter provided. In the event such permit is obtained for the purpose of making a connection to a sewer or water
facility of the village located in any public street, the superintendent of public works, if practical, may require the applicant to tunnel or auger instead of
removing or injuring the pavement. (1976 Code § 95.001)
8-5A-2: PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE:
A. Applications:
1. No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for such permit shall be made to the village clerk. This application shall clearly set
out the purpose of the excavation, location of excavation, size of the opening, type of pavement (if any) to be removed, approximate length of time
excavation will remain open, the person doing the actual excavating work and the name of the person for whom the work is being done, and shall
contain an agreement that the applicant will comply strictly with all ordinances, provisions, regulations and restrictions as to backfilling, barricading
and protected lighting at night.
2. Application shall also show that the applicant has contracted all operators of gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer or any public utility service in the
area, as well as this village itself, to receive from them the information as to the existence and location of any underground facilities, so that the
proper precautions can be taken to avoid accidents through damage to the underground structures. (1976 Code § 95.002)
B. Issuance: No such permit shall be issued except upon recommendation of the superintendent of public works and on order of the village board of
trustees. (1976 Code § 95.003)
8-5A-3: PERMIT FEES AND BOND:
A. Fees: A permit fee shall be charged by the village clerk for the issuance of an excavation permit. The fee for each permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
(1976 Code § 95.004)
B. Bond: No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has filed with the village clerk, a bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or because of the making, existence of,
manner of guarding or constructing any such excavation. Provided, however, that the village clerk shall hold such bond for one year after the work is
finished to ensure that the work has been satisfactorily performed. (1976 Code § 95.005)
8-5A-4: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
The application for an excavation permit to perform excavation work under this article shall be accompanied with a cash deposit in the sum of fifty dollars
($50.00) if no pavement is involved, and two hundred dollars ($200.00) if the excavation is in a paved area. Any deposit made hereunder shall serve as
security for the repair and performance of work necessary to put the public place in as good a condition as it was prior to the excavation if the permittee
fails to make the necessary repairs or to complete the proper backfilling of the opening and the excavation work under the excavation permit. Upon the
permittee's completion of the work covered by such permit in conformity with this article, as determined by the superintendent of public works, two-thirds
(2/3) of such deposit shall be promptly refunded to the permittee and the balance, except for ten percent (10%) of the original cash deposit to be retained
by the village as a service charge, shall be refunded upon the expiration of twelve (12) months after the completion of the work. The village may use any or
all of any such deposit to pay the cost of any work the village performs to restore or maintain the public place as herein provided in the event the permittee
fails to perform such work, in which event the amount refunded to the permittee shall be reduced by the amount thus expended by the village. (1976 Code
§ 95.006)
8-5A-5: REGULATIONS FOR EXCAVATING:
A. Barricades And Lights: Any person making or maintaining any excavation in any street or public place shall keep the same adequately guarded by
barricades and lights to protect persons and property from injury. (1976 Code § 95.007)
B. Repairing And Replacing Excavations: Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street or public place in the village shall
immediately upon completion of the work, and as fast as practicable during the accomplishment thereof, backfill the excavation with sand topped with
at least twelve inches (12") of crushed road gravel and relay all paving or macadam in a skillful and permanent manner to conform to the adjoining
paved or bituminous surface. Such work shall be done to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public works and under his direction. If such work is
not done within ten (10) days after restoration is possible, the village may backfill and restore the surface and charge the cost thereof to the permittee,
and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided herein. (1976 Code § 95.008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 247/525
C. Cleanup: As the excavation work progresses all public streets or public places shall be entirely cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other
debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and
shall be completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public works. From time to time, as may be ordered by the superintendent of public
works and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall, at his own or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse
and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within twenty four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by
the superintendent of public works, said work may be done by the village and the cost thereof charged to the permittee and the permittee shall also be
liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided herein. (1976 Code § 95.009)
D. Supervision: The superintendent of public works shall from time to time inspect all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street or
other public place in the village to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Notice shall be given to him at least ten (10) hours before the
work of backfilling any such excavation or tunnel commences. (1976 Code § 95.010)
E. Emergency Action: Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life
or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or piping, or for making repairs, provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the
village clerk for such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced. (1976 Code § 95.011)
8-5A-6: PUBLIC UTILITY EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this article as to the requirements for the securing of a permit, the making of applications therefor, the payment of permit fees thereunder,
the filing of a bond with or without surety for indemnity purposes, and the making of a cash deposit shall not apply to any entity operating as a public utility
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission and having franchise ordinances or grants from the village for the use of streets, alleys, avenues
and other public places, nor shall any of the other provisions of this article prevail over the provisions of such franchise ordinances or grants. (1976 Code
§ 95.012)
Chapter 6
TREES AND VEGETATION
8-6-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. Findings And Determinations: The following are hereby found and determined:
1. It is the public policy of the village to replace, by replanting, trees within the village that are removed in the course of constructing public
improvements including extended grading areas in new subdivisions or planned unit developments (PUDs).
2. Trees contribute to the scenic beauty of the village and increase property values while enhancing the quality of the life within the village.
3. The replacement of trees, wooded areas and wildlife habitat provides desired environmental effects.
4. The replacement of trees within the village is necessary in order to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment, and
promote the public welfare. To promote the foregoing and for the good of future generations, it is necessary to require a tree replacement program
which will assure the proper replacement of trees and cover for birds and wildlife, at quantities greater than the trees and vegetative cover removed
due to site development. (1976 Code § 100.01)
5. Proper site grading is perhaps the single most important consideration in saving trees during construction. Mass cuts and fills are responsible for
more tree loss in construction areas than any other single factor. Mass cuts and filling shall be discouraged and grading or density variances can be
used to encourage the preservation of woodland or blocks of tree stands.
6. Tree conservation is recommended and will be encouraged when proper engineering practices are followed, as accepted by the village engineer.
When proper grading, water detention and the installation of public improvements needed to prevent flooding, sewer backup, use of ejector pumps
and the like requires removal, tree replacement shall be required.
B. Purpose: The purpose and intent of this chapter is not to discourage development, nor restrict an owner's right to use his property, but to ensure that
existing healthy mature trees are preserved. It is further a goal of this chapter to ensure more trees exist in the village after a development is built than
before. The goal of this chapter will be to ensure it is less expensive to save existing trees than to provide replacement trees. Healthy mature trees can
only be saved through cooperation between the village and the developer/owner. The burden of identifying those trees to be saved and those trees
targeted for removal and replacement rests with the developer and no building permit shall be issued until the village zoning officer certifies
conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 01-10-29, 11-5-2001)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village for the construction of public improvements and site grading.
CONSTRUCTION AREA: The area on a development site where earthmoving is contemplated for the construction of public improvements including
extended grading areas.
dbh: The diameter of a tree measured at breast height, or four feet six inches (4'6") above the ground.
dbh CATEGORIES: Category 1, trees with a dbh of 10 inches to 19.9 inches
Category 2, trees with a dbh of 20 inches to 29.9 inches
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 248/525
Category 3, trees with a dbh of 30 inches or greater
DEVELOPER: A person applying for plan approval and/or building permit for a new subdivision or new planned unit development.
DRIP LINE: The area under a tree determined by measuring the longest horizontal branch of that tree and using that measurement as the radius and the
trunk as the center, the circular area of land under the tree is defined as within the drip line.
EXTENDED GRADING AREAS: The public rights of way and those areas extending beyond the rights of way and easements for public improvements
where, in keeping with accepted engineering practices, grading should be extended beyond such road rights of way and easements. Should the extended
grading areas extend beneath the drip line of any healthy mature tree, then that tree shall be included in the number of trees to be replaced regardless of
its chance of survival. Any healthy mature tree designated for replacement due to an extended grading area shall be given all possible chance for survival
at the developer's/owner's expense. Extended grading areas shall not be granted for the sole purpose of placing buildings on individual lots. Easements
not included in the extended grading areas where trees remain shall be excluded from the tree replacement requirements of this chapter.
MATURE TREE: Any tree with a dbh of ten inches (10") or greater.
OWNER: Joint tenancies, trusts, beneficiaries under wills and trusts, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, lessors, lessees, agents, executors,
assigns and the like.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
REPLACEMENT TREES: Any tree not listed in subsection 8-6-4C of this chapter, or "wildlife planting" as defined in this section.
RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas dedicated to the village which may include streets, roads, boulevards, curbs, gutters or sidewalks.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: The altering of the terrain, removal of trees and/or vegetation and construction of public improvements thereon including the
extended grading areas.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The final plan of subdivision or planned unit development (PUD), showing the public improvements including any extended
grading areas.
VILLAGE: The village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois.
WILDLIFE PLANTING: One clustered planting of the following: one white pine; one burr oak; one gray dogwood; one black cherry; one American plum or
any species recommended by the Illinois department of conservation. Wildlife plantings are suggested for edging of wetlands and property boundaries to
create hedgerows for animal habitat. (1976 Code § 100.03; amd. Ord. 01-10-29, 11-5-2001)
8-6-3: TREE REPLACEMENT FUND:
See section 13-1-10 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
8-6-4: REPLACEMENT STANDARDS:
A. Objective: The objective of this chapter is to protect healthy mature trees within the village, replace trees as necessary and provide wildlife cover in
areas disturbed by site development within the village. Measures taken to protect trees and wildlife cover shall assure that existing trees and wildlife
cover shall be saved to the greatest extent possible. The intent of this chapter is minimizing loss of healthy mature trees and wildlife cover through
protective measures, careful planning and tree replacement. This chapter shall apply to all new subdivisions and PUDs not currently approved by the
village board, and may be considered as a condition for approval of any special use or variance submittal.
B. Tree Protection:
1. As part of a final plan submittal, the planning and zoning board shall require the developer/owner to submit a detailed tree survey and a tree
preservation plan at the expense of the developer. Failure to submit these items shall constitute a valid reason to reject a petition or withhold
approval until such items are available to the planning and zoning board.
2. During construction, all reasonable steps necessary to prevent damage or the destruction of a tree designated a healthy mature tree shall be taken.
These steps will include:
a. No soils shall be removed or disturbed within an area around the drip line, which is determined using the following formula: one foot (1') out in
horizontal distance for each inch of the tree's diameter. This area will start at the drip line and extend outward (calculated drip line area).
b. A protective fence approved by the village engineer with appropriate signage shall be erected around any tree designated a healthy mature tree.
c. Any tree which is designated a category 3 (DBH) or is specifically identified as a tree of significant value by the village board shall be reviewed for
possible deep root feeding and extraordinary steps for preservation which may include stoppage of work as directed by a vote of the village board
until an arborist can be contacted, at the developer/owner's expense, to develop a plan to attempt to ensure the tree can be saved. Developers are
encouraged to plan their open space areas, tot lots and recreational areas around these trees.
d. Proper site grading is perhaps the single most important consideration in saving trees during construction. Mass cuts and fills are responsible for
more tree loss in construction areas than any other single factor. Mass cuts and filling shall be discouraged and grading or density variances may
be considered to encourage the preservation of woodland or blocks of tree stands.
e. Tree conservation is recommended and will be encouraged when accepted engineering practices are followed, as accepted by the village
engineer. When proper grading, water detention and the installation of public improvements needed to prevent flooding, sewer backup, use of
ejector pumps and the like require removal, tree replacement will be required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 249/525
f. Healthy mature oak trees are to be singled out for extra care and attention during the grading process to ensure that their root systems are not
damaged. The calculated drip line area (subsection B2a of this section) may be adjusted outward upon the recommendation of a certified arborist
and the approval of an authorized representative of the village.
g. Variances for slopes greater than three to one (3:1) can be considered subject to village engineer approval.
h. The developer/owner is responsible to ensure that all applicable subcontractors are trained on proper tree protection.
i. No excess soil, additional fill, equipment, trailers, liquids or construction debris shall be placed within the calculated drip line of any tree that is to
remain at its original location.
j. Only protective nondamaging devices or attachments shall be attached to any tree during construction, and only following written approval from the
village mayor or an authorized village representative.
C. Prohibited Replacement Trees:
1. Replacement trees shall not include the following:
Austrian pine
Box elder
Catalpa
Mountain ash
Mulberry
Poplar
Siberian elm
Soft maple
Tree of heaven
Willow
Any tree determined unacceptable by the village board upon recommendation of the building department. (Ord. 01-10-29, 11-5-2001)
2. Replacement trees located in a parkway or right of way, as defined in section 8-6-2 of this chapter, shall be installed and maintained according to the
provisions set forth in this chapter. (1976 Code § 100.12)
D. Replacement Trees:
1. Planting: Replacement trees shall be planted in accordance with the following schedule:
DBH Category Number Of Replacement Trees
1 3
2 4
3 6
Where there are few or no trees within a development, a minimum of five (5) trees per acre on average shall be planted in all zoning districts. Replacement
trees in the evergreen classification shall have minimum height of twenty four inches (24") to thirty six inches (36"). Replacement trees in the deciduous
classification shall have a minimum height of sixty inches (60") to seventy two inches (72"). Wildlife plantings shall have no minimum height requirements
and one wildlife planting shall equal one replacement tree. Replacement trees or wildlife plantings, depending on the weather, shall be planted in the
spring of the year following the removal of the trees to be replaced. (1976 Code § 100.13)
2. Location: In development where open areas or park areas are provided, it is recommended that replacement trees be planted in clusters, or that
wildlife plantings be planted as a hedgerow to provide buffers. In developments where, due to good forestry practices, the planting of replacement
trees is not advised, the developer/owner shall cause to be planted, on public property, the required replacement trees, at the direction of the building
official or as directed by the village board. (1976 Code § 100.14)
E. Trees In Developments:
1. Development Proposals: All final plans of subdivisions and PUDs approved by the village board shall include, on a separate sheet, by phases of
development, a list of the number and DBH category of all mature trees within the road rights of way, easements and extended grading areas, as
defined in section 8-6-2 of this chapter, and indicate which of those trees lying therein are to be removed. This list shall be certified by the
developer's engineer or surveyor and shall be used to determine the number of trees or wildlife plantings to be planted as replacements. It is the
intent of this chapter that each phase of a development be considered separately and individually as to its compliance.
However, a developer/owner may plant replacement trees at the current time in any phase of a multi-phase development if he has met tree
replacement requirements for the current phase. If the developer/owner wishes to plant required trees in other phases at a later date, he shall
deposit in escrow two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per replacement tree.
2. Removing Trees Prior To Development:
a. Any person removing or destroying any healthy mature tree within thirty six (36) months prior to the submission of a development plan shall be
subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per mature tree removed or destroyed. All fines shall be kept in a separate
village tree replacement fund for the sole purpose of tree replacement. In addition, each healthy mature tree so destroyed or removed shall be
replaced with new trees at triple the required replacement.
b. If any healthy mature tree designated for preservation during site development is destroyed or removed, it shall be replaced with new trees at triple
the required replacement. (Ord. 01-10-29, 11-5-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 250/525
c. In a planned unit development (PUD), in lieu of the standards in this chapter, a site specific tree preservation and replacement plan may be
approved by the village board of trustees in connection with the approval of the PUD; provided that, unless the village board of trustees determines
otherwise, the tree replacement formula in subsection D1 of this section shall apply to any site specific tree preservation and replacement plan. If a
site specific tree preservation and replacement plan is approved for such a PUD, except for the tree replacement formula in subsection D1 of this
section, the standards of this chapter shall not apply to that PUD, and there shall be no further tree survey or tree preservation review by the plan
commission or village board. If a site specific tree preservation and replacement plan is not approved by the village board of trustees, then all the
standards of this chapter shall be applicable. A site specific tree preservation and replacement plan may be approved at the time of approval of a
preliminary PUD plan. (Ord. 02-08-26, 8-27-2002)
8-6-5: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Anyone who violates this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense
in addition to providing the replacement trees as outlined in this chapter. Each healthy mature tree removed or destroyed in violation of this chapter shall
be considered a separate offense and each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The per tree fine for removal or destruction
of healthy mature trees in violation of this chapter shall be reduced proportionately from maximum to minimum based upon the extent to which the average
diameter of replacement trees approaches the diameter of the tree that was removed or destroyed in violation of this chapter, with the minimum fine being
reserved for those instances in which the average diameter of the replacement trees equals or exceeds the diameter of the mature tree removed or
destroyed in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 01-10-29, 11-5-2001)
ARTICLE A. TREE ORDINANCE
8-6A-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the VILLAGE OF ANTIOCH TREE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 92-12-25, 12-21-1992)
8-6A-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the
planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the village.
B. Intent: It is the intent of the village board of trustees that the terms of this article shall be construed so as to promote:
1. The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable trees, shrubs and other plants within the village; and
2. The protection of community residents from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the village from property damage caused or
threatened by the improper planting, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs or other plants located within the community. (Ord. 92-12-25, 12-21-
1992)
8-6A-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used within this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section:
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE FOR THE VILLAGE (Arboricultural Specifications Manual): A manual prepared
by the arborist pursuant to provisions containing regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants
upon village owned property.
ARBORIST: The director of public works of the village.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land.
TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn grass and flowers less than twenty four inches (24") in height.
VILLAGE OWNED PROPERTY: Property within the limits of the village, and:
A. Owned by the village in fee simple absolute; or
B. Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or for public easements. (Ord. 92-
12-25, 12-21-1992)
8-6A-4: TREE COMMISSION:
A. Establishment: The village tree commission is hereby established. Its functions and duties are limited to those set forth in this article.
B. Composition: The tree commission shall be composed of nine (9) commissioners, six (6) of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of
the village board of trustees. These six (6) commissioners shall serve without pay and shall reside within the village. The remaining three (3)
commissioners shall be ex officio and shall not vote. The three (3) ex officio commissioners may be the director of public works, the director of parks
and recreation and the village administrator. Subject to the exceptions in subsection C of this section, each commissioner shall serve for a term of three
(3) years.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 251/525
C. Appointment Of Members: One of the six (6) commissioners initially appointed to the tree commission, who is not an ex officio member, shall serve for a
term of one year; three (3) of the six (6) commissioners initially appointed shall serve for a term of two (2) years; and the remaining two (2)
commissioners shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Terms shall start on a common date. Determination of the length of terms of the six (6)
commissioners initially appointed shall be by lot. The mayor shall designate the chair of the tree commission.
D. Expiration And Vacation Of Terms: Within thirty (30) days following the expiration of the term of any appointed commissioner, a successor shall be
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the village board of trustees, and the successor shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Should any
commissioner resign or be removed from the tree commission, a successor shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve for the unexpired period of
the vacated term. A member of the tree commission may be removed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the village board of trustees.
E. Duties: The tree commission shall perform the following duties:
1. Within a reasonable time after the appointment of the tree commission, upon call of the chair, the tree commission shall meet and adopt rules of
procedure for regular and special meetings to fulfill the duties imposed upon it by this article.
2. The tree commission shall advise and consult the arborist on any matter pertaining to the village tree ordinance and its enforcement. The topics
under which this advice and consultation may be given may include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
a. Amendments to this tree ordinance and alterations or revisions to the arboricultural specifications manual, and alterations or revisions of the urban
forestry plan;
b. Policy concerning selection, planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the village;
c. Allocation of funds to the arbor division and expenditures of funds by the arbor division;
d. Establishment of educational and informational programs;
e. Development of policies and procedures regarding the arborist's duties;
f. Issuance of permits required by this article.
3. The tree commission, upon request of any person who disagrees with the decision of the arborist shall hear all issues of the disputes which arise
between the village arborist and any such person, whenever those issues involve matters or the interpretation or enforcement of the arboricultural
specifications manual, the urban forestry plan or of the interpretation or enforcement of this article, including dispute regarding the issuance of
permits, or the concurrence or nonconcurrence of the arborist in permits required under other ordinances or laws, or the abatement of nuisances.
The decision of a majority of the appointed members of the tree commission with regard to such dispute shall be binding upon the arborist. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to limit the jurisdiction of any court of law with respect to such disputes. (Ord. 92-12-25, 12-21-1992)
8-6A-5: VILLAGE ARBORIST:
A. Office Established: The position of arborist is hereby established.
B. Duties: The arborist shall perform the following duties:
1. With the assistance of the tree commission, the arborist shall develop, and each subsequent year update, the urban forestry plan. The plan shall
outline urban forestry program activities for a minimum of the next five (5) years. This plan shall describe the urban forestry activities to be
undertaken by the village, the reasons for those activities, the possible funding source(s), the means of accomplishing the activities, the alternatives
available to the village to fund or accomplish the activity, the projected date of completion and the consequences if the activity is not completed.
Activities may include, but are not limited to, street tree inventory, planting, tree removal, beautification projects and educational projects.
2. With the assistance of the tree commission, the arborist shall develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the arboricultural
specifications manual. This manual shall contain regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other
plants upon village owned property.
3. The arborist shall cause the urban forestry plan and arboricultural specifications manual, and all revisions and amendments, to be published and
promulgated and shall cause three (3) copies of the manual, and all revisions and amendments, to be available for public inspection at the office of
the village clerk. Notice that such information is available for public inspection shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Lake
County at least one weekday of each of four (4) consecutive weeks immediately following the initial availability of the arboricultural specifications
manual, or revisions and amendments thereto. The arboricultural specifications manual, and any revisions and additions thereto shall become
effective on the tenth day following the final publication in a newspaper of general circulation required under this subsection.
4. The arborist shall make available to any interested person copies of the tree ordinance information about the activities of the tree commission,
copies of the arboricultural specifications manual and copies of the urban forestry plan.
5. The arborist shall administer the urban forestry plan, the tree ordinance and the provisions of the arboricultural specifications manual.
6. The arborist shall perform whatever acts are necessary, including the planting and maintenance of trees, the removal of undesirable trees, shrubs
and other plants located on village owned property to ensure that all trees, shrubs and other plants located on village owned property conform with
the urban forestry plan, the arboricultural specifications manual and this article.
7. The arborist shall issue such permits as are required by this article and shall obtain as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permits the
written agreement of each person who applies for such permits that he will comply with the requirements of this article, the urban forestry plan and
with the regulations and standards of the arboricultural specifications manual. the arborist shall have the right to inspect all work performed pursuant
to such permits. If the arborist finds that the work performed is not in compliance with the requirements of this article, the urban forestry plan or with
the regulations or standards of the arboricultural specifications manual, the arborist shall provide written notice of his finding to the permit applicant.
The notice shall contain a copy of subsection 8-6A-7C2 of this article, and:
a. The permit shall be nullified and shall be void; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 252/525
b. The arborist may issue a written order that the permit applicant cease and desist all work for which the permit was required; and
c. The permit applicant shall be subject to the penalty under section 8-6-5 of this chapter; and
d. The arborist may take steps to correct the results of the noncomplying work, and the reasonable costs of such steps shall be charged to the permit
applicant;
8. The arborist shall establish a program of public information and education that will encourage the planting, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs
and other plants on private property in furtherance of the goals of the urban forestry plan. (Ord. 92-12-25, 12-21-1992)
8-6A-6: PERMITS:
A. Scope Of Requirements: No person, except the arborist, an agent of the arborist or a contractor hired by the arborist, may perform any of the following
acts without first obtaining from the arborist a permit for which no fee shall be charged, and nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any
person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits as are required by law:
1. Plant on village owned property or treat, prune, remove or otherwise disturb any tree, shrub or other plant located on village owned property, except
that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to village owned property from watering or fertilizing without a permit
any tree, shrub or other plant located on such village owned property;
2. Trim, prune or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or portion thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on village owned property and
thereby to cause damage to persons or property;
3. Place on village owned property, either above or below ground level, a container for trees, shrubs or other plants;
4. Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any tree, shrub or other plant located on village owned property;
5. Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other manmade object to any tree, shrub or other plant located on village owned property;
6. Dig a tunnel or trench on village owned property.
B. Issuance: Within seven (7) days of receipt of the application, the arborist shall issue a permit to perform within thirty (30) days of the day of issuance
any of the acts specified in subsection A of this section, for which a permit is requested whenever:
1. Such acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance;
2. Such acts are not inconsistent with the development and implementation of the urban forestry plan or with any regulations or standards of the
arboricultural specifications manual; and whenever
3. An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to the arborist detailing the location, number, size and species of trees, shrubs or
other plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose of such acts and the methods to be used, and presenting any additional
information that the arborist may find reasonably necessary;
4. The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is sought in accordance with the provisions of this article, the urban forestry plan and
with the regulations and standards set forth in the arboricultural specifications manual; and
5. The applicant certifies that he has read and understands those provisions of the urban forestry plan, this article and of the arboricultural
specifications manual which are pertinent to the work for which the permit is sought; and
6. If the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any tree or part thereof, located on private property, which, as a result of such felling
reasonably may be expected to fall upon village owned property, and if such felling is done by one other than the owner of the property on which
such felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and to hold the village harmless for all damages resulting from work conducted
pursuant to the permit and shall deposit with the village clerk a liability insurance policy in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
per person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident for bodily injury liability and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) aggregate for
property damage liability, which policy shall name the village as an additional insured.
C. Public Utility Companies: Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt public utility companies or their agents from any of the requirements of
this article. (Ord. 92-12-25, 12-21-1992)
8-6A-7: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A. Nuisances Declared: Any tree, shrub, other plant or part thereof, whether located on village owned property or on private property, which is in a
condition as follows, are hereby declared public nuisances under this article:
1. Any dead or dying tree, shrub or other plant;
2. Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub or other plant, which harbors insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree,
shrub or other plant;
3. Which by reason of location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public;
4. Which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street sign on village property;
5. Which dangerously obstructs the view as such may be determined by the village engineer pursuant to this article.
B. Right To Inspect: The officers, agents, servants and employees of the village have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located a
tree, shrub, plant or part thereof that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 253/525
C. Abatement: The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under this article:
1. Any public nuisance under this article which is located on village owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the arborist in
whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery.
2. Any public nuisance under this article which is located on privately owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property
owner or his agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance. No property owner may be found guilty of violating this
provision unless and until the following requirements of notice have been satisfied:
a. The arborist shall cause a written notice to be personally served or sent by registered mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the
general taxes for the last preceding year.
b. Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other plant or part thereof which has been declared to be a public nuisance, its location on the
property, the reason for declaring it a nuisance.
c. Such notice shall describe the premises by legal description or by common description.
d. Such notice shall state the actions that the property owner may undertake to abate the nuisance.
e. Such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no less than thirty (30) days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for general taxes for the last preceding year.
f. In the event that the nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the notice, the arborist is authorized to cause the abatement of said nuisance.
3. The arborist is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any public nuisance provided that the nuisance is determined by the arborist to be
an immediate threat to any person or property. (Ord. 92-12-25, 12-21-1992)
8-6A-8: INTERFERE WITH ARBORIST:
No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the arborist or his agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of this
article. (Ord. 92-12-25, 12-21-1992)
8-6A-9: APPEALS:
Any part who elects to dispute any action or decision by the arborist or tree commission, shall be entitled to appeal to the village board of trustees for final
determination. (Ord. 92-12-25, 12-21-1992)
Chapter 7
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY
8-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village of Antioch's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village of Antioch
rights of way and the village of Antioch as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village of Antioch intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the village of Antioch and, in particular, the
use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without
limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
8. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the
jurisdiction of the village of Antioch. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and
operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar
agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 254/525
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village of Antioch, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise,
license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village of Antioch rights
of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village of Antioch enter into such an agreement. In
such an agreement, the village of Antioch may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village of Antioch, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village of Antioch and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license
or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the
utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village of Antioch shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village of Antioch so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit
the ability of the village of Antioch to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society For Testing And Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Antioch.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary
or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 255/525
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The village of Antioch's engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or
operated by the village of Antioch.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the village of Antioch engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of
the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 8-7-4 and 8-7-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village of Antioch. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village of Antioch has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village of Antioch. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal village of Antioch property that is
not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village of Antioch buildings, fixtures and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 256/525
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 8-7-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village of Antioch through an open video system as defined in the rules of the
federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Antioch.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 09-12-
41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village of Antioch shall register on January 1 of each year with the engineer, providing the utility's name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in section 8-7-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village of
Antioch right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the village of Antioch engineer and obtaining a permit from the village of Antioch therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of
the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village of Antioch and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village of Antioch may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials
accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 257/525
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village of Antioch:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village of Antioch and
shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the village of Antioch finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 8-7-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 8-7-10 of this chapter;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 8-7-21 of this chapter); and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village of Antioch.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division
of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation district (other local or state entities with jurisdiction), have been satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village of Antioch within thirty (30)
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of two percent (2%) of the total project cost, but in no case less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). No
application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Of Antioch Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
village of Antioch engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules, and regulations, the village of Antioch engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the village of Antioch
engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the village of Antioch engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village of Antioch engineer, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional Village Of Antioch Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village of
Antioch that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall
consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by
the telecommunications retailer to the village of Antioch not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The village of Antioch engineer shall specify the portion of the
right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the village of Antioch engineer fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten
(10) days after service of notice to the village of Antioch by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 258/525
construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the village of Antioch, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 8-7-4 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village of Antioch an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation
available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional Village Of Antioch Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007:
Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty
five (45) days after submission to the village of Antioch, unless otherwise acted upon by the village of Antioch, provided the holder has complied with
applicable village of Antioch codes, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the village of Antioch authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village of Antioch rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall
be held at a date, time and place designated by the village of Antioch with such village of Antioch representatives in attendance as the village of
Antioch deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations,
procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property
owners.
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the village of Antioch does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village of Antioch and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village of Antioch within ninety (90) days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the
locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with section 8-7-21 of this chapter. If the village of Antioch denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove
the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-
2009)
8-7-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the village of Antioch, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 259/525
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village of Antioch within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village of Antioch.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village of Antioch, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village of Antioch Administrator
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of Antioch of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility
shall obtain and furnish to the village of Antioch evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
of Antioch evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection
A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village of Antioch and any person for any of the matters
that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. (All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.) (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village of Antioch and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to
arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided,
however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the village of Antioch, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village of Antioch occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village of Antioch issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village of Antioch may pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the
permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village of Antioch must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the village of Antioch from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other
applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village of Antioch in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village of Antioch, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village of Antioch. Any surety bond or letter of credit
provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village of Antioch and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of Antioch of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the village of Antioch and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the village of Antioch engineer, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village of Antioch estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village of Antioch, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken
prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village of Antioch engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion,
allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 260/525
security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for
any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village of Antioch, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village of
Antioch for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the village of Antioch for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village of Antioch has been compelled to pay or incur
by reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village of Antioch determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village of Antioch that any amount has been withdrawn from the
security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village of
Antioch, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village of Antioch, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below
the minimum balance required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the
village of Antioch for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the
permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village of Antioch to the extent necessary to cover
any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village of Antioch as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said
costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village of Antioch with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village of
Antioch, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security
fund shall affect any other right the village of Antioch may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village of Antioch shall not be entitled to a double
monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Of Antioch Right To Revoke Permit: The village of Antioch may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of
the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village of Antioch shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the
village of Antioch, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the village of Antioch with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village of Antioch, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction
to the village of Antioch within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the
satisfaction of the village of Antioch providing written proof of such removal to the village of Antioch within ten (10) days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation.
The village of Antioch may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village of Antioch may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village of Antioch
or its designee may, at the option of the village of Antioch: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee,
remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 261/525
them abandoned and property of the village of Antioch. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village of Antioch for all costs of removal. (Ord.
09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village of Antioch no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right
of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in
the right of way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village of Antioch's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 09-12-
41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. Adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook";
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations"; and
9. "NPDES Phase II Regulations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the village of Antioch engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the village of Antioch engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The village of Antioch's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any
work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 8-7-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention
by the village of Antioch. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 262/525
1. No Interference With Village Of Antioch Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the village of Antioch engineer determines that
the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right
of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village of Antioch highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the
roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. Adm.
code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village of Antioch may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power
or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 [1989]).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village of Antioch may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that
are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The village of Antioch may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The village of Antioch may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 263/525
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The village of Antioch may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-
7-2009)
8-7-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village of
Antioch engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they
shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village of Antioch to be preserved or protected shall be
bored under or around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half (1/2) of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the village of Antioch engineer.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 264/525
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village of Antioch to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any
pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the engineer.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic.
If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 8-7-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the engineer.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village of Antioch.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village of Antioch.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village of Antioch
approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is
continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village of Antioch. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by village of Antioch)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village of Antioch rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce
commission) entitled "rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 265/525
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for
cable installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snow
drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village of Antioch. Weather permitting,
utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village of Antioch
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for
pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the engineer. With the approval of the
engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances
shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the village of Antioch
engineer. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior
to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village of Antioch.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village of Antioch shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village of Antioch, be required to be discontinued when such operations would
create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when
conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the engineer when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the village of Antioch, the hours of construction are those set forth in section 9-1-10 of this code.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village of Antioch shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village of Antioch will
make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village of Antioch or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and
holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-17: TREES AND VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not performed pursuant to
applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the
application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 266/525
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village of Antioch will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society Of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village of Antioch may require the removal and replacement of trees if
trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
B. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village of Antioch may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or
trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
C. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
village of Antioch for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the engineer
that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village of Antioch, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of
any village of Antioch improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village of Antioch in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village of Antioch, any utility that owns, controls, or
maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities
or appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village of Antioch retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the
rights of way of the village of Antioch, as the village of Antioch may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or
safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the village of Antioch, the utility shall notify the village of Antioch
within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village of Antioch may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village
of Antioch engineer determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village of
Antioch does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village of Antioch, the abandoning
utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village of Antioch. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the village of Antioch engineer.
Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended
by the village of Antioch engineer for good cause shown. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the village of Antioch and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 267/525
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the village of Antioch engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs.
If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village of Antioch police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village of Antioch a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the village of Antioch
engineer as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The village of Antioch engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The village of Antioch engineer may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the village of Antioch engineer may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the village of
Antioch engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the village of Antioch clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The village board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled
meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The village board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village of Antioch will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village of Antioch's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit related cost apportionment of the village of Antioch. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 09-
12-41, 12-7-2009)
8-7-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village of Antioch may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 09-12-41, 12-7-2009)
Chapter 8
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
8-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following definitions:
ACT: The Illinois power agency act, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3855/1-92, as may be amended from time to time.
CUSTOMER: Recipients of residential and small commercial retail electric loads as provided in the act.
ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM: A program pursuant to the act for the aggregation of residential and small commercial retail electric loads
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 268/525
located within the corporate limits of the village that provides customers with the opportunity to opt out of participating in that program as provided in the
act. (Ord. 12-04-05, 4-16-2012)
8-8-2: AGGREGATION OF ELECTRICAL LOAD:
A. The corporate authorities of the village are authorized to operate an electricity aggregation program pursuant to the act and for that purpose may solicit
bids, RFPs or RFQs and enter into service agreements to facilitate the sale and purchase of electricity and related services and equipment for those
loads aggregated pursuant to the electricity aggregation program as provided in the act.
B. The corporate authorities of the village may exercise the authority to operate the electricity aggregation program jointly with any other municipality or
county and, in combination with two (2) or more municipalities or counties, may initiate a process to jointly authorize the electricity aggregation program
by a majority vote of each particular municipality or county as required by the act. (Ord. 12-04-05, 4-16-2012)
8-8-3: OPT OUT PROGRAM:
A. The electricity aggregation program shall operate as an opt out program whereby customers who do not wish to participate in the electricity aggregation
program may opt out pursuant to the act.
B. The village administrator or his designee, on behalf of the village, shall fully inform customers in advance, as provided in the act, that customers have
the right to opt out of the electricity aggregation program. The disclosure provided to the customers shall comply with the requirements of the act and
shall prominently state all charges to be made and shall include full disclosure of the cost to obtain service pursuant to section 16-603 of the act, how to
access service, and the fact that service under section 16-603 of the act is available to customers without penalty if they are currently receiving service
under section 16-603 of the act.
C. Upon notification from any customer that the customer wishes to opt out of the electricity aggregation program, that customer shall be excluded from
the electricity aggregation program.
D. Except for those customers who opt out of the electricity aggregation program pursuant to this section and the act, the electricity aggregation program
shall automatically apply for each person owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to be aggregated in the corporate
limits of the village. (Ord. 12-04-05, 4-16-2012)
8-8-4: ADOPTION OF PLAN OF OPERATION AND GOVERNANCE:
A. The corporate authorities of the village, with the assistance from the Illinois power agency as required pursuant to the act, shall develop and approve,
via an appropriate resolution, a plan of operation and governance for the electricity aggregation program.
B. Before adopting the plan of operation required under this section and the act, the corporate authorities shall hold at least two (2) public hearings on the
proposed plan. Before the first public hearing, the corporate authorities shall publish notice of the hearings once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. The notice shall summarize the plan of operation and state the date, time, and location of each
hearing.
C. The plan of operation and governance for the electricity aggregation program shall:
1. Provide for universal access to all applicable residential customers and equitable treatment of applicable residential customers,
2. Describe demand management and energy efficiency services to be provided to each class of customers, and
3. Meet any requirements established by law concerning aggregated service offered pursuant to the act. (Ord. 12-04-05, 4-16-2012)
8-8-5: PROCUREMENT:
The process for procuring bids for electricity and other related services and awarding proposed agreements for the purchase of electricity and other related
services for the electricity aggregation program shall be conducted pursuant to the act, utilizing any means or methods allowed thereunder so as to ensure
the greatest flexibility in the bidding process in order to secure the best benefits to the residents and businesses of the village of Antioch. (Ord. 12-04-05,
4-16-2012)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
9-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 269/525
The documents listed below, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, are adopted as the Building Code of the Village for the control of
buildings and structures. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the codes listed below are referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, set forth in section 9-1-2 of this chapter. If
there are any conflicts between the codes set forth herein, or between the codes set forth herein and other regulations of the Village, or any technical
codes adopted by the Lake County Board, pursuant to State Law1, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. Building: International Building Code 2012, as published by the International Code Council, (hereinafter referred to as the ICC), Country Club Hills, IL
60478-5795, and abbreviated "IBC".
B. Residential: International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings 2012, as published by the ICC, and abbreviated "IRC".
C. Fire Prevention: International Fire Code 2012, as published by the ICC, and abbreviated "IFC".
D. Fuel Gas: International Fuel Gas Code 2012, as published by the ICC in conjunction with the American Gas Association, Washington, D.C., and
abbreviated "IFGC".
E. Mechanical: International Mechanical Code 2012, as published by the ICC, and abbreviated "IMC".
F. Property Maintenance: International Property Maintenance Code 2012, as published by the ICC, and abbreviated "IPMC".
G. Swimming And Spa: International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 2012, as published by the ICC, and abbreviated "ISPSC".
H. Life Safety: NFPA 101 - Life Safety Code, published by the National Fire Prevention Association (NFPA), Quincy, Massachusetts, that edition as
currently adopted by reference with section 100.7 of title 41, fire protection, chapter I: Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) and as amended from
time to time by the OSFM2.
I. Electrical: NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011, as published by the National Fire Prevention Association, and abbreviated "NEC".
J. Plumbing: Current edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code as published by the Illinois Department of Public Health, and as authorized by the Illinois
Compiled Statutes3.
K. Energy: Current edition of the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code. (Ord. 18-02-05, 2-12-2018)
9-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO ADOPTED CODES:
A. International Building Code (IBC): The 2012 International Building Code is hereby adopted with the following amendments:
1. General Amendments:
a. ICC Electrical Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Building Code to the ICC Electrical Code are hereby deleted and replaced with
NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011 Edition.
b. ICC International Existing Building Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Building Code to the ICC International Existing Building
Code are hereby deleted with no substitution.
c. ICC International Plumbing Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Building Code to the ICC International Plumbing Code are
hereby deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
d. ICC International Energy Conservation Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Building Code to the ICC International Energy
Conservation Code are hereby deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code, current edition.
e. Code Official: Any and all references in the ICC International Building Code to the Code Official are hereby deleted and replaced with " Building
Official".
2. Specific Amendments:
Section 101.1, Page 1
Replace [NAME OF JURISDICTION] with " the Village of Antioch" in the second line.
Section 101.2 Exception, Page 1
Delete all the words that are after "detached one and two family dwellings".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 270/525
Section 103, Page 2
Delete the words "DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY" and insert the words "Planning, Zoning & Building Department".
Section 103.1, Page 2
Delete the words "Department of Building Safety" and insert the words "Planning, Zoning & Building Department".
Section 103.3, Page 2
Delete the last sentence with no substitution.
Section 105.1.1, Page 3
Delete the last sentence with no substitution.
Section 105.1.2, Page 3
Delete the last sentence with no substitution.
Section 105.2, Page 3 & 4
Building
Amend Item # 1.
Playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet.
Item # 6 Delete the words "and are not part of an accessible route" at the end of the paragraph.
Delete with no substitution Items 2, 3, 4, 5, and 8.
Section 105.3, Page 4
Item # 6 Delete the word "applicant" and "applicant's" and insert the word "owner" and "owner's".
Section 105.5, Page 5
Delete the existing Section and insert the words:
Permit time limits. All permits shall become void if;
1. A substantial start of construction is not made within 6 months from the date of issuance.
2. Substantial work is not performed during any 6 month period.
3. Within 2 years from date of issuance of a building permit a Certificate of Occupancy is not issued.
4. Permits for above ground or in ground swimming pools are not completed after a one-year period.
5. Permits for demolition are not completed 90 days after date of issuance.
6. Permits for fences, re-siding, re-roofing, decks, electrical up grade, sheds, detached garages, screen porches and any minor alteration to
an existing building that does not exceed 400 square feet are not completed six months after issuance.
Section 107.1, Page 5
Delete the words "two or more" and insert the word "three".
Section 107.2.1, Page 5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 271/525
Delete the words: "Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official." and insert "Scale
of plans shall be not less than 1/8 inch to a foot or more than 1/4 inch to a foot.
Exception: Sections or sketches drawn to a larger scale for clarity."
Section 107.2.5, Page 6
In the first sentence delete the word "a site plan" and insert the words "three site plans".
Section 107.3.1, Page 6
Delete the words "as "Reviewed for Code Compliance" with no substitution.
Section 111.2, Page 8
Delete the words "that contains the following." And all of the numbered items with no substitution. Insert a sentence that reads "The
Certificate of Occupancy shall be as prescribed by the Building Official."
Section 113, Page 9
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
113.1 Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
113.2 Disqualification of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
113.3 Compensation of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
113.4 Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days after the date of the Building Official's
decision thereon.
113.5 Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
113.5.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which
a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant
information be received.
113.6 Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 114.4, Page 9
Delete the words " penalties as prescribed by law" and insert the words " a fine of $500.00 per offense. Each week shall constitute a
separate offense."
Section 115.1, Page 9
Add a new subsection to read as follows:
115.1.1 Boarding Up: Boarding up a vacant or unsafe structure is considered a temporary measure until a decision can be made as to what
remedy the owner wants to pursue as provided in this section; but in no case, can exceed six (6) months or a time as the code official may
deem necessary to protect public safety and welfare.
Section 201.3, Page 11
Delete in its entirety and amend to read: " Where terms are not defined in this code such terms shall have meanings ascribed to them as
in other code publications adopted within section 9-1-1 of the Village Code."
Table 307.7(1), Page 45
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 272/525
Change the amount of "1000" to "750" under flammable gas category, column gas (cubic feet).
Section 310.1, Page 49
Under the R-3 Group add a paragraph that reads "All two (2) hour fire separation assemblies between R-3 residential units shall not
contain any mechanical or plumbing systems, unless the mechanical or plumbing system is part of a tested assembly. Electrical
systems shall be allowed in accordance with the 2011 National Electrical Code."
Section 403.1, Page 57
Add a sentence to the end of the paragraph that reads "The height of the building for fire department access shall be measured from the
average grade elevation to the highest finished floor level."
Section 411.1, Page 72
Change the existing exception to number "1" and add another exception to read,
"2. A temporary use permit (not to exceed 30 days) may be issued for a haunted house in an existing structure provided the following
criteria is approved.
A. A special inspection has been conducted and the report is in the office.
B. A plot plan showing sufficient parking for the anticipated customers and all structures on the property.
C. A floor plan showing the existing and proposed layout of partitions, windows and means of egress.
D. A list of all interior finishes and materials to be used for decorations and their flame spread and smoke development ratings.
E. Plans showing permanent, temporary and emergency lighting.
F. Methods of assuring continuous movement of occupants through the amusement such as but not limited to;
1) Permanently stationed supervisory personnel.
2) Directional arrows.
3) Other means.
G. Method of assuring fire protection such as but not limited to;
1) An automatic sprinkler system.
2) Fire detection/alarm system.
3) Portable fire extinguishers."
Section 505.2.2, Page 97
Delete the words "Section 1007" and insert the words "State of Illinois Accessibility Standard".
Section 901, Page 203
Add section [F] 901.9 Key Box
[F] 901.9.1 Where Required: A key box shall be required in any building that is required by this code to have a fire suppression, fire
protective signaling or a fire detection system.
[F] 901.9.2 Supervision: All required key boxes shall be electronically supervised.
[F] 901.9.3 Contents of Key Box: All required key boxes shall contain keys to all areas required by the code official.
[F] Section 903.2, Page 204
Add the following line before the exception:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided, where not otherwise specified in this section, for all new buildings and structures over 10,000
square feet in fire area,
[F] Section 903.2, Page 204
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 273/525
To the heading " Automatic Sprinkler Systems Section 903", add section 304 " Business Group B", page 42 to the group of sections that
include section 903.2.4 (F-1), page 205, sections 903.2.7 (M), 903.2.9 (S-1), page 206, that all require an automatic sprinkler system.
Add, to use group B, the following three choices of which 1 has to exist to require automatic sprinklers:
1. Where a group B fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet;
2. Where a group B fire area is located three or more stories above grade; or
3. Where the combined area of all group B fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceed 10,000 square feet.
[F] Sections 903.2.1.1, Page 204
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "5,000 square feet".
Add the following at the end of section 903.2.1.1 as numbered:
5. Where the total combined areas of use group A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas on all floors exceed 10,000 square feet.
6. Where any use groups A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas is three or more stories above grade on any one side.
[F] Section 903.2.1.2, Page 166
Add the following:
4. Where the total combined area of use group A-2 fire areas on all floors exceed 5,000 square feet.
5. Where any use group's A-2 fire area is three or more stories above the grade on any one side.
[F] Sections 903.2.1.3, Page 205
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "5,000 square feet".
Add the following at the end of section 903.2.1.3 as numbered:
5. Where the total combined areas of use group A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas on all floors exceed 10,000 square feet.
6. Where any use groups A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas is three or more stories above grade on any one side.
[F] Sections 903.2.1.4, Page 205
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "5,000 square feet".
Add the following at the end of section 903.2.1.4 as numbered:
5. Where the total combined areas of use group A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas on all floors exceed 10,000 square feet.
6. Where any use groups A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas is three or more stories above grade on any one side.
[F] Sections 903.2.3, Page 205
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "5,000 square feet".
Add the following at the end of [F] Section 903.2.3 as numbered:
4. Where the total combined areas of use Group E fire areas on all floors exceed 10,000 square feet.
5. Where any use Group E fire areas is three or more stories above grade on any one side.
[F] Sections 903.2.4, Page 205
Group F-1
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "10,000 square feet".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 274/525
Item #3, change "24,000 square feet" to "10,000 square feet".
[F] Sections 903.2.7, Page 206
Group M
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "10,000 square feet".
Item #3, change "24,000 square feet" to "10,000 square feet".
[F] Sections 903.2.8, Page 206
Group R, add "as follows":
[F] 903.2.8.1 Group R-1 or R-2.
[F] 903.2.8.2 Group R-3 or R-4
1. Where a Group R-3 or R-4 fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet;
2. Where a Group R-3 or R-4 fire area is located three or more stories above grade; or
3. Where the combined area of all Group R-3 or R-4 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceed 10,000 square feet.
[F] 903.2.8.3 Care Facilities. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.3 shall be permitted in care facilities with 3
or more individuals in a single-family dwelling.
[F] Section 903.3.1.4, Page 208
Add a subsection to read;
"903.3.1.4 Emergency power supply. Every automatic fire suppression system that requires or is equipped with an electric fire pump
shall have an emergency generator to provide power in the case of primary power loss.
Exception. Upon submittal of documentation from the Fire Chief having jurisdiction of the area, stating that he has reviewed all
pertinent information concerning the interruption of the power supply of the area and is accepting the utility provider as a reliable
power supply for the fire pump.
[F] Section 905, Page 211
Add to section [F] 905.3 this paragraph before the exception.
Cross Connection: The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of the State of Illinois
Plumbing Code.
[F] Section 906.1, Page 214
Change to read "Portable fire extinguishers shall bear the label of an approved agency, be of an approved type and be installed in a location
visible and available to the occupants."
Add this section:
[F] Section 906.2 Where Required: A portable fire extinguisher shall be installed in the following locations in accordance with NFiPA (same as
NFPA) 10 listed:
1. In all use groups, except R-3 and R-4, in accordance with NFiPA (same as NFPA) 10.
2. In all areas containing commercial kitchen exhaust hood systems;
3. In all areas where fuel is dispensed;
4. In all areas where a flammable or combustible liquid is used in the operation of spraying, coating, or dipping;
5. In all occupancies in use group I-3 at staff locations. Access to portable extinguishers shall be permitted to be locked;
6. On each completed floor of buildings under construction, other than occupancies in use group R-3.
7. In any laboratory, shop or other room occupied for similar purposes; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 275/525
8. Where required by the fire prevention code listed in chapter 35.
[F] Section 907.1, Page 215
Add to section [F] 907.1.4 as follows:
907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panel
907.1.4.1 Location: Fire alarm control panel shall be located by the nearest logical emergency response entrance.
Exception: When a fire alarm annunciator panel is located at the logical emergency response entrance, the fire alarm control panel may be
located by the main power circuit panels.
907.1.4.2 All fire alarm control panels shall be addressable and shall display the exact location of the activated device.
907.1.4.3 All fire alarm control panels shall be capable of having the audio signal silenced without resetting the fire alarm control panel.
[F] Section 907.6.1, Page 225
Change the subsection to read as follows:
Wiring: All wiring shall conform to the requirements of NFiPA (same as NFPA) 72 listed in chapter 35. In addition the minimum wire size for all
audio-visual devices shall be 14 gauge solid wire. All other devices, the minimum wire size shall be 18 gauge solid wire. The maximum I/R
drop for all indicating circuits shall not exceed 10% of the rated voltage.
[F] Section 907.6.3, Page 225
Change "22,500" to "10,000" and "300" to "100".
[F] Section 916, Page 238
Add this section:
Section 916.0 Supervision
[F] Section 916.1 Fire Suppression System: All automatic fire suppression systems required for occupancies in use group A, B, E, H, I, M or R
shall be supervised by 1 or 2 below.
1. Approved central-station system in accordance with NFiPA (same as NFPA) 71;
Section 1006.1, Page 243
Illumination required.
After the words exit discharge insert the words "and toilet rooms"
Section 1007, Page 243
Delete the entire section and insert a new section to read:
Section 1007 Accessible Means of Egress
1007.1 Accessible Means of Egress Required. Accessible means of egress shall comply with the Illinois Capitol Development Board,
Accessibility Standards.
Section 1008.1.5, Page 248
Add new subsection to read:
1008.1.5.1 Grade Exit Discharge Doors: Where required to swing in the direction of egress travel, all required grade exit doors shall be
provided with a hard surfaced area underneath the door swing.
1008.1.5.2 Stoop surface: The exterior surface shall have a slip resistant surface that has a slope not greater than 1:50 in any direction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 276/525
1008.1.5.3 Support: Sufficient wing walls and/or foundation wall is required under all stoops. Wing walls shall have a minimum of one (1)
number 4 reinforcing bar located not more than six (6) inches beneath the top edge of concrete and extending downward into the foundation wall
not less than two (2) feet.
1008.1.5.4 Stoop extension: The outer perimeter of the stoop shall not project out beyond the wing wall and/or foundation wall more than
twelve (12) inches in any direction."
Chapter 11, Page 281
Delete the entire Chapter and insert a new section to read:
Chapter 11 Accessibility
1101.1 Scope. The provisions of the State of Illinois Accessibility Standards shall control the design and construction of facilities for accessibility
to physically disabled persons.
Section 1608.1, Page 345
Add to the end of the paragraph;
"In no case shall the design snow load be less than 30 pounds per square foot.
Section 1808.7.4, Page 405
Change this section to require the top of a foundation to be a minimum of 6" above the finished Grade.
Section 1809.5, Page 407
Delete from Item #1 the words "below the frost line of the locality" and insert the words "a minimum of forty-two (42) inches measured
from adjacent finished grade level."
Table 2902, Page 547
Delete the entire table and insert "Table B" from the State of Illinois Plumbing Code.
Section 2902.6 (New), Page 550
Add a new section to read;
2902.6 Waste lines. All plumbing waste lines that are located in, or under concrete slabs shall be cast iron.
Exception: Waste lines that go through the foundation wall shall be ductile iron and extend on the outside of the foundation wall a
minimum of five feet.
B. Residential Code: The 2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby adopted with the following amendments:
1. General Amendments:
a. ICC Electrical Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Residential Code to the ICC Electrical Code are hereby deleted and replaced
with NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011 Edition.
b. ICC International Existing Building Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Residential Code to the ICC International Existing
Building Code are hereby deleted with no substitution.
c. ICC International Plumbing Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Residential Code to the ICC International Plumbing Code are
hereby deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
d. Code Official: Any and all references in the ICC International Residential Code to the Code Official are hereby deleted and replaced with "
Building Official".
2. Specific Amendments:
Section R101.1, Page 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 277/525
Replace [NAME OF JURISDICTION] with " the Village of Antioch" in the second line.
Section R103, Page 2
Delete the words "DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY" and insert the words "Planning, Zoning & Building Department".
Section R103.1, Page 2
Delete the words "DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY" and insert the words "Planning, Zoning & Building Department".
Section R105.2, Page 3
Amend item 1, delete with no substitution Items 2, 3, and 10. Add # 11 to read as follows:
11. Structures determined by the Building Official to be eligible for the Registration Program.
Item #1 "One story detached accessory structures used as tool and Storage sheds, Playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does
not exceed 200 square feet"
Item #2 "Fences not over 7 feet high."
Item #3 "Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge."
Item #10 "Decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, that are not more than 16 inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a
dwelling, are not part of a pool barrier, and do not serve the exit door required by section R311.4."
Section R105.7, Page 5
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
R105.7 Placement of Permit. The building permit card shall be kept on the site of the work in an accessible location, protected from
adverse weather until the completion of the project.
Section R109.1.1, Page 6
Change the title of this section from Foundation Inspection to Footing Inspection.
Section R112, Page 8
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
SECTION R112
BOARD OF APPEALS
R112.1 Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
R112.2 Disqualification of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
R112.3 Compensation of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
R112.4 Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days after the date of the Building Official's
decision thereon.
R112.5 Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
R112.5.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under
which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only
relevant information be received.
R112.6 Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section R302, Page 48
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 278/525
Delete this section with no substitution.
Table R302.6, Page 51
All references to 1/2 inch gypsum board should be changed to 5/8 inch Type X gypsum board.
Delete the last line in the table.
Add the following Exception:
Exception: One and two family dwellings that are protected by an automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be allowed to substitute 1/2
inch gypsum board in place of 5/8 inch Type X gypsum board.
Section R305.1, Page 54
Change the section to read as follows:
Minimum height. Habitable space, hallways, bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundry rooms and portions of basements containing the spaces shall
have a ceiling height of not less than 7'6".
Section R305.1, Page 54
Add an additional exception numbered 3 to read as follows:
3. Ceilings and finished basements can have a minimum height less than 7' 6" provided that no permanently installed fixtures will extend below 7
feet.
Section R313, Page 62
Delete the entire section with no substitution.
Section R314.3.1, Page 63
Change this section to read as follows:
Alterations, repairs and additions. When alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, and the cost of the alterations, repairs or
additions exceeds 50% of the assessed value of the dwelling or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings,
the individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke alarms located as required for new dwellings.
Table R403.1, Page 78
Delete the current Table and insert the following:
Table R403.1
MINIMUM WIDTH OF CONCRETE,
PRECAST OR MASONRY FOOTINGS (inches)
Number of stories and type of construction Thickness of footing (inches) Projection on each side of foundation wall (inches)
One story (without basement)
Frame 8 4
Masonry veneer on frame 8 4
Masonry 8 4
One story (with basement)
Frame 8 4
Masonry veneer on frame 8 4
Masonry 8 4
Over one story (with or without a basement)
Frame 8 4
Masonry veneer on frame 8 4
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 279/525
Masonry 12 6
Section R405.1, Page 109
Rewrite this section as follows and delete the exception:
R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations. Drains shall be provided around all concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth and
enclose crawl spaces, habitable or usable spaces located below grade. The foundation drain shall consist of drainage tiles or perforated pipe
placed on a minimum of 2 inches of washed gravel or crushed rock with a minimum aggregate size of one half inch in diameter and covered
with not less than 12 inches of the same material. Foundation drains must be covered with a filter membrane with a minimum width of 18
inches. Foundation drains must connect to a sump pit located inside the basement or crawl space of the dwelling. The drains must discharge
by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system.
Section R408.6, Page 112
Rewrite this section as follows:
R408.6 Finished grade. The finished grade of under floor surfaces must be located a minimum of 24 inches and a maximum of 42 inches
below the bottom of the floor framing.
Section 408.7, Page 112
Delete this section with no substitution
Section 602.3.2, Page 157
Delete the exception.
C. Fire Prevention: The International Fire Code 2012 is hereby adopted with the following amendments:
1. General Amendments:
a. ICC Electrical Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Fire Code to the ICC Electrical Code are hereby deleted and replaced with
NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011 Edition.
b. ICC International Plumbing Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Fire Code to the ICC International Plumbing Code are hereby
deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 edition.
c. Code Official: Any and all references in the ICC International Fire Code to the Code Official are hereby deleted and replaced with " Building
Official".
2. Specific Amendments:
Section 101.1, Page 1
Replace [NAME OF JURISDICTION] with " the Village of Antioch" in the second line.
Section 103, Page 2
Delete Section 103 with no substitution.
Section 105.1.2, Page 4
Types of permits.
Delete #1 and change #2 to #1
Section 105.3.4, Page 4
Add new section to read:
105.3.4.1 Temporary Permit: When a temporary hazardous situation is anticipated or discovered for conditions not otherwise regulated by this
code the fire code official is authorized, based on applicable data, to issue a temporary permit with appropriate conditions deemed necessary for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 280/525
the safety, health and welfare of the public.
Section 108, Page 12
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
108.1 Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
108.2 Disqualification of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
108.3 Compensation of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
108.3.4 Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days after the date of the Building Official's
decision thereon.
108.5 Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
108.5.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which
a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant
information be received.
108.6 Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 109.1, Page 12
Section 109.1 Unlawful Acts, add the following sections:
Section 109.1.1: No person shall deliberately or maliciously turn in an alarm of fire when in fact that person knows that no fire or emergency
exists. No person shall activate any installed fire protection system for the purpose other than emergency, maintenance, drills or other
prescribed testing.
Section 109.1.2: The owner or tenant shall be charged for false alarms in accordance with village code for fire protection malfunctions in excess
of five (5) per year.
Section 113, Page 14
Section 113, Fees,
Delete this section with no substitution.
Section 305.1, Page 46
Add a new subsection to read:
305.1.1 Proper Clearance: Proper clearances, as required by the mechanical code and NFiPA #704 listed in chapter 80, shall be maintained
between heating and lighting equipment and combustible and flammable materials so that continuous operation of full capacity will not
increase the combustible or flammable materials to their ignition temperature or flash point.
Section 305.1.1, Page 46
Add a new subsection to read:
305.1.1 Portable Heaters: Portable heaters shall be listed devices and designed and located so they cannot be easily overturned. The code
official may prohibit the use of portable heaters in occupancies or situations in which such use or operation would present an undue danger to
life or property.
Section 307, Page 46
Section 307.1 Add the following:
Open burning shall be in accordance with the Village of Antioch Nuisance Ordinances found in title 5, Chapter 1 of the Antioch,
Illinois Village Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 281/525
Section 901, Page 99
Add section [F] 901.11 Key Box
[F] 901.11.1 Where Required: A key box shall be required in any building that is required by this code to have a fire suppression, fire
protective signaling or a fire detection system.
[F] 901.11.2 Supervision: All required key boxes shall be electronically supervised.
[F] 901.11.3 Contents of Key Box: All required key boxes shall contain keys to all areas required by the code official.
[F] Section 903.2, Page 100
Add the following line before the exception:
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided, where not otherwise specified in this section, for all new buildings and structures over 10,000
square feet in fire area,
[F] Section 903.2, Page 100
To the heading " Automatic Sprinkler Systems Section 903", add section 304 " Business Group B", page 42 to the group of sections that
include section 903.2.4 (F-1), page 205, sections 903.2.7 (M), 903.2.9 (S-1), page 206, that all require an automatic sprinkler system.
Add, to use group B, the following three choices of which 1 has to exist to require automatic sprinklers:
1. Where a group B fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet;
2. Where a group B fire area is located three or more stories above grade; or
3. Where the combined area of all group B fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceed 10,000 square feet.
[F] Sections 903.2.1.1, Page 100
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "5,000 square feet".
Add the following at the end of section 903.2.1.1 as numbered:
5. Where the total combined areas of use group A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas on all floors exceed 10,000 square feet.
6. Where any use groups A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas is three or more stories above grade on any one side.
[F] Section 903.2.1.2, Page 100
Add the following:
4. Where the total combined area of use group A-2 fire areas on all floors exceed 5,000 square feet.
5. Where any use group's A-2 fire area is three or more stories above the grade on any one side.
[F] Sections 903.2.1.3, Page 100
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "5,000 square feet".
Add the following at the end of section 903.2.1.3 as numbered:
5. Where the total combined areas of use group A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas on all floors exceed 10,000 square feet.
6. Where any use groups A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas is three or more stories above grade on any one side.
[F] Sections 903.2.1.4, Page 100
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "5,000 square feet".
Add the following at the end of section 903.2.1.4 as numbered:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 282/525
5. Where the total combined areas of use group A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas on all floors exceed 10,000 square feet.
6. Where any use groups A-1, A-3, and A-4 fire areas is three or more stories above grade on any one side.
[F] Sections 903.2.3, Page 100
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "5,000 square feet".
Add the following at the end of [F] Section 903.2.3 as numbered:
4. Where the total combined areas of use Group E fire areas on all floors exceed 10,000 square feet.
5. Where any use Group E fire areas is three or more stories above grade on any one side.
[F] Sections 903.2.4, Page 100
Group F-1
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "10,000 square feet".
Item #3, change "24,000 square feet" to "10,000 square feet".
[F] Sections 903.2.7, Page 101
Group M
Item #1, change "12,000 square feet" to "10,000 square feet".
Item #3, change "24,000 square feet" to "10,000 square feet".
[F] Sections 903.2.8, Page 101
Group R, add "as follows":
[F] 903.2.8.1 Group R-1 or R-2.
[F] 903.2.8.2 Group R-3 or R-4
1. Where a Group R-3 or R-4 fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet;
2. Where a Group R-3 or R-4 fire area is located three or more stories above grade; or
3. Where the combined area of all Group R-3 or R-4 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceed 10,000 square feet.
[F] 903.2.8.3 Care Facilities. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.3 shall be permitted in care facilities with
3 or more individuals in a single-family dwelling.
[F] Section 903.3.1.4, Page 104
Add a subsection to read;
903.3.1.4 Emergency power supply. Every automatic fire suppression system that requires or is equipped with an electric fire pump
shall have an emergency generator to provide power in the case of primary power loss.
Exception. Upon submittal of documentation from the Fire Chief having jurisdiction of the area, stating that he has reviewed all
pertinent information concerning the interruption of the power supply of the area and is accepting the utility provider as a reliable
power supply for the fire pump.
[F] Section 905, Page 108
Add to section [F] 905.3 this paragraph before the exception.
Cross Connection: The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of the State of Illinois
Plumbing Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 283/525
[F] Section 906.1, Page 111
Add the following:
7. In all areas where fuel is dispensed;
8. In all areas where a flammable or combustible liquid is used in the operation of spraying, coating, or dipping;
9. Where required by the fire prevention code listed in chapter 35.
[F] Section 906.11, Page 113
Add the following:
[F] 906.11 Servicing Agency: Portable fire extinguishers shall bear the label of an approved agency, be of an approved type and be installed
in a location visible and available to the occupants.
[F] Section 907.1, Page 113
Add to section [F] 907.1.4 as follows:
907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panel
907.1.4.1 Location: Fire alarm control panel shall be located by the nearest logical emergency response entrance.
Exception: When a fire alarm annunciator panel is located at the logical emergency response entrance, the fire alarm control panel may be
located by the main power circuit panels.
907.1.4.2 All fire alarm control panels shall be addressable and shall display the exact location of the activated device.
907.1.4.3 All fire alarm control panels shall be capable of having the audio signal silenced without resetting the fire alarm control panel.
[F] Section 907.6.1, Page 122
Change the subsection to read as follows:
[F] 907.6.1 Wiring: All wiring shall conform to the requirements of NFiPA (same as NFPA) 72 listed in chapter 35. In addition the minimum
wire size for all audio-visual devices shall be 14 gauge solid wire. All other devices, the minimum wire size shall be 18 gauge solid wire. The
maximum I/R drop for all indicating circuits shall not exceed 10% of the rated voltage.
[F] Section 907.6.3, Page 122
Change "22,500" to "10,000" and "300" to "100".
[F] Section 916, Page 137
Add this section:
Section 916.0 Supervision
[F] Section 916.1 Fire Suppression System: All automatic fire suppression systems required for occupancies in use group A, B, E, H, I, M or
R shall be supervised by:
1. Approved central-station system in accordance with NFiPA (same as NFPA) 72;
Section 1006.1, Page 143
[B] 1006.1 Illumination required.
After the words exit discharge insert the words "and toilet rooms"
Section 1007, Page 143
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 284/525
Delete the entire section and insert a new section to read:
SECTION 1007
ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS
[B] 1007.1 Accessible Means of Egress Required. Accessible means of egress shall comply with the Illinois Capitol Development Board,
Accessibility Standards.
Section 1008.1.5, Page 148
Add new subsection to read:
[B] 1008.1.5.1 Grade Exit Discharge Doors: Where required to swing in the direction of egress travel, all required grade exit doors shall be
provided with a hard surfaced area underneath the door swing.
[B] 1008.1.5.2 Stoop surface: The exterior surface shall have a slip resistant surface that has a slope not greater than 1:50 in any direction.
[B] 1008.1.5.3 Support: Sufficient wing walls and/or foundation wall is required under all stoops. Wing walls shall have a minimum of one (1)
number 4 reinforcing bar located not more than six (6) inches beneath the top edge of concrete and extending downward into the foundation wall
not less than two (2) feet.
[B] 1008.1.5.4 Stoop extension: The outer perimeter of the stoop shall not project out beyond the wing wall and/or foundation wall more than
twelve (12) inches in any direction."
Section 6109.13, Page 409
Add the following:
6109.13.1 Barrier Protection. Barrier protection from vehicles shall stop a vehicle from coming in contact with LP-Gas storage containers. Such
barriers shall meet the requirements of IBC 2012 1607.8.3.
D. Fuel Gas Code: The 2012 International Fuel Gas Code is hereby adopted with the following amendments:
1. General Amendments:
a. ICC Electrical Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Fuel Gas Code to the ICC Electrical Code are hereby deleted and replaced
with NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011 Edition.
b. ICC International Existing Building Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Fuel Gas Code to the ICC International Existing Building
Code are hereby deleted with no substitution.
c. ICC International Plumbing Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Fuel Gas Code to the ICC International Plumbing Code are
hereby deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 edition.
d. Code Official: Any and all references in the ICC International Fuel Gas Code to the Code Official are hereby deleted and replaced with " Building
Official".
2. Specific Amendments:
Section 101.1, Page 1
Replace [NAME OF JURISDICTION] with " the Village of Antioch" in the second line.
Section 106.6.2, Page 5
[A] 106.6.2 Fee Schedule
Delete the words "as indicated in the following schedule." and "[JURISDICTION TO INSERT APPROPRIATE SCHEDULE]". Insert the
words "the effective fee schedule as adopted by the Village of Antioch".
Section 108.4, Page 7
108.4 Violation penalties
Delete the words "[SPECIFY OFFENSE]" and insert the word " petty offense". In the eighth (8th) line delete the word "[AMOUNT]" and insert
the number "$500.00". In the ninth (9th) and tenth (10th) lines delete the words "or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF DAYS], or
both such fine and imprisonment." In the last sentence delete the word " day" and insert the word " week".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 285/525
Section 109, Page 7
SECTION 109 (IFGC)
MEANS OF APPEAL
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
109.1 Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
109.2 Disqualification of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
109.3 Compensation of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
109.4 Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days after the date of the Building Official's
decision thereon.
109.5 Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
109.5.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which
a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant
information be received.
109.6 Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 504.2.10, Page 95
Corrugated vent connector size
Delete this entire section with no substitution.
E. Mechanical Code: The International Mechanical Code 2012 is hereby adopted with the following amendments:
1. General Amendments:
a. ICC Electrical Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Mechanical Code to the ICC Electrical Code are hereby deleted and replaced
with NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011 Edition.
b. ICC International Existing Building Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Mechanical Code to the ICC International Existing
Building Code are hereby deleted with no substitution.
c. ICC International Plumbing Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Mechanical Code to the ICC International Plumbing Code are
hereby deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
d. Code Official: Any and all references in the ICC International Mechanical Code to the Code Official are hereby deleted and replaced with "
Building Official".
2. Specific Amendments:
Section 101.1, Page 1
Replace [NAME OF JURISDICTION] with " the Village of Antioch" in the second line.
Section 106.5.2, Page 5
[A] 106.5.2 Fee Schedule
Delete the words "as indicated in the following schedule." and "[JURISDICTION TO INSERT APPROPRIATE SCHEDULE]". Insert the
words "the effective fee schedule as adopted by the Village of Antioch".
Section 106.5.3, Page 5
Delete Section 106.5.3 with no substitution
Section 108.4, Page 7
[A]108.4 Violation penalties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 286/525
Delete the words "[SPECIFY OFFENSE]" and insert the word " petty offense" in the 7th line. Delete the word "[AMOUNT]" and insert the
number "$500.00" in the 8th line. In the 8th and 9th lines, delete the words "or by imprisonment not exceeding [NUMBER OF DAYS], or
both such fine and imprisonment." In the last sentence delete the word " day" and insert the word " week".
Section 108.5, Page 7
[A]108.5 Stop Work Orders.
In the fourteenth (14th) line, delete the first reference to "[AMOUNT]" and insert the number "$100.00". Delete the second reference to "
[AMOUNT]" and insert the number "$500.00".
Section 109, Page 7
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
109.1 Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
109.2 Disqualification of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
109.3 Compensation of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
109.4 Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days after the date of the Building Official's
decision thereon.
109.5 Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
109.5.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which
a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant
information be received.
109.6 Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
F. Property Maintenance: The International Property Maintenance Code 2012 is hereby adopted with the following amendments:
1. General Amendments:
a. ICC Electrical Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Property Maintenance Code to the ICC Electrical Code are hereby deleted
and replaced with NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011 Edition.
b. ICC International Existing Building Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Property Maintenance Code to the ICC International
Existing Building Code are hereby deleted with no substitution.
c. ICC International Plumbing Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Property Maintenance Code to the ICC International Plumbing
Code are hereby deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014 edition.
d. Code Official: Any and all references in the ICC International Property Maintenance Code to the Code Official are hereby deleted and replaced
with " Building Official".
2. Specific Amendments:
Section 101.1, Page 1
Replace [NAME OF JURISDICTION] with " the Village of Antioch" in the second line.
Section 103.5, Page 5
[A] 106.6.2 Fees
Delete the words "as indicated in the following schedule." and "[JURISDICTION TO INSERT APPROPRIATE SCHEDULE]". Insert the
words "the effective fee schedule as adopted by the Village of Antioch".
Section 108.2.2, Page 5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 287/525
Closing Of Vacant Structures,
Section 108.2.2 Boarding Up: Boarding up a vacant or unsafe structure is considered a temporary measure until decision can be made as to what
remedy the owner wants to pursue as provided in this section.
If any window or door remains boarded up for more than fifteen (15) days, but less than ninety (90) days, the plywood or other board covering
the window or door must be covered with a weather-resistant paint or provided with other weather-resistant finish.
If any window remains boarded up for ninety (90) or more days, the window shall be covered with two shutters, each containing a minimum of
two raised panels. The shutters shall be covered with a weather-resistant paint or otherwise covered with a weather-resistant finish.
If any door remains boarded up for ninety (90) or more days, the door shall be covered with a solid door containing a minimum of two raised
panels. The solid door shall be covered with a weather-resistant paint or otherwise covered with a weather-resistant finish.
Section 111, Page 7
SECTION 111
MEANS OF APPEAL
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
[A] 111.1 Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
[A] 111.2 Disqualification of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
[A] 111.3 Compensation of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
[A] 111.4 Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days after the date of the Building Official's
decision thereon.
[A] 111.5 Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative,
the Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
[A] 111.5.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under
which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only
relevant information be received.
[A] 111.6 Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 302.4, Page 11
Weeds
Replace [JURISDICTION TO INSERT HEIGHT IN INCHES] with more than 8" inches in height. in the third line.
Section 304.14, Page 13
Insect Screens,
Replace [DATE] to [DATE] with "May 15" and "September 30", respectively in the first and second lines.
Section 602.3, Page 21
Heat Supply.
Replace [DATE] to [DATE] with "October 1st" and "May 15th", in the fifth line.
Section 602.4, Page 21
Occupiable work spaces.
Replace [DATE] to [DATE] with "October 1st" and "May 15th", in the third line.
G. Swimming And Spa: The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 2012, as published by the ICC, and abbreviated "ISPSC" are hereby adopted with
the following amendments:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 288/525
1. General Amendments: Any and all references in the ICC International Swimming Pool and SPA Code to the Code Official are hereby deleted and
replaced with " Building Official".
a. ICC International Plumbing Code: Any and all references in the ICC International Swimming Pool and SPA Code to the ICC International Plumbing
Code are hereby deleted and replaced with the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, current edition.
2. Specific Amendments:
Section 101.1, Page 1
Replace [NAME OF JURISDICTION] with " the Village of Antioch" in the second line.
Section 103.1, Page 2
Delete the words "Department of Building Safety" and insert the words "Planning, Zoning & Building Department".
Section 105.3, Page 4
Change the first sentence to read as follows
"Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the
work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced, or if the work
authorized by such permit is not completed within one year of the date of permit issuance."
Section 105.4, Page 4
Delete the last sentence of this section with no substitution.
Section 105.6.2, Page 4
Fee Schedule
Delete the words "as indicated in the following schedule." and "[JURISDICTION TO INSERT APPROPRIATE SCHEDULE]". Insert the
words "the effective fee schedule as adopted by the Village of Antioch".
Section 105.6.3, Page 6
Delete the entire section and insert the following
The Building Official shall authorize the refunding of fees in accordance with the current adoption of the Department Policy and Procedure
Relating to Fee Refunds and Reductions.
Section 107.4, Page 6
Change this section to read as follows:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter
or repair an aquatic vessel in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a fine of $500 per offense. Each week shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 108, Page 6
SECTION 108
MEANS OF APPEAL
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
108.1 Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
108.2 Disqualification of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
108.3 Compensation of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 289/525
108.4 Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days after the date of the Building Official's
decision thereon.
108.5 Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
108.5.1 Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which
a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant
information be received.
108.6 Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 305.4, Page 14
Change the first paragraph to read as follows:
Where a wall of a dwelling or structure serves as part of the barrier, doors that provide direct access to the aquatic vessel through the wall shall
be equipped with one or more of the following:
H. Life Safety: The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 2000 as adopted by the Illinois Office of the State Fire Marshal, (section 100.7 of title 41: Fire Protection,
chapter 1), is adopted by the Village with no further changes.
I. Plumbing Code: The current edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code as published by the Illinois Department of Public Health, and as authorized by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes4 is adopted with no changes.
J. Electrical Code: The NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011 is hereby adopted with the following amendments:
1. General Amendments:
a. Code Official: Any and all references in the NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011 to the Code Official are hereby deleted and replaced with "
Building Official".
b. Specific Restrictions: In addition to the adoption of the NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code 2011, the Village requires the following specific
restrictions as to new and remodeled constructions (Note - page numbers shown are taken from the NEC Handbook):
Section, Page
Switch Location: All switches that control required lighting outlets shall be located in the same room as the outlet(s). There shall be, at each
point of entry and/or exit to a room, the same control required lighting outlet or switched outlet. Switches shall be located adjacent to the door
opening or wall opening and shall be located on the latch side of the doorway. The above rule shall also apply to hallways and passageways.
The electrical inspector or building inspector shall control the number and placement of switches in hallways and passageways.
Conduit Required: All underground services and overhead services shall be installed in metal conduit from meter to breaker panel box. When
installing thin wall conduit appropriate fittings are required (watertight compression connectors and couplings).
Independent Branch Circuits: Separate branch circuits are required for furnaces, dishwashers, sump pumps, ejector pumps, whirlpool tubs
and washers and dryers. These must be independent from all other outlets and circuits.
Aluminum Wire: Use of aluminum wire is prohibited for electrical services and wiring of structures, unless otherwise permitted by the Electrical
Inspector or Building Code Official.
Minimum Amperage For One- And Two-Family Residential: All new construction of single- and two-family homes will have a minimum of a
two hundred (200) amp service. All upgrades (revisions) of electrical services will be a minimum of one hundred (100) amps.
Electric Pipe: For all new construction of any building or structure requiring electrical wiring, said wiring shall be done in electric pipe (EMT)
(electrical metallic tubing).
Remodeled Or Rehabilitated Structures: The electrical inspector or the head of the building department shall have the authority to authorize
the use of non-metallic sheathed cable or armored cable or metal-clad cable for structures being remodeled or rehabilitated. If no determination
is made as to the use of wiring, then the applicant must use EMT (electric metallic tubing). The determination to use Romex or BX must be in
writing and signed by the electrical inspector or head of the building department as part of the permit process.
Licensed Contractor: All electrical work performed as part of new construction or extensive remodeling shall be performed under the
supervision of an electrical contractor who possesses a current electrical contractor's license from an Illinois municipality. Minor additions or
revisions to electrical work performed by the owner-occupant of a single-family residence may be performed by that owner, with the approval of
the village's electrical inspector.
The licensed electrical contractor shall submit to the village an original certificate of insurance documenting that the contractor carries insurance
with minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Such coverage shall include general liability - bodily injury, property damage, and
workers' compensation. No permit may be issued in the absence of this certificate.
2. Specific Amendments:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 290/525
Section 90.10, Page 11
Add the following section:
SECTION 90.10
MEANS OF APPEAL
Delete the entire section and replace with the following:
(A) Application for Appeal: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the Building Official to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
(B) Disqualification of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has any personal, professional or financial
interest.
(C) Compensation of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined by law.
(D) Notice of Meeting: Any appeal must be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days after the date of the Building Official's
decision thereon.
(E) Open Hearing: All hearings before the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the
Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
(F) Procedure: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available to the public through the Secretary, procedures under which a
hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant
information be received.
(G) Administration: The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 210.8, Page 90
Add the following to the "Exception 2 (5)":
Single dedicated receptacles that supply power to sump pumps, battery backup sump pumps, ejector pumps, dedicated appliance circuits,
and garage door openers.
Section 210-11a, Page 93
Number of Branch Circuits
Add the following to the end of this section:
The total number of openings for any branch circuit shall not exceed 9 openings for a 15 ampere circuit or 12 openings for a 20 ampere circuit.
Section 210-12, Page 93
Arc-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection (AFCI)
Insert the following exception:
Exception to 210-12(B) In circumstances where the Building Official deems that it is not practical to comply with this requirement due to
existing conditions, the requirement can be waived, provided every effort is made to comply with the intent of the code.
Section 230-43, Page 166
Wiring Methods for 600 volts Nominal, or Less
Add a new number twenty (20) to read:
"(20) For overhead service entrance cables on the outside of one and two family dwelling, only items 3, 4 or 5 above are allowed." (Only rigid
metal conduit or intermediate metal conduit or electrical metallic tubing)
Section 230-50, Page 167
Protection Against Physical Damage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 291/525
Add a new number seven (7) to read:
"(7) for overhead service entrance cables on the outside of one and 2 family dwellings, only items 1, 2 or 4 above are allowed." (Only rigid
metal conduit or intermediate metal conduit or electrical metallic tubing)
Section 300-5(A), Page 300
Minimum Cover Requirements.
Add a paragraph to the end of the section to read:
"Underground installation of an electrical service cannot be located in the same trench with plumbing or gas service(s) unless the minimum
distance between utility services located in the same trench, shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches measured in a horizontal dimension.
Utility services located in separate trenches shall be located a minimum of twelve (12) inches apart horizontally."
Exception: Plumbing and electrical systems that are part of a swimming pool installation may be located in the same trench in circumstances
where the Building Official determines that it is not practical to comply with the separation requirement.
Section 320-12, Page 383
Uses Not Permitted
Add a new number (6) to read:
(6) "In any occupancy other than one and two family dwellings."
Section 334-10, Page 402
Uses Permitted
Delete Items (2), (3), and (5) with no substitution.
K. Energy Conservation: The current edition of the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code is adopted with no changes. (Ord. 18-02-05, 2-12-2018)
9-1-3: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. Modular Homes: Modular homes constructed within the village will be permitted from the approved list of manufactured housing manufacturers by the
state department of public health. (1976 Code § 151.002(J)_(M))
B. Compliance With Specific Material Requirements:
1. Conflicting Provisions: Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, an ordinance providing for masonry dividing walls and ceilings, section 9-1-6
of this chapter, and an ordinance providing for the use of certain plastic pipe, the plumbing code adopted in section 9-1-1 of this chapter, shall take
precedence over any similar or conflicting provisions of the codes adopted by this chapter.
2. Concrete Placement: The contractor is responsible for adequate protection during concrete placement. Such protection shall be in accordance with
standards set forth in "Design And Control Of Concrete Mixtures", current edition, as published by the Portland Cement Association
(www.cement.org). During the winter months, the pouring of concrete shall occur only if the ambient air temperature during the previous night was a
minimum of twenty five degrees Fahrenheit (25°F), and rising so that during the day of the pour it shall be a minimum of twenty five degrees
Fahrenheit (25°F), as determined by the national weather service. During summer months, the pouring of concrete shall occur only if the ambient air
temperature during any time of the pour is a maximum of ninety five degrees Fahrenheit (95°F), as determined by the national weather service
approved observation location nearest the location of the pour. (Ord. 06-10-35, 10-2-2006)
C. Pipes And Fittings: Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, plastic potable water lines are not permitted in any type of construction. ABS pipe
and ABS fittings are not permitted for installation of any drains, waste lines or vents for any plumbing system. In addition, "no hub" pipe and "no hub"
fittings are not permitted for installation of drains, waste lines or vents of a plumbing system or sewer mains or laterals.
1. Unless prohibited by special waste considerations, which require corrosion resistance, the underground installation of schedule 40 PVC pipes and
fittings shall be permitted for sanitary uses where pipe is embedded in crushed gravel within the interior of the foundation wall. Schedule 40 foam
core shall not be allowed for underground installation.
2. Where sanitary lines pass through the foundation wall, to a point past the overdig, but no less than ten feet (10'), ductile iron piping shall be used.
Couplings which connect the ductile iron to PVC shall be "no shear" type.
3. Potable water line underground shall be type K copper; potable water line aboveground if copper is used shall be type L. (Ord. 07-11-31, 11-5-2007)
D. Plans Require Architectural Approval: All plans and specifications for new construction, or alterations involving structural changes, of all buildings or
structures, excepting detached accessory buildings, shall be prepared by, or shall be examined in detail and approved by, an architect duly licensed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 292/525
under the Illinois architectural act4.
1. Certificate: All such plans and specifications shall contain a certificate or certificates signed and sealed by said architect specifically certifying that
said plans and specifications shall have been so prepared or examined and approved by him.
2. Detailed Plans: Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and shall show
in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
3. Exceptions: Owners of single-family residences, at their discretion, may choose to sign an affidavit, accepting responsibility for the working drawings
and specifications, in lieu of an architect's or engineer's seal, where the proposed work is:
a. An addition consisting of five hundred (500) square feet of floor area or less, to an existing single-family structure; or remodeling where the total
construction cost is estimated to be forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) or less;
b. Where, in the opinion of the village director of planning, zoning and building, or his successor or nominee, the construction plans and
specifications are in keeping with typical design and construction practices for single-family residential construction;
c. The construction is to take place on a proposed building pad which lies outside of the floodplain and outside of any organic or severe wet soils
area as defined by the USDA soil conservation service;
d. That the construction is on a lot or parcel where no variation to lot area, lot width, lot coverage, side yards or setbacks will take place.
4. Contents: Such affidavit shall be on forms as provided by the department of planning, zoning and building, and shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to:
a. A statement accepting responsibility for the contract documents, including working drawings and specifications.
b. Permanent index number (PIN).
c. Legal description of the property as indicated on the warranty deed or recent plat of survey.
d. Common address of the property.
e. Name, address, phone number and fax number of person preparing the working drawings and specifications.
f. Date, and revised date where applicable, of approved working drawings and specifications.
g. Signatures of the owner(s) as indicated on the warranty deed or on trust documents.
E. Site Plan: There shall be a site plan drawn to scale showing the location of all easements, drainage facilities, including drainage tiles, feeder and lateral
septic fields and septic tanks, adjacent grades, property lines, the proposed building and of every existing structure on the property. The site plan shall
show the elevation of existing grade at the corners of the site and at the center of the building location, and at other locations on site if needed to
indicate varying surface conditions, and shall show the elevation of all proposed final grades at the building perimeter and elsewhere on the site
sufficiently to show the pattern of all surface drainage of stormwater on the entire site. The location of all existing or proposed water supply, sewage
disposal lines, storm drains, sump pump drainage and wells shall be shown on the site plan. This plan shall also show all vehicular parking facilities
required by the Antioch zoning ordinance5, indicating details of pavement construction. The site plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor,
registered architect or registered engineer. (1976 Code §§ 151.002(J)-(M))
F. Covenants, Conditions, Or Restrictions: For properties within the village that are encumbered by private covenants, conditions, or restrictions, the
following procedure will be administered in conjunction with the building and site permit process. In situations where emergency actions may be
required, the village reserves the right to forgo the understated processes in order to allow the abatement of nuisances or potential hazards.
1. Prior to the application of this subsection F, the respective agent or administrator of the private covenants shall register with the village board of
trustees in writing, with a request to notify the agent or administrator of an application for issuance of construction or development related permits
pursuant to this subsection F. Said request shall include a reaffirmation and nature of the request, the name of the covenant administrator or
appointed body lawfully charged with the administration of the covenants, a statement indicating that the owners represented by the administrator
and bound by the covenants have assented to the administrator's/agent's representative authority, a list of the subject properties or subdivisions in
question (as identified by PIN or common address), and updated contact information, including fax, phone, e-mail, and mailing address, for the
dissemination of relevant building related correspondence. The village board will hear the request at a regularly scheduled meeting and determine
that the information supplied is sufficient and meets the intent of this subsection F.
2. For each property in the village there may be only one registered covenant administrator for the purpose of receiving notice of applications for
construction or development related permits.
3. Once registered by the village, permits for registered properties and subdivisions that lack acknowledgment letters from the registered covenant
administrator will not be reviewed by the building or engineering departments, except as follows:
a. Upon submission of a completed permit application that lacks an acknowledgment letter, the building department shall attempt to contact the
registered covenant administrator in writing and shall make a record of the notification within the building permit file. Notice to the covenant
administrator shall be by first class mail to the last address provided to the village.
b. Once the letter to the covenant administrator is submitted, the building department will hold the permit for no longer than fourteen (14) calendar
days prior to the review of the permit. Once the fourteen (14) days have lapsed, or upon written notification from the covenant administrator,
whichever is first, the permit shall enter into the review process pursuant to this title.
c. Any deadline or duration for review of construction or development related permit applications provided for by state or local law shall be stayed
during the notice and acknowledgment period provided for herein.
G. Conflicting Provisions: Whenever the provisions of the codes adopted by reference in this chapter and other regulations of the village conflict, the more
restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 08-02-01, 2-4-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 293/525
9-1-4: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
See section 13-1-6 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
9-1-5: SITE DEVELOPMENT:
A. Conditions Requiring A Site Development Plan:
1. Residential construction: All engineering improvements benefiting more than one property parcel;
2. "Subdivision" as defined and regulated in title 11 of this code;
3. All engineering improvements for other than residential (commercial, institutional, industrial) construction whether on one or many property parcels;
4. Any water main extension;
5. Any sanitary sewer extension;
6. Any storm sewer extension;
7. Any roadway extension;
8. Development in a flood hazard area; floodplain, or the site is subject to sheet flow of stormwater from off site areas;
9. Development subject to the Lake County watershed development ordinance adopted in section 12-1-1 of this code;
10. Development subject to any other special considerations as determined by the village engineer or director of planning, zoning, and building.
B. Site Development Plan Contents: The site development plan must be prepared by a licensed surveyor, architect or engineer and be submitted to the
village with the following information:
1. Existing Conditions: The site plan must show existing project topography and topography for an area within a two hundred foot (200') radius of the
project boundary, which information shall include the following:
a. The locations and flow line of creeks or swales.
b. Street gradients.
c. The locations, rims and inverts of sanitary and storm sewers.
d. Water main, valve and fire hydrant locations.
e. Electric, telephone and gas utilities.
f. Ground contours, drawn to USGS datum.
g. Floodplain or flood hazard areas.
h. Foundation heights on adjoining property or within two hundred feet (200') of the project.
i. Name and address of developer or builder.
j. Name and address of person preparing the site development plan.
2. Proposed Improvements: The site plan must show all improvements proposed by the developer, whether public or privately owned, which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. The location, size and elevation of foundations.
b. The location, size and elevation of parking areas and drives.
c. The size and location of water supply and hydrant protection.
d. The location and size of sanitary sewer connection.
e. Site drainage, detention, and floodplain replacement, if required.
f. Proposed contour lines or spot elevation depicting final grades at pertinent locations.
g. Calculations of stormwater drainage, including detention, pipe sizes and floodplain replacement.
3. Site Improvements: An "estimated site improvement construction costs" documenting all site improvements including, but not limited to: roadways,
public walks, sanitary sewer mains, storm sewer mains, and water mains.
4. Content Modification Plan: The village engineer or director of planning, zoning, and building may waive or modify site development plan contents to
omit items or require additional information as applicable to that site development.
C. Site Development Procedures: The following is a general outline which may be altered by the specific needs of a development or changes in Antioch
village policies and procedures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 294/525
1. Developer (owner, contractor, agent, representative or the like) will submit a concept plan as defined in title 11 of this code, or a draft site
development plan. The number, nature, deadlines, and media of site development plan copies submitted will be governed by published
administrative policies and procedures as needed and in compliance with this code.
2. The village will invoice the developer for all applicable fees and escrowed funds as required by all applicable village codes.
3. Upon receipt of monies and any outstanding site development plan requirements, the village will review the plan internally and communicate with the
developer as needed.
4. The village will communicate with any agencies other than the village of Antioch as pertains to the site development.
5. The village will communicate in written form requirements of permit issuance.
6. Upon satisfaction of the village engineer/director of planning, zoning, and building, in keeping with this and all applicable village codes, a site
development permit will be issued.
7. The village will conduct site improvement inspections as needed to enforce this code and site development permit. (Ord. 03-09-37, 9-8-2003)
D. Site Development Fees And Escrow Deposits: See title 13, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
9-1-6: DIVIDING WALLS AND CEILINGS:
There shall be provided a two (2) hour fire resistive wall, without openings, between two (2) living units side by side. There shall be provided eight inch (8")
masonry walls or material that is fire resistive equivalent, without openings, extending from the ground line to the bottom side of the underlayment of the
roof, between living units in row housing, of three (3) or more living units, and between every two (2) living units in multiple-family dwellings, including
modular housing. There shall be provided one hour fire resistive ceilings which divide living units horizontally. (1976 Code § 151.008)
9-1-7: MINIMUM FLOOR AREAS IN ONE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
A. One-Story One-Family Dwellings:
1. Every one-story one-family dwelling containing three (3) bedrooms or less hereafter erected or structurally altered shall contain at least one
thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet of floor area, exclusive of basement, porch or garage.
2. Every one-story one-family dwelling containing four (4) bedrooms or more hereafter erected or structurally altered shall contain at least one thousand
two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor area, exclusive of basement, porch or garage.
B. Two-Story One-Family Dwellings: Every two-story one-family dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall contain at least one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area, exclusive of basement, porch or garage. (1976 Code § 151.009)
9-1-8: MASONRY CONSTRUCTION WITHIN CERTAIN DISTRICTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
9-1-9: INCREASE IN DWELLING UNITS:
A. For any structure of more than two (2) residential units which is increased to handle more dwelling units, the existing portion of the structure shall
conform with all building codes for new construction, except as provided in subsection B of this section.
B. Should an owner, builder, developer or tenant be unable to comply with this section, he shall be allowed to appear before the village board of trustees,
at any of its regularly scheduled meetings, to show cause why he is unable to conform to this section. The application for a variation shall be in writing
stating the reason the owner is unable to comply. Reasons for inability to comply shall include hardship, major structural problems, cosmetic or
appearance reasons, including the requirement to use brick on the old structure because it is required to be used on the new structure, and for any
other good cause shown. The village board, by a majority, may waive the requirements of this section. Their decision shall be final.
C. In all other respects, the building codes of the village shall be complied with.
D. The chief building inspector shall have the final determination as to conformity with this section. (1976 Code § 151.011)
9-1-10: HOURS CONSTRUCTION WORK AUTHORIZED:
It is forbidden to permit performance of construction work prior to the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or to permit the performance of construction work
after the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday. It shall be further a nuisance to permit the performance of construction work prior to
the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or to permit the performance of construction work after the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Sundays or holidays.
(1976 Code § 151.012)
9-1-11: FENCE RESTRICTIONS6:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 295/525
A. Definition: A "fence" is defined as a structure forming a barrier at grade between lots, between a lot and a street or an alley, or between portions of a lot
or lots, such structure being independent of any other.
B. Barbed Wire And Electric Fences: No owner, lessee or person in possession of any lot or parcel of real estate within the village shall erect, maintain, or
permit to be erected or maintained, along the line of or in or upon any such lot or parcel, a fence equipped with or having barbed wire spikes, or any
similar device, or any electric charge sufficient to cause shock within six feet (6') of the ground level. (1976 Code § 96.020)
9-1-12: CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS; FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 03-09-37, 9-8-2003)
9-1-13: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Tax Liability For Real Property Improvements: It is required as a condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy that an unexecuted certificate of
occupancy be filed with the assessor of Lake County, and that the owner of such property obtain from the assessor, in the form prescribed by such
official, a receipt showing that the unexecuted certificate of occupancy has been filed and that the property is subject to increased assessment, from
the date of issue of the certificate on a proportionate basis for the year in which the improvement was completed. The owner of the property shall file
such receipt with the village clerk and a certified copy of the certificate of occupancy, when issued, shall be filed with the assessor by the village clerk.
(1976 Code § 157.002)
B. Definition: "Certificate of occupancy" means the certificate or permit, by whatever name denominated which the village, under its authority to regulate
the construction of buildings, issues as evidence that all applicable requirements have been complied with and requires before any new, reconstructed
or remodeled building may be lawfully occupied. (1976 Code § 157.003)
9-1-14: CONDOMINIUMS:
A. In the event that any portion of a property shall be developed under the state statutes relating to condominiums, the condominium covenants, conditions
and restrictions shall be approved by the village attorney. Such documents shall include a provision whereby the village shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to enforce covenants or obligations of the association or the owners of the units as defined and provided within the declaration of
condominium, and further shall have the right, upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice specifying the nature of a default, to enter upon common open
spaces and cure such default, or cause the same to be cured at the cost and expense of the association or the owner or owners thereof. The village
shall also have the right to charge or place a lien upon the property of the condominium association for the repayment of such costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorney fees, in enforcing such obligations. The declaration shall further provide that this provision may not be amended without
the approval of the village. Prior to the examination of the condominium covenants, conditions, and restrictions by the village attorney, the applicant
shall deposit with the village clerk a sum sufficient to cover the costs of that examination and preparation of any additions, deletions or the like to the
covenants, conditions and restrictions.
B. Any condominium constructed or converted shall be subject to all of the building codes and laws of the state and the village. (1976 Code § 157.005)
9-1-15: FILL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Clean Fill Allowed: The only fill that may be used to raise a parcel of land is concrete, sand, gravel, dirt and virgin clay. (1976 Code § 157.016)
B. Industrial Waste Fill Prohibited: No industrial byproduct or waste shall be used as fill within the corporate limits of the village. (1976 Code § 157.015)
9-1-16: FIRE ZONES:
The following zones as shown on the official map, as amended, of the village are designated fire zones as defined in the building code adopted in section
9-1-1 of this chapter, and any construction, remodeling or use as regulated by such code fire zone provisions is to be in accordance therewith in these
zones: B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1 and M-2. (1976 Code § 157.004)
9-1-17: PENALTY:
A. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions regarding penalties set forth in the uniform, national, state or international codes adopted under this chapter,
the provision in subsection C of this section shall apply to all violations of any of the aforesaid codes.
B. Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses.
C. Any person violating any specifically identified provision of a uniform, national, state or international building code shall also be subject to fines set forth
in the schedule of fines set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code.
D. Any person who shall violate a provision of any of the codes adopted by this chapter, or who shall fail to comply with any of the regulations thereof, or
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 296/525
certificate issued under the provisions of the codes, or violate any other provisions of this chapter, and which is not specifically identified in subsection
1-3-1A of this code, shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code.
E. Each day that a violation of any code adopted by this chapter or of any other provision of this chapter continues shall be deemed to constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 2
SIGN CODE1
(Rep. by Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
Chapter 3
SMOKE DETECTORS
9-3-1: NEW OWNERS:
It shall be the responsibility of the new purchaser of any home in the Village which does not have smoke detectors, to install at least one battery operated
or better type smoke detector in the common area in the home. (Ord. 15-12-21, 12-7-2015)
9-3-2: RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Single-Family Residences:
1. All new single-family buildings shall have smoke detectors hardwired into the electrical system. Smoke detectors shall also be of the design to
include a battery backup contained within the unit. An approved Underwriter Laboratories rated smoke detector shall be installed on each floor of the
building. The smoke detectors shall be located within the laundry area, furnace area, and bedroom or sleeping area as determined by the authority
having jurisdiction. Smoke detectors shall be interconnected so that if one is activated all will activate.
2. All residential smoke detectors shall be connected to a dedicated circuit strictly for smoke detector use only. The circuit shall be labeled smoke
detectors. At the time of final inspection, the circuit shall be secured, (breaker lock-out), in the on position so that it cannot be turned off. (Ord. 18-02-
05, 2-12-2018)
B. Two-Flat Residences: There shall be at least one approved battery operated smoke detector in each apartment and in the furnace room, as well as one
approved battery operated smoke detector at the top of all required stairwells. This shall be required in all two-flat or more multiple-family units
regardless of age. The battery operated smoke detectors shall be required to be installed within six (6) months of notification of this chapter to the
owners of record of the land.
C. Multiple-Family Residential Buildings Of Three Units Or More:
1. All buildings that have more than two (2) units for residential occupancy with a common area of entrance and egress shall have approved
Underwriter Laboratories rated smoke detectors installed within each unit and in all common areas. Common areas shall include, but not be limited
to, attics, hallways, stairwells, laundry rooms, storage areas and other areas accessible to the public. All detectors in common areas are to be
connected into a monitored fire alarm system approved by the Village that will notify the Fire Department upon receipt of an alarm. The system shall
be installed per National Fire Protection Association 72 requirements. Installation of fire alarm systems shall be approved by the Village prior to
installation. Location of the fire alarm control panel shall be in a common area accessible to the public without having to enter into a residential unit.
2. Installation of the fire alarm system shall be in accordance with chapter 6 of this title.
3. The building owner may choose to have smoke detectors, within each individual residential unit, connected directly to the alarm system. If the smoke
detectors are to be separate from the alarm system, they are to be hardwired into the electrical system. Smoke detectors shall also be of the design
to include a battery backup contained within the unit. Smoke detectors within individual units shall be placed within fifteen feet (15') of the sleeping
area.
4. The common areas of multiple-family residential buildings shall be fully covered using the appropriate detection devices connected to the building
fire alarm. (Ord. 15-12-21, 12-7-2015)
9-3-3: BUILDINGS HOUSING TRANSIENT OCCUPANTS:
A. In all units where the occupants reside less than thirty (30) days or where units can be used as a hotel/motel environment, approved smoke detectors
shall be installed within each unit and in all common areas. All detectors are to be connected into an approved monitored alarm system that will
immediately notify the fire department upon receipt of an alarm. The system shall be installed per National Fire Protection Association 72 requirements.
Fire alarm systems shall be approved prior to installation and shall be fully tested at the time of completion of installation. Installation shall be in
accordance with chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 15-12-21, 12-7-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 297/525
9-3-4: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
A. In residential units, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to maintain the smoke detector in working order to ensure they function effectively at all
times. Where battery operated smoke detectors are currently permitted, the occupant shall do regular tests of the smoke detector and change the
battery once a year or more if necessary.
B. If battery operated smoke detectors are not maintained by the occupants, the owner of the building shall be required to change the detectors to be
hardwired into the electrical system. Detectors shall then be connected to the electrical system with a circuit dedicated strictly for use of the smoke
detectors. The circuit breaker shall be clearly marked smoke detectors. The circuit shall be secured into the on position upon completion of the final
inspection so that it cannot be turned off.
C. Residential units shall include multi-family units, condos, apartments, single-family residences and townhouses. (Ord. 15-12-21, 12-7-2015)
9-3-5: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 15-12-21, 12-7-2015)
Chapter 4
TRAILERS
9-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the word "trailer" is defined to mean any vehicle or structure which is suitable for living, sleeping or office purposes and is
mounted upon wheels, or is so designed or equipped that wheels or other devices for moving the same can be affixed thereto, and which can thus be
transported either by its own power or by external power or effort. This definition shall not include any vehicle operated upon fixed rails. (1976 Code
§ 96.010)
9-4-2: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Private Property: It shall be unlawful to maintain or allow any trailer to be upon private or public property within the village, or to occupy any such trailer,
but this prohibition shall not apply to the following:
1. Any trailer which is in transit;
2. Any trailer which is unoccupied and is not offered for lease; and
3. Any trailer which is occupied by a nonpaying guest of the owner or lawful occupant of private property upon which the same trailer is located for an
interval of not exceeding thirty (30) days in any one year period. (1976 Code § 96.011)
B. Permanently Affixing Trailer: No person occupying a camp car or trailer shall remove the wheels or any similar transporting devices therefrom or
otherwise permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent the ready removal thereof. (1976 Code § 96.012)
9-4-3: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 5
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The term "house", as used in this chapter, shall mean and include all buildings used for dwellings and business purposes. (1976 Code § 153.001)
9-5-2: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
A. All houses in the village shall be numbered, and it is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of every house in the village to
number or cause the same to be numbered in the manner as is provided in this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 298/525
B. One number on each side of each thoroughfare shall be allotted to each twenty feet (20') of frontage. The numbering shall begin at the state line
between the state of Illinois and the state of Wisconsin as a base line and shall increase southerly, a number being assigned for each twenty feet (20'),
beginning within the present corporate limits on the north with number 551. Numbering shall begin on the east line of the corporate limits as a base line
and shall increase westerly, a number being assigned for each twenty feet (20'), beginning within the present corporate limits on the east with number
one. (1976 Code § 153.002)
C. For streets running in a northerly and southerly direction, even numbers shall be placed on the westerly side and odd numbers on the easterly side. For
streets running in an easterly and westerly direction, the even numbers shall be placed on the southerly side and the odd numbers on the northerly
side. (1976 Code § 153.002; amd. 2003 Code)
D. Each of the figures of numbers so to be placed on houses shall be not less than three inches (3") in height and shall be so marked as to be distinctly
and easily read and shall be of design to be approved by the village. Such numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or near the front of the
house. It shall be the obligation of the owner or occupant of the house to place the house numbers within six (6) months of the date of this chapter.
E. Whenever any house or building shall have been numbered or renumbered in accordance with this chapter, such number shall not be changed or
altered unless upon application to the village clerk and upon new number being assigned therefor in accordance with this chapter.
F. In all cases where numbers have been assigned on any street, in pursuance hereof or of any ordinance hereafter passed, it shall be the duty of the
village clerk to adjust and reassign such numbers as the same may be required from time to time, and in all cases where there is a mistake or conflict
in numbers, the village clerk shall direct and make the proper adjustment of the same. If any person shall feel himself aggrieved, he may make
complaint to the mayor and village board of trustees and have an adjustment made accordingly. (1976 Code § 153.002)
9-5-3: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
All territory hereinafter to be annexed to the village shall conform to the system of numbering herein provided. Maps shall be prepared of all streets
required to be numbered, drawn to an accurate scale showing all intersecting streets and the location of the front of all houses and each front entrance of
the same. The whole length of streets shall be divided into spaces or lots. of twenty feet (20') frontage as herein provided. A number shall be given for
each space and the number coinciding most nearly with the location of any front entrance shall be the number of the same. Consecutive numbers shall be
placed directly opposite on lines at right angles to the street. All numbers placed on houses under this chapter shall be indicated on such maps. Said maps
shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk. (1976 Code § 153.003)
9-5-4: DEFACE, DAMAGE NUMBERS:
No person shall remove or deface any house number placed upon any house in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No person shall retain any
number on his house other than that provided by the provisions hereof. No owner, agent or person in possession of any house shall refuse or neglect to
number such house or cause the same to be numbered in conformity with this chapter. (1976 Code § 153.004)
9-5-5: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 6
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS
9-6-1: TITLE:
This chapter, including all rules and regulations which may be adopted by the village by reference or otherwise, is entitled EMERGENCY ALARM
SYSTEMS. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
9-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
BURGLAR OR SECURITY ALARM: An alarm system activated by signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the alarm system.
CENTRAL ANSWERING POINT: An office or place to which alarm system signals are relayed and where operators monitor and investigate and record
such alarm signals prior to notifying the appropriate agency of an emergency situation. Such service is to be controlled and operated by a person, firm, or
corporation whose business is furnishing, maintaining, or monitoring of supervised alarm systems. In accordance with NFPA 72, also known as "remote
station".
COMBINATION ALARM: A burglar or security alarm system activated by signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the alarm system,
which also includes fire detection devices.
FALSE ALARM: An activation of the fire detection system by any one or more of the following causes:
A. Mechanical failure of the system and/or more than one of its components.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 299/525
B. Malfunction of the system and/or one of its components.
C. Improper maintenance of the systems and/or one of its components.
D. Wilful, careless or negligent acts of any person.
E. Any other cause not related to a fire emergency; provided, however, that any alarm activated by natural causes, including tornadoes and weather or
by malicious acts of persons not under the direction or control of the property owner or occupant.
FIRE ALARM CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the business of inspection, testing, installing or altering by contract equipment and appliances
connected to a required or nonrequired automatic fire detection system.
FIRE ALARM MONITORING AGENCY: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind that contracts with a
fire alarm contractor or fire alarm user to monitor a fire detection system at a continuously staffed location, receives an alarm signal notification from the
system and notifies the fire department to respond.
FIRE ALARM USER: The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of the premises on which a fire
detection system is installed and maintained.
FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM: A fire detection system, also known as a fire alarm system, shall mean any system of components that can be activated
manually, detect alarm and/or supervisory signals from a sprinkler system valve, detect the discharge of an extinguishing agent in cooking systems or
detect the presence of heat and/or products of combustion. Said system's purpose is to activate alerting devices for notification of occupants on the
premises and may be capable of transmission of a signal to a monitored location for the purpose of alerting the fire department to respond.
LICENSED FIRE ALARM CONTRACTOR: A fire alarm contractor shall obtain a contractor license from the village of Antioch to install, service, inspect,
test, alter or maintain a fire detection system within the village of Antioch. Said fire alarm contractor shall submit, with application, proof that the fire alarm
contractor is qualified or has employed qualified fire alarm technicians.
LICENSED FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM: Owners or their agents shall obtain a license from the village of Antioch for all fire detection systems. To obtain a
license, the owner or agent shall submit proof the fire detection system is under contract by a licensed fire alarm contractor to perform inspections, testing
and maintenance of the system.
QUALIFIED FIRE ALARM TECHNICIAN: Any person employed by a contractor that holds an Illinois private alarm contractor agency license, any
individual that holds an Illinois private alarm contractor license or any licensed electrical contractor. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
9-6-3: FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS:
A. License Required:
1. Fire Alarm Contractor: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a fire alarm contractor, either alone or through an agent, employee, or
partner, without first having obtained a license herein provided from the village of Antioch.
2. Fire Detection System: It shall be unlawful for any person to lease, use or own a fire detection system or be in control of premises wherein a fire
detection system is operated or maintained without first having obtained a license from the village of Antioch.
B. Application For License:
1. Fire Alarm Contractor: An application for a license as a qualified alarm contractor shall be filed with the village of Antioch prior to performing any
work on a fire detection system within the village of Antioch. Once a license is given, it shall remain in force during the term of the license, unless
revoked for just cause. Subsequent work performed within the village of Antioch shall be included under the license during its valid term. The
application form shall contain the following information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant for license.
b. Illinois department of professional regulation alarm agency license number (if applicant is a business entity); or Illinois department of professional
regulation alarm contractor license number (if applicant is an individual); or if not licensed as an alarm contractor, the electrical license number.
The applicant shall submit, along with the application form, an insurance certificate as proof of insurance.
C. Permit Requirements And Restrictions:
1. Compliance With Provisions; Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person registered under the provision of this subsection to install any fire
alarm system, fire detection system or fire alarm signaling system or components, wiring or fixtures without strict compliance with the ordinance
relating to such fixtures, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to do any work without having obtained such a permit from the village of Antioch
as may be required.
2. Unlawful Use Of Permit: It shall be unlawful for any licensed fire alarm contractor to secure or furnish a permit for the installation, alteration,
replacement or repair of a fire detection system for use by any person not entitled under this subsection.
3. Required Submittals: A licensed fire alarm contractor shall include the following with the permit application:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or organization for which the work is being performed.
b. The name, address and telephone number at the premises of the work to be performed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 300/525
c. A copy of the current contractor's license.
d. Three (3) copies of schematic drawings of the premises for the proposed system that indicates the location and types of devices to be installed.
e. Three (3) copies of manufacturer's cut sheets, for all equipment to be used at the premises as part of the system.
f. A completed battery calculation sheet that is provided with the proposed manufacturer's equipment that indicates the proper amount of standby
battery capacity as it relates to the overall number of system devices being installed.
g. Signature of the applicant or authorized agent.
The application for permit and required submittals shall be reviewed by the fire department prior to issuing the permit. Once reviewed and
approved, the permit shall be issued upon payment of a permit fee.
4. Permit Fee: A permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid prior to granting a permit to install the fire detection systems.
5. Inspection Of Newly Installed Or Modified System: Upon completion of all work related to the permitted system being installed, the licensed fire
alarm contractor shall contact the fire department to perform a final acceptance test. It shall be the responsibility of the fire chief to make or cause to
be made such inspection of the fire detection system to ensure compliance of the provisions of this subsection and all other ordinances relating to
the installation of the system. The licensed fire alarm contractor shall contact the fire department to request a system inspection at least forty eight
(48) hours prior to the desired inspection date. The fire chief or his/her designee shall perform the final acceptance test on the installed system
before said system is connected to any monitoring service for active response to alarm signals.
6. Reinspection Fee Required: If the fire detection system fails to obtain approval by the fire department on the initial test and inspection visit, a
reinspection fee may be charged to the licensed fire alarm contractor. Said reinspection fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional test
performed to give final approval to the installed system. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
7. Information Shall Be Posted: No fire alarm system shall be placed in service for active response to alarm signals received by the monitoring agency
without first posting the following information on or above the front of the fire control panel:
a. The name and phone number of the agency that monitors the fire detection system.
b. The position and/or account number that identifies the installed system in the records of the agency that monitors the fire detection system.
c. The fire alarm license for the fire detection system installed.
d. The name and phone number of the licensed fire alarm contractor that maintains the fire detection system as required by this chapter. (Ord. 16-01-
03, 1-18-2016)
D. Maintenance And Operation:
1. Maintenance And Operation: It shall be the responsibility of the fire alarm system license holder to provide for continuous inspection, testing and
maintenance of their system through a maintenance agreement with a licensed fire alarm contractor. Proof of such agreement shall be provided at
the time of application for a permit to install the fire detection system.
2. System Deactivation, Notification: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the licensed fire detection system to be deactivated for inspection,
testing, service, repair or alteration; or disabled in any way without first notifying the alarm monitoring agency.
3. System Reactivation, Notification: Prior to reactivation of the licensed fire detection system, notification shall be made to the alarm monitoring
agency that the system is being placed back in service.
4. Response To Fire Alarm Signals: A response to a fire alarm signal may result when any person, firm or organization reports to the fire department
the receipt of an electronic fire alarm signal; the receipt of a telephone call reporting an activated fire alarm signal; or a direct report to the fire
department that an emergency signal is activated from a fire detection system on the premises. Such notification may result in the dispatch of fire
department personnel and equipment to the premises. It shall be the responsibility of the fire alarm user and/or the fire alarm contractor to notify the
occupants on the premises whenever testing is being performed that may result in an audible signal being produced. This precaution is necessary to
prevent an unnecessary response to an audible alarm signal when a system has been properly deactivated with the monitoring agency. (Ord. 15-12-
20, 12-7-2015)
E. Reserved. (Ord. 16-01-03, 1-18-2016)
F. Signaling And Notification:
1. Fire Alarm Systems Signaling: All required automatic fire alarm systems shall have supervisory, trouble and fire condition signals transmitted in
accordance with NFPA 72, chapter 5 remote station service. It is the responsibility of the building owner to maintain this supervision during the
required life of the building. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
2. Fire Alarm Systems Notification: All required automatic fire alarm systems shall have supervisory signals, and fire condition signals shall notify the
Antioch fire department dispatch center immediately upon receipt of said alarms. Notification of premises or key holders shall occur after notification
to the fire department. All trouble condition signals shall notify the premises and/or key holders upon receipt of said alarms. (Ord. 16-01-03, 1-18-
2016)
G. Annunciator Required:
1. Annunciator Panel: In all buildings requiring fire suppression systems, fire protective signaling systems and/or automatic fire detection systems, more
than one story or ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, an annunciator panel shall be located at the front entrance so as to be readily visible to
the fire department for rapid determination of the area in which a water flow alarm, detection alarm and/or manual fire alarm is activated. A zone
diagram shall be provided and approved by the fire official. A separate zone by floor shall be provided for the following types of alarm initiating
devices, where provided:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 301/525
a. Smoke or heat detectors;
b. Sprinkler water flow devices;
c. Wet standpipe water flow devices;
d. Manual fire alarm pull boxes;
e. Specialized fire suppression system.
H. Security Key Box Required:
1. Security Key Box: When access to or within a building or an opening is unduly difficult because of security or where immediate access is necessary
for lifesaving, firefighting purposes, or response to activated alarms for fire protection systems, the fire official shall require a key box to be installed
in a location which is accessible to and approved by the fire department. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire official and shall contain
keys, properly identified, to gain access to all portions of the building or documents pertaining to emergency plan for the building.
I. Additional Device Requirements:
1. If an automatic fire suppression system (sprinkler system) is installed within the building, a white strobe light shall be installed above the fire
department connection. If this strobe light is not visible from the common direction of the responding fire department, an additional white strobe light
shall be installed on the front of the building nearest to the location of the fire department connection. The strobe light(s) shall be activated by water
flow from the sprinkler system.
2. The installation of safety guards over manual alarm initiating devices may be required where such devices are subject to damage or frequent
malicious activation.
a. Safety guards include the installation of STI stopper II (or equivalent) tamper covers that include an audible annunciation, over manual pull
stations that are located in public access areas. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
9-6-4: REMOTE STATION SERVICE:
A. UL Listing Required: All alarm systems required by this chapter using remote station service for monitoring of alarm signals shall transmit to a UL listed
central station and a copy of the UL listing for the remote station service shall be provided to the fire department at the time of system completion and
activation. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
9-6-5: FALSE ALARMS:
A. Service Charges: The owner or tenant shall be charged for alarm protection malfunctions and/or false alarms generating true alarm conditions in excess
of three (3) per calendar year. A service charge as set forth in section 1-3-1 of this code shall be billed for each false alarm thereafter in any twelve (12)
month period, except as provided in this chapter.
1. Should a false alarm be transmitted by a piece of electronic equipment under service by an alarm company, there shall be no charge for a false
alarm provided the alarm holder gives the village safety inspector proof that the defect is being corrected.
2. In the event false alarms or trouble alarms continue during any twelve (12) month period, the village may direct the company maintaining the village
monitoring equipment to disconnect the premises from which such false or trouble alarms originate, from such equipment. Reconnection of such
premises to the monitoring equipment shall not be made until all false alarm fees as set forth in section 1-3-1 of this code, and a reconnection charge
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), have been paid to the village.
3. No person, other than a fire official, shall cause a fire alarm system to be reset once an alarm has been activated. This section will not apply to
alarms generated for testing or fire drills when the village communications facilities have been notified in advance of the testing or drill.
4. Alarm system audiovisual warning devices may be silenced by the building owner/occupant, but only after a thorough search of the building has
been conducted and it has been determined that no fire or other emergency exists.
5. Resetting of a fire alarm prior to the arrival of the fire department will constitute a false alarm.
B. Grace Period: Upon written request, a thirty (30) day grace period for new alarm systems or for major modification or additions to existing alarm
systems shall be granted upon approval by the village safety inspector.
C. Failure To Pay/Revocation: The licensed fire detection system user shall be responsible for the payment of all false alarm fees assessed. Failure to
remit payment for false alarm fees within ninety (90) days of the date of invoice may result in the revocation of the fire alarm user's license. (Ord. 16-
01-03, 1-18-2016)
9-6-6: DAILY TEST SIGNAL REQUIRED:
A. Daily Fire Alarm System Test Signal: The fire alarm or detection system shall be programmed to transmit an automatic daily test signal to the remote
central station as required in NFPA 72. Said daily test signal shall be programmed to transmit at the same time each day. If said test signal is not
received in the remote central station facility within sixty (60) minutes of the scheduled time, the central station shall notify the premises and/or key
holder of the system failure. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
9-6-7: SECURITY SYSTEMS, COMBINATION SYSTEMS AND BURGLAR ALARMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 302/525
A. Registration Required:
1. Security Systems And Burglar Alarms Registration: All security systems, combination alarms and burglar alarms installed within the village of Antioch
that are programmed to notify a central station monitoring service of an alarm condition that requires the Antioch police or fire department to respond
to the premises shall register their system with the village of Antioch at the time of installation or activation to monitoring service. Residential security
systems with fire detection options shall fall under this section.
2. Registration Information And Fee: Registration of a security system or burglar alarm shall include the following information:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm or organization for which the security system or burglar alarm is being registered.
b. The name, address and telephone number at the premises of the system installation if different than subsection A2a of this section.
c. The name, address and telephone number of the person or company that will be performing the system installation.
d. The alarm contractor or alarm agency license number of the installing company.
e. The name, address and telephone number of the central station monitoring agency that will be receiving the alarm signals.
f. A list of at least three (3) key holder names with telephone numbers to contact in the event of a system malfunction or activation.
g. Signature of the applicant or authorized agent.
3. Registration Fee: A onetime registration fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid prior to activation and connection of the security system or
burglar system to a central station. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
4. False Alarm Fees For Security Systems And Burglar Alarms Or Combination Alarms: Any system that produces a response to a signal from a
security system or burglar alarm that requires a response from the Antioch police or fire department; and said signal is determined to be a "false
alarm" as defined in section 9-6-2 of this chapter shall subject the licensed fire alarm user to false alarm fees as set forth in section 1-3-1 of this
code. (Ord. 16-01-03, 1-18-2016)
9-6-8: WAIVERS:
Any person and/or corporation may request a waiver if specific sections of this chapter will create an undue economic burden. Said waiver request shall be
made in writing to the fire chief or police chief and the village safety inspector citing the specific facts supporting the waiver request.
A. After investigation of all facts, the fire chief or police chief and the village safety inspector shall submit the waiver request and their recommendations to
the board of trustees at a regularly scheduled board meeting. The petitioner may be present at the meeting to offer direct testimony and otherwise
support his/her request.
B. After hearing all evidence and careful deliberation, the board of trustees may waive specific sections of this chapter when all of the following conditions
are met:
1. The facts presented are deemed to be true and accurate; and
2. The proposed waiver will not constitute an increase in life safety hazards or lessen the protection afforded to the building, its occupants or
firefighters; and
3. A time schedule is established for compliance with the chapter as adopted.
C. Any waiver issued under this section may be rescinded if it is later determined that facts presented were inaccurate, the waiver is ineffective, or a life
safety problem has been determined to exist. (Ord. 15-12-20, 12-7-2015)
Title 10
ZONING
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the ANTIOCH ZONING ORDINANCE. (1976 Code § 150.001)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the people;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 303/525
B. To divide the village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
buildings, structures and land for residential, business, manufacturing and other specified uses; (1976 Code § 150.002)
C. To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business and manufacturing areas within the village and to promote the orderly and
beneficial development of these areas as recommended by the comprehensive plan; (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
D. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property;
E. To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings necessary to provide adequate light and air
and to protect the public health;
F. To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for residential, business, manufacturing or other uses within these areas;
G. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein;
H. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
I. To prevent additions to or alteration or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder;
J. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off street parking of
motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
K. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
L. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use
and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them;
M. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the village;
N. To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable
development in each district; and
O. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein. (1976 Code § 150.002)
10-1-3: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
No buildings or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered; nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose
other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is located. (1976 Code § 150.004)
10-1-4: INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the safety, health,
convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal any ordinance, rules or
regulations previously adopted and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this title, or which shall be adopted, pursuant to law, relating to the use of
buildings or premises, nor is it intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties,
except that where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by the other ordinances or any easements, covenants or other agreements, the provisions of this title shall control. If
or wherever this title is silent on technical definitions and standards, reference should be made to appropriate sections of the building code1, subdivision
code2, or manuals depicting standard professional engineering and/or land use planning practices. (1976 Code § 150.012)
10-1-5: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 304/525
10-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
In the construction of this title, the following rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when in conflict with the
context of any provision. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure", the word "lot" shall include the word "plot", and the word "shall" is mandatory
and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: A subordinate building or use which is located on the same lot on which the principal building or use is situated and
which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such building or main use, when permitted by district regulations. An
"accessory building or use" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. Children's playhouse, garden house or private greenhouse.
B. Garage, shed or building for domestic storage.
C. Swimming pools, private, for the use of residents of the zoning lot and their guests.
D. Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with any retail service or business use, unless this storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
E. Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless this storage is
excluded by the district regulations.
F. Off street motor vehicle parking areas and loading and unloading facilities.
G. Signs, as permitted and regulated by ordinance1.
H. Public utility communications, electric, gas, water and sewer lines, their supports and incidental equipment.
Where a substantial part of the wall of an accessory building is a part of the wall of the main building, or where an accessory building is attached to
the main building in a substantial manner as by a roof, the accessory building shall be counted as part of the main building.
ACRE: Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
ACREAGE: Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre or more which has not been subdivided by metes and bounds or platted.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS: Products created as a result of the science and art of farming, which shall include all types of vegetables, fruits, grains and
forestry products. In addition, agricultural products are products for gardening, such as small tools, landscape timbers, stones contained in bags or
packages of no more than fifty (50) pounds, mulch, potting soil, etc.
AIRPORT OR AIRCRAFT LANDING FIELD: Any landing area, runway or other facility (including heliports), designed, used or intended to be used either
publicly or privately by any person or persons for the landing and taking off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie down areas,
hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
ALLEY: A public way not more than thirty feet (30') wide which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used as a single housekeeping
unit. Complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, must always be included for each apartment.
AREA, GROSS DEVELOPMENT: The size of the development site, excluding any preexisting public rights of way, or portions thereof, for collector and
arterial streets and roads.
AREA, NET DEVELOPMENT: That part of any gross development site which excludes floodplain area, wetland areas, permanent standing water and any
other part of the site that is not intended to be part of a designated and platted zoning lot, including new street rights of way as indicated below. Net
development area shall be determined by subtracting the following areas from the gross development area:
A. Floodplain area in accordance with title 12, chapter 1 of this code, including base flood elevations (BFE) as indicated on the floodplain maps
adopted in title 12, chapter 1 of this code, or as determined by the Lake County stormwater management commission or other regulatory agency
having jurisdiction;
B. Wetland areas, beyond the floodplain area in subsection A of this definition and as regulated by the Lake County stormwater management
commission or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction;
C. Area of existing bodies of waters, such as lakes, ponds, whether manmade or natural, and permanent streams, beyond the floodplain area and
wetland area in subsections A and B of this definition; and finally
D. Deducting twenty percent (20%) of the remainder for streets, regardless of the amount of land actually used for streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 305/525
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof where automobiles are washed with the use of a chain conveyor and blower or steam cleaning
device.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body,
frame or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified
under "automobile repair, major".
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease for operation of
automobiles, are offered for sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not including
major automobile repairs, and including washing of automobiles where no chain conveyor blower or steam cleaning device is employed. When the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage.
Automobile service stations shall not include sale or storage of junkers or junkyards as defined herein.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and
are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles, or parts thereof, and including
any used farm vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition, and including the commercial
salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building or overhangs the public way.
BASEMENT: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above the established curb level or above the average
level of the adjoining ground where curb level has not been established, a basement shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement.
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to announce church services or to display court or other public office notices, or signs offering the sale or lease of the premises on
which the sign is located.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or, in lieu of a street or streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways or a corporate boundary of the village.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or restaurant, where meals are provided for compensation to four (4) or more persons, but not more
than twelve (12), who are not members of the keeper's family.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open space requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels. Any structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain
elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers and other similar structures, are not considered as buildings.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal exit and entrance doors.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of a
gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height of the buildings may be measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: Any building which does not conform to the regulations of this title prescribing the maximum floor area ratio, required
yards, coverage, height and setbacks, minimum required spacing between buildings on a single lot and minimum required usable open space for the
district in which the building is located.
BUILDING, POLE: A building whose main support members are poles with spacing depending on the size of the building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main use of the zoning lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from it, regulated by the front yard requirements set up in this title.
BULK: The term used to describe the size and mutual relationships of buildings and other structures as to size, height, coverage, shape and location of
exterior walls in relation to lot lines, to the center line of the streets, to other walls of the same building, and to other buildings or structures and to all open
space relating to the building or structure.
BUS LOT: Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger buses or motor coaches.
CARTAGE, LOCAL: Pickup and delivery of parcels, packages, and freight by motor truck within and not exceeding fifteen (15) miles of the village.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the curb level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A "cellar" shall not be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurements.
CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER: An establishment where patients are admitted for special study and treatment by two (2) or more licensed
physicians and their professional associates practicing medicine together.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building
or portion thereof.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated for a planned
development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of the planned development. "Common open space" may contain such
complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents of the planned development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 306/525
CONDOMINIUM: An ownership arrangement and not a land use, therefore, it is allowed in any district and under the same restrictions of the land use that
comprises it.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building, measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one
street, the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street. Where no curb elevation has been
established, the main level of the land immediately adjacent to the building shall be considered the "curb level".
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre.
DENSITY, GROSS: The total number of dwelling units divided by the gross area of the development site.
DENSITY, NET: The total number of dwelling units divided by the net developable site.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including a house trailer or mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging
houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED ONE-FAMILY: Two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5) or six (6) adjoining dwelling units, each of which is separated from the other by
one or more unpierced walls from ground to roof. Each dwelling unit is characterized by individual front access to the outdoors, and individual rear yard
space with direct access from the dwelling unit and for use only by the occupants of that particular dwelling unit.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space or yard areas and is not connected to any other dwelling unit by floor,
walls or porches.
DWELLING GROUP: Two (2) or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings or boarding or lodging houses located on one zoning lot, but not
including tourist courts or motels.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building designed or altered to provide for three (3) or more dwelling units where the primary access to any one
dwelling unit is a shared access from a common hall, stair or balcony; includes what is commonly known as an apartment building.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building designed to provide one dwelling unit and entirely separated from any other dwelling by open yard areas.
DWELLING, ROW (PARTY WALL): See definition of Dwelling, Attached One-Family.
DWELLING, STACKED: A dwelling containing two (2) or more adjoining dwelling units, each of which is attached to another, either above or below the
other, in a vertical arrangement. Each dwelling unit shall have its own individual access from the outdoors.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed or altered to provide for two (2) dwelling units within the same residential structure.
DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit consists of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for not more than one family,
plus not more than four (4) additional nonfamily members. At minimum one bathroom plus complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed as required by
title 9, chapter 1 of this code, shall always be included with each dwelling unit.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, foster relationship, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than five (5) persons (excluding servants)
who are not related by blood, foster relationship, marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common household, but not including sororities,
fraternities or other similar organizations.
FLOODPLAIN: The regulatory floodplain as defined and regulated by title 12, chapter 1 of this code.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The floor area of the building divided by the area of the lot.
FUEL BULK STATION: A place where crude petroleum, gasoline, naphtha, benzine, benzol, kerosene, or other flammable liquid which has a flashpoint at
or below two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (200°F) is stored for wholesale purposes, where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is more than six
thousand (6,000) gallons, regardless of whether the fuel is stored aboveground, underground, or in mobile tank cars or trucks.
GARAGE, BUS: Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of three (3) or more passenger motorbuses, or motor coaches used in public
transportation, including school buses.
GARAGE, BUS OR TRUCK: A building which is used or intended to be used for the storage of motor vehicles, truck trailers, tractors and commercial
vehicles exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of the principal building designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the storage of
automobiles of the occupants of the premises, including commercial vehicles of not more than one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage used for the care, incidental servicing, and sale of automobile supplies, or where motor vehicles
are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the structure, but not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and commercial vehicles exceeding
one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GUESTHOUSE: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the principal building, for use by temporary
guests of the occupants of the premises. These quarters shall have no kitchen facilities nor be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.
HARDWARE STORE: A store for which the principal business shall be the retail sale of building materials, gardening supplies, paint, lumber, metalware,
such as tools, locks, hinges, or cutlery, and the mechanical or electrical equipment necessary for conducting a construction, restoration or repair activity.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation or profession customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use which is clearly incidental to
the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. The "home occupation" shall be carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building
accessory thereto, and only by members of the family occupying the premises and one person outside the family. No article shall be sold or offered for
sale on the premises except those produced by the occupation on the premises, and no mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or
maintained other than such as is customarily incidental to domestic use. There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign except as allowed by the sign
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 307/525
regulations of the village, no exterior storage of material, no other exterior indication of the "home occupation" or variation from the residential character of
the principal building, and no offensive odors, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, heat or glare shall be produced. Offices, clinics, doctors' offices, hospitals,
barbershops, tearooms, restaurants, beauty parlors, dress shops, millinery shops, tourist homes, animal hospitals and kennels, among others, shall not be
deemed to be "home occupations".
HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM: An institution open to the public in which patients or injured persons are given medical or surgical care, or for the cure of
contagious diseases or the care of incurable patients.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: A building containing dwelling units or individual guestrooms, the majority of which are for permanent guests. Maid and janitor
service may be provided, but kitchen facilities are not necessarily included.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building in which more than four (4) rooms or suites are reserved to provide living and sleeping accommodations for temporary
guests, with no provision in said rooms for cooking in any individual room or suite.
HOUSEHOLDER: The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or lessee thereof.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Surfaces which do not readily absorb water. For the purposes of this title, they consist of all buildings, parking areas, driveways,
roads, sidewalks and any areas of concrete, asphalt, gravel or compressed earth. In the case of exterior storage areas, such as found in some industrial
developments, the areas devoted to exterior storage and circulation in those areas shall also be considered to be impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (ISR): A measure of the intensity of land use which is determined by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on
a site by gross development area.
JUNKYARD: The use of more than two hundred (200) square feet of any lot where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags or similar materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses taking place entirely
within a completely enclosed building.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four (4) dogs, cats or other household domestic animals over four (4)
months of age are kept, or on which more than two (2) such animals are boarded for compensation or kept for sale.
LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products
is not included within this definition.
LINE OF BUILDING (For Measuring Yards): A line parallel to the nearest lot line drawn through the point of a building or group of buildings nearest to the
lot line, exclusive of the features specified as being permitted to extend into a yard.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET: An open, hard surfaced area of land other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is
for the standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and trailers to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys. This
space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width, forty five feet (45') in length, and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access aisles and
maneuvering space.
LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guest rooms where lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous
arrangement, but not open to the public or to overnight guests.
LOT: When used alone shall mean a "zoning lot", unless the context of this title clearly indicates otherwise.
LOT, CORNER: A parcel of land situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets or adjoining a curved street at the end of a block.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public street; for a corner lot, the owner may elect either street line as the front
lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front property line of a zoning lot.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The rear lot line is the lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most remote from the front lot lines. Lot lines other than front or rear
lot lines are side lot lines.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets which is not a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
MANUFACTURE: The making of anything by any agency or process.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL, PRIVATE: A building in which freight, brought to the building by motor truck, is assembled and sorted for routing in
intrastate and interstate shipment by motor truck.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building, structure, or land lawfully occupied by a use or lawfully established at the time of the adoption of this title or
amendments hereto, which does not conform after the passage of this title, or amendments hereto, with the use regulations of this title.
NURSERY SCHOOL OR DAY NURSERY: An institution providing care for three (3) or more children under the age of six (6) years for periods of more
than four (4) hours but not exceeding twenty four (24) hours.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 308/525
NURSING HOME OR REST HOME: A private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering from bodily
disorders, but not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or for surgical care.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
OUTLOT: A parcel of property which is specifically dedicated to a public or quasi-public purpose. Such purpose may include, but is not necessarily limited
to: open space - passive recreation; stormwater retention or detention; wetlands preservation; etc. In any case, such outlot use does not include the
construction of any habitable structure. As an unbuildable lot, an outlot is not required to abut a publicly dedicated street, but may be accessible for
maintenance and emergency vehicles.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard surfaced area of land, other than a street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage
of private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles
and commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity, and available to the public, whether for compensation, free, or as an
accommodation to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not less than one hundred sixty two (162) square feet (81/2 feet by 19
feet), exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office and work areas, for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle
under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way or pathway across or within a tract of land intended primarily for pedestrian traffic and from which motor propelled
vehicles are excluded.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A special use of parcel(s) of land planned and developed as a unit under single ownership or unified control for which the
zoning and subdivision regulations are applied to the project as a whole and within which strict compliance with particular zoning district regulations may
be waived to permit a standard of development which provides a desirable environment while maintaining maximum protection for the existing character of
adjacent land uses.
PORCH: A roofed over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Land owned by a governmental agency and intended for recreational use and/or conservation of natural resources.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department, duly authorized to furnish, under public regulation, to the public electricity, gas,
steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation or water.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including depots, loading platforms, stations, train
sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops or water towers.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon, a building, structure
or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD): A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered, upon
the premises where the sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SMOKE UNITS: Represent the number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the
purpose of this chart, Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period of observation; each reading is then multiplied by
the time in minutes during which it is observed; and the various products are added together to give the total number of "smoke units" observed during the
total period under observation.
SPECIAL USE: Any use of land or buildings, or both, described and permitted herein, subject to the provisions of this title.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen feet (14') in height shall be considered as an additional
story for each fourteen feet (14') or fraction thereof.
STORY, HALF: That portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not
more than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the finished floor of such story. In the case of one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple-family
dwellings less than three (3) stories in height, a half story in a sloping roof shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of this title.
STREET: A dedicated public thoroughfare other than an alley.
STREET LINE: A line separating an abutting lot, piece, or parcel of land from a street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change other than incidental repairs which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having location on the ground.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises.
TERRACE, OPEN: A level platform which, for the purposes of this title, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the principal structure and which is
constructed not more than four feet (4') in height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
TOURIST COURTS, MOTOR LODGES, MOTELS: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or
used temporarily by, automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts,
motels, motor lodges or similar type uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 309/525
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests.
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Attached One-Family.
TRAILER COURT OR CAMP, HOUSE OR MOBILE HOME: A house trailer court is any premises on which are parked one or more house trailers, or any
premises used or held out for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking place of one or more house trailers, whether the trailers stand on wheels or
rigid supports.
TRAILER, HOUSE, OR MOBILE HOME: A vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or
for carrying persons and property, including a trailer coach, house trailer, or mobile home, whether with permanently affixed or detachable wheels.
TRUCK PARKING AREA OR YARD: Any land used or intended to be used for the storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and including
commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading, and which exceeds one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building thereon is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased.
USED CAR LOT: A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or trucks are displayed for sale or trade.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level
upward, except as otherwise permitted in this title, and which extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and lying between the front line of the lot and the nearest line of a building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the zoning lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building.
YARD, SIDE: That part of the yard lying between the nearest line of the principal building and a side lot line, and extending from the required front yard (or
from the front lot line if there is no required front yard) to the required rear yard.
ZONING LOT: A plot of ground made up of one or more parcels which is, or may be, occupied by a use, building or buildings, including the open spaces
required by this title.
ZONING MAP: The map or maps incorporated into this title as a part hereof designating zoning districts. (1976 Code § 150.003; amd. Ord. 94-5-14, 5-2-
1994; Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002; Ord. 08-12-26, 12-15-2008; Ord. 08-12-31, 12-15-2008)
Chapter 3
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
10-3-1: BUILDINGS ON A LOT:
A. Building Height, Bulk And Lot Coverage:
1. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated or structurally altered so as to have a greater height, a higher ratio of lot coverage or smaller
open space about it than permissible under the limitations set forth herein for the district in which the building is located; except that parapet walls,
chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, and necessary mechanical appurtenances, shall be
permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance with all other ordinances of the village.
2. No space allocated to a building or dwelling group for the purpose of complying with the side, rear or front yard, or court or other open space or lot
area requirements of this title, shall thereafter, by reason of change in ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy the yard, court, open
space or lot area requirements of any other building or dwelling group.
3. An open terrace, but not including a roofed over porch or terrace, may occupy a front yard provided the unoccupied portion of the front yard has a
depth of not less than fifteen feet (15'). A one-story bay window may project into the front yard not more than three feet (3'). Overhanging eaves may
project over the minimum required side yard not more than twenty four inches (24").
4. No usable open space or off street parking space or loading space existing or provided hereafter for any building shall be reduced below the
minimum requirements hereinafter set forth for the usable open space, parking space or loading space, nor further reduced if already less than the
minimum requirements. (1976 Code § 150.006)
B. Location Of Buildings: Except as otherwise provided for in this title, every building shall be constructed or erected on a lot or parcel of land which abuts
on a public street or permanent easement of access to a public street, which easement shall have a minimum width of twenty five feet (25'), unless an
easement of lesser width was of record prior to the adoption of this title, except in planned developments as hereinafter provided. (1976 Code
§ 150.008)
C. Buildings Under Construction: Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on
which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this title and on which actual construction has been diligently carried on; provided
such building shall be completed within one year from the date of passage and publication of this title. (1976 Code § 150.009)
D. Buildings On A Zoning Lot: Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling units shall be located on a "zoning lot" as defined
in section 10-2-1 of this title and in no case shall there be more than one such building on one zoning lot, except in a planned development or in
accordance with a plan approved by the governmental agency subsidizing the state or federally subsidized elderly/low income housing otherwise in
compliance with this title. (1976 Code § 150.010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 310/525
10-3-2: LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS:
A. When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the
use district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
B. Any single lot or parcel of land which was of record at the time of adoption of this title, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width and
area, may be utilized for a permitted use; provided, that yards, courts or usable open space are not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the
minimum required dimensions or areas. (1976 Code § 150.007)
10-3-3: ANNEXATION REQUESTS:
Property owners requesting annexation to the village shall complete and execute a petition for annexation on forms provided by the village and available at
the office of the village clerk. The petition shall be accompanied by the following documentation:
A. Warranty deed or other proof of ownership. Where the property is held in trust, a certificate of trust shall be submitted, which discloses all the beneficial
owners.
B. Proposed plat of annexation, including a legal description of the property to be annexed, prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor or Illinois
registered professional engineer.
C. Draft annexation agreement in a format acceptable to the village attorney. A sample draft is available at the office of the village clerk.
The petitioner shall submit the original and nineteen (19) copies of the petition along with twenty (20) copies of the aforementioned supporting
documentation, plus related fees pursuant to the provisions of section 13-1-8 of this code. (Ord. 00-03-01, 3-6-2000)
10-3-4: ANNEXATIONS AND ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS:
A. General Annexations: All properties approved for annexation to the village shall be accomplished through appropriate legal instruments, which may
include executed annexation agreements. The form of such legal instruments must be prepared or approved by the village attorney. The village shall
be the sole determiner of whether or not an annexation agreement is required.
1. The term of any annexation agreement must indicate the effective time frame of the agreement. At its discretion, the village board may impose a
lesser time frame than that allowed by state statute1.
2. The village is under no obligation to annex any territory or any parcel. This may include parcels specifically designated as recommended for
annexation by the comprehensive plan, based upon a specific proposed plan, time frame, growth control or other issues.
3. The village does not consider annexation requests, annexation agreements for parcels, or parcels in aggregate which are not yet contiguous to its
corporate limits. This does not preclude a petitioner or owner from obtaining contiguity from other landowners who are contiguous. Said petition to
annex can be accomplished by a joint petition so that there is contiguity.
B. East Subarea: The "East subarea" is defined as that territory situated east of Deep Lake Road. It includes some of the most environmentally sensitive
land in north central Lake County. Therefore, all annexation agreements for East subarea parcels annexed after May 1, 2000, shall include a
requirement that specified the same density or intensity of development as that indicated in the comprehensive plan in existence or in effect at the time
of the petition to annex, approved by ordinance and recorded with the Lake County recorder's office. No petition to change zoning after annexation
shall be entertained unless said new zoning request is in conformity with the comprehensive plan in existence at the time the petition is filed. (Ord. 00-
09-16, 9-5-2000)
This does not preclude a petitioner from requesting a change in the comprehensive plan at the time of filing a request for a zoning change. (Ord. 02-09-
33, 9-16-2002)
10-3-5: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
A. Attached Structures: Where an accessory building or structure is attached to a main building, it shall be considered an addition and be subject to, and
conform to, all regulations of this chapter applicable to the main building.
B. Accessory Structures In Business And Manufacturing Zones: Accessory structures in business and manufacturing zones shall comply with the required
and applicable setback, separation, and landscape buffer yard areas listed under title 9 of this code and this title.
C. Accessory Structures In Residential Zones: An accessory structure in a residential zone shall meet the front and side yard setback and buffer
requirements of the underlying zone and, unless regulated by a more specific code, rule, or standard, shall not be located any closer than five feet (5')
from the rear and rear side lot lines. Where overlap occurs among code standards the more restrictive shall apply. No accessory building shall be more
than eighteen feet (18') in height as measured from ground level to the roof peak of the building.
D. Main Building Required First: An accessory building shall not be erected prior to the establishment or construction of the main building to which it is
accessory.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 311/525
E. Side Yard Setback: Unless a stricter side yard setback is required by the code, underlying zone, or site specific development plan, no accessory
structure to a single-family detached residence shall be located within fifteen feet (15') of a side yard lot line abutting a street.
F. Private Pools: Private pools as accessory to residential uses shall be located within the rear yard and follow the requirements listed in subsection 10-
5G-3E, "Permitted Obstructions", of this title. Aboveground pools shall meet the yard area requirements of a principal structure.
G. No Circumvention Intended: These regulations are not intended to abbreviate or circumvent easements, planned development ordinances, building
code regulations, variances, exceptions listed under overlay districts, or other limitations placed upon parcels by village corporate authorities.
H. Size: Accessory structures cannot be larger than the principal building. The maximum size allowed for accessory structures shall be limited to the area
of the principal building's footprint. (Ord. 10-04-14, 4-19-2010)
10-3-6: COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR STORAGE NOT ACCESSORY TO RETAIL:
A. Generally: It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to place, deposit, or maintain outdoor storage on any premises or property except as permitted
in this chapter. All storage areas shall be fully screened from view from adjacent properties by an approved treatment that may include building
placement, walls, fencing, and landscaping. Such storage areas shall not be located in the building setbacks, landscape buffer yards, nor dedicated
easements.
B. Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage shall be allowed in the manufacturing zoning district, subject to site plan approval, if listed in the specific district
regulations.
Railroad boxcars and trailers may not be used for storage or warehousing purposes. Outdoor storage shall be screened with a visual barrier that
adequately conceals material from the view of residential areas, public rights of way, trails or public open space. Outdoor storage shall be behind
required setbacks and outside buffer areas.
All outdoor storage facilities for manufacturing equipment, fuel, raw materials, subassemblies, finished goods and defective or repairable goods shall
be enclosed by an opaque fence and other appropriate treatment. Such fence or treatment shall be adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent
property. Acceptable barriers include opaque fencing, berming, and/or other landscape treatment. Chainlink fencing with slats for screening is
prohibited.
The board of trustees may grant a variance to screening requirements for outdoor storage upon approval of a preliminary plan or PUD. The exception
shall be based on a visual analysis of the site and proposed development identification of unusual topographic or elevation conditions, strategic design
treatment, and demonstration that the strict enforcement of screening is not practical. Views into the site will determine the amount and location of
landscaping.
C. Additional Outdoor Storage Requirements: Terminals for public transit vehicles; parking or storage of motor vehicles, including towing services; truck
rentals, motor freight terminals; contractor yards for vehicles, materials, equipment and supplies; automobile wrecking or dismantling; outdoor storage;
solid waste transfer stations; and landscape contractor yards shall comply with the following conditions:
1. The site is properly graded for drainage; surfaced with a concrete or asphalted surface approved by the village engineer; storage areas shall be
bounded by curb and gutter, graded and designed to manage stormwater, and be maintained in good condition, free of weeds, trash, and debris;
2. The site is provided with barriers of such dimensions that occupants of adjacent structures are not unreasonably disturbed, either by day or by night,
by the movement of vehicles, machinery, equipment, or supplies;
3. The site is provided with entrances and exits located to minimize traffic congestion;
4. The site is provided with barriers and located so that no parts of the parked vehicles extend into a landscape buffer yard space or into a required
setback;
5. The site is appropriately screened from view from adjacent properties by an opaque approved treatment that may include a combination of
landscaping, decorative walls, or fencing. All shall be in compliance with the village landscape ordinance. Chainlink fencing with slats for screening is
prohibited; and
6. Lighting facilities are arranged so that they neither unreasonably disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties nor interfere with traffic. (Ord.
10-04-14, 4-19-2010)
10-3-7: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010;
amd. Ord. 10-04-14, 4-19-2010)
Chapter 4
ZONING MAP AND DISTRICTS
10-4-1: ZONING USE DISTRICTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 312/525
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title, the village is divided into the following districts:
Residential districts
RE-1 Rural estate/agricultural district
RE-2 Rural estate district
RE-3 Rural estate district
SE-1 Suburban estate district
SE-2 Suburban estate district
R-1 One-family dwelling district
R-2 One-family dwelling district
R-3 One-family dwelling district
R-4 Two-family dwelling district
R-5 Multiple-family dwelling district
Business districts
B-1 Business district, limited retail
B-2 Business district, general retail
B-3 Business district, service and wholesale
Manufacturing districts
M-1 Manufacturing district, limited
M-2 Manufacturing district, general
Other districts
OS Open space district
Downtown districts
VC Village core
TC Transitional core
MT Main Street transitional
BP Business park
CE Commercial edge
(Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002; amd. Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-4-2: ZONING MAP:
The zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, and all amendments thereto, shall be a part of this title and
shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon, were fully set forth
and described herein. (1976 Code § 150.026; amd. 2003 Code)
10-4-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 313/525
A. Zoning Of Streets, Alleys, Etc.: All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be
in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights of way. Where the centerline of a
street, alley, public way or railroad right of way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall
be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to the centerline. (1976 Code § 150.028)
B. Boundary Lines: Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any use district as shown on the zoning map incorporated herein, the following
rules shall apply:
1. Where district boundary lines are indicated as following streets, alleys or similar rights of way, they shall be construed as following the centerlines
thereof.
2. Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
3. Where a lot held in one ownership and of record at the effective date of this title is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed
to be within the less restricted district, provided that this construction shall not apply if it increases the area of the less restricted portion of the lot by
more than twenty percent (20%). (1976 Code § 150.029)
10-4-4: NEW OR ANNEXED LANDS:
When territory is annexed to the village and there is no request for a zoning classification and no specific zoning amendment petition is filed, the said
territory, upon annexation to the village, shall be automatically classified RE-1 rural estate zoning district pursuant to state law1. (Ord. 00-03-01, 3-6-2000;
amd. Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
Chapter 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
10-5-1: PURPOSE:
The residential districts set forth herein are established in order to protect public health and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals,
prosperity and welfare. These general goals include, among others, the following specific purposes:
A. To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, offensive odors, noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, heat, glare and other objectionable
factors.
B. To protect residential areas to the extent possible and appropriate in each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially through traffic, and
to alleviate congestion by promoting off street parking.
C. To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of population through
regulation of the bulk of buildings.
D. To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof.
E. To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open space on the same zoning lots with residential development.
F. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for necessary and
desirable services in the vicinity of residences, which increase safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable influences.
G. To promote the best use and development of residential land in accordance with a comprehensive land use plan; to promote stability of residential
development; to protect the character of desirable development; and to protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic
base of the village. (1976 Code § 150.070)
H. To provide for a variety of residential neighborhoods, various densities and a diversity of housing types. RE rural estate districts provide for
development on private well and individual septic systems. No planned developments (PUDs), clustering or density transfers are allowed in the RE
districts. SE suburban estate and R residential districts provide for development to be serviced by village sanitary sewer and water. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-
2-2002)
10-5-2: FENCES AND WALLS1:
A. Residential Districts:
1. In all RE rural estate districts, all SE suburban estate districts and all R residential districts, fences or walls (excluding decorative fences) not over six
feet (6') in height may be constructed on any lot, excluding corner lots and vacant lots, behind the front of any principal building located on said lot.
However, if the front of the building extends beyond the front of any principal building on an adjacent lot, no fence may be constructed on the lot
which would extend beyond the front of the principal building on an adjacent lot unless the fence or wall is forty eight inches (48") or less in height
with slatted openings (such as a picket fence or maximum of 50 percent opaque) and has a gated entrance for access by any village authority and/or
utility or their contractor to access the easements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 314/525
2. In the aforesaid residential district zoning classifications, fences or walls (excluding decorative fences) not over six feet (6') in height may be
constructed on any corner lot. However, no fence on any corner lot shall extend beyond the building line or the front of any principal building on any
adjacent lot, whichever is less, unless the fence is forty eight inches (48") or less in height with slatted openings (such as a picket fence or maximum
of 50 percent opaque) and has a gated entrance for access by any village authority and/or utility or their contractor to access the easements.
3. In the aforesaid residential district zoning classifications, fences or walls (excluding decorative fences) not over six feet (6') in height may be
constructed on any vacant lot only when the record owner of the vacant lot is also the record owner of an adjacent lot improved with a principal
building, and then only if the fence to be constructed on the vacant lot does not extend beyond the building setback line of the lot, or beyond the front
of any principal building on an adjacent lot, whichever is less.
B. Exception For Lakefront Lots: Properties with frontage along a natural lake designated as one of the eleven (11) connected lakes of the Chain O'Lakes,
and consisting of a minimum of eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet as measured above the high water level of the adjacent lake, may have a
fence of up to six feet (6') in height along its front and side property lines. (Ord. 02-10-42, 10-21-2002)
10-5-3: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
ARTICLE A. RE-1 RURAL ESTATE/AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
10-5A-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and purposes are created for the RE-1 rural estate/agricultural district:
Agriculture.
Apiary.
Aquarium.
Arboretum or botanical garden.
Breeding station.
Camp, day or youth.
Camp, military.
Childcare institution.
Church or other place of worship.
Conservation club.
Convent, monastery.
Cultivation of field and garden.
Dairy farm, including processing.
Dwellings, one-family detached.
Flower farm.
Game animal farm.
Golf course.
Grass or sod farm.
Greenhouse and/or nursery center.
Greenhouse, nonretail.
Hatchery, fish.
Hatchery, poultry.
Home for the aged.
Kennels.
Mink, furbearing animal ranch.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 315/525
Mushroom production barn, commercial.
Nursery, nonretail.
Nursery school.
Nursing home or convalescent home.
Orchard.
Park, public.
Piggery, commercial.
Public open land, refuge or preserve.
Religious retreat.
Rod and gun club, skeet range, ski and toboggan club, polo club.
School or home for the mentally disturbed or retarded or physically handicapped.
Schools, elementary, junior or high.
Seminary, theological.
Sheltered care home.
Stable, private.
Training center, armed forces camp or field type.
Truck farm.
Veterinary clinic.
Wineries, provided that they are currently duly licensed to sell bottled wine and offer tastings pursuant to title 4, chapter 2 of this code and the Illinois liquor
control act of 19341, as amended. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002; amd. Ord. 12-06-10, 6-18-2012)
10-5A-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses and purposes may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Airports and heliports.
Amphitheater.
Cemetery.
Drive-in theater.
Extraction of earth products.
Fairground and exposition ground.
Golf driving range.
Pet cemetery.
Recreational accessory uses.
Recreational uses.
Signs.
Solid waste disposal sites.
Stable, commercial.
Summer theater.
Utility installation and service. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-5A-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size: The minimum area for a lot or parcel within this district shall be five (5) acres. The minimum lot width or parcel width shall be one hundred sixty
five feet (165').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 316/525
B. Yard Areas: No building or structure shall be closer than twenty feet (20') to any lot or parcel line. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
ARTICLE B. RE-2 RURAL ESTATE DISTRICT
10-5B-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and purposes are created for the RE-2 rural estate district:
Accessory buildings, as defined herein and as regulated by section 10-3-5 of this title.
Churches.
Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses to be occupied by not more than ten (10) persons.
Dwellings, one-family detached.
Home occupations, as defined in this title.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed one year.
Truck gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved and when no sale of products is conducted on the premises. (Ord. 02-12-46,
12-2-2002)
10-5B-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses and purposes may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.
Golf courses, public or private.
Municipal or privately owned recreation building or community center, when operated not for profit.
Public or private park or playground.
Public utility facilities, i.e., filtration plant, water reservoir or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station, treatment plant and other similar
facilities.
Schools, elementary, high and college, public or private. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-5B-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as follows:
One-family detached dwellings 30 feet and not over 21/2 stories
Church 100 feet for towers or steeples but not more than 65 feet for the main structure
B. Lot Size:
1. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than one hundred eight
thousand nine hundred (108,900) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than one hundred sixty five feet (165').
2. Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than two hundred
seventeen thousand eight hundred (217,800) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than three hundred thirty feet
(330').
C. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure
or enlargement:
Front yard 50 feet minimum
Interior side yards 10 percent of the actual lot width
Corner side yards 25 feet minimum
Rear yards 35 feet minimum
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 317/525
(Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
ARTICLE C. RE-3 RURAL ESTATE DISTRICT
10-5C-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and purposes are created for the RE-3 rural estate district:
Accessory buildings, as defined herein and as regulated by section 10-3-5 of this title.
Churches.
Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses to be occupied by not more than ten (10) persons.
Dwellings, one-family detached.
Home occupations, as defined in this title.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed one year.
Truck gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved and when no sale of products is conducted on the premises. (Ord. 02-12-46,
12-2-2002)
10-5C-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses and purposes may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.
Golf courses, public or private.
Municipal or privately owned recreation building or community center, when operated not for profit.
Public or private parks or playgrounds.
Public utility facilities, i.e., filtration plant, water reservoir or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station, treatment plant and other similar
facilities.
Schools, elementary, high and college, public or private. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-5C-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as follows:
One-family detached dwellings 30 feet and not over 21/2 stories
Church 100 feet for towers or steeples but not more than 65 feet for the main structure
B. Lot Size:
1. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than forty thousand (40,000)
square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than one hundred thirty feet (130'), except at a cul-de-sac the width
measured at the front building setback line may be no less than one hundred feet (100').
2. Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than forty thousand
(40,000) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than two hundred feet (200').
C. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure
or enlargement:
Front yard 30 feet minimum
Interior side yards 10 percent of the actual lot width
Corner side yards 25 feet minimum
Rear yards 30 feet minimum
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 318/525
(Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
ARTICLE D. SE-1 SUBURBAN ESTATE DISTRICT
10-5D-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and purposes are created for the SE-1 suburban estate district:
Accessory buildings, as defined herein and as regulated by section 10-3-5 of this title.
Churches.
Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses to be occupied by not more than ten (10) persons.
Dwellings, one-family detached.
Home occupations, as defined in this title.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed one year.
Truck gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved and when no sale of products is conducted on the premises. (Ord. 02-12-46,
12-2-2002)
10-5D-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses and purposes may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.
Golf courses, public or private.
Municipal or privately owned recreation building or community center, when operated not for profit.
Planned developments, as defined and regulated in this title.
Public or private park or playground.
Public utility facilities, i.e., filtration plant, water reservoir or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station, treatment plant and other similar
facilities.
Schools, elementary, high and college, public or private. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-5D-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as follows:
One-family detached dwellings 30 feet and not over 21/2 stories
Church 100 feet for towers or steeples but not more than 65 feet for the main structure
B. Lot Size:
1. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than twenty two thousand
(22,000) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than one hundred feet (100'), except as provided in section 10-3-2
of this title.
2. Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than forty thousand
(40,000) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than two hundred feet (200').
C. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure
or enlargement:
Front yard 50 feet minimum
Interior side yards 10 percent of the actual lot width
Corner side yards 25 feet minimum
Rear yards 35 feet minimum
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 319/525
(Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
ARTICLE E. SE-2 SUBURBAN ESTATE DISTRICT
10-5E-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses and purposes are created for the SE-2 suburban estate district:
Accessory buildings, as defined herein and as regulated by section 10-3-5 of this title.
Churches.
Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses to be occupied by not more than ten (10) persons.
Dwellings, one-family detached.
Home occupations, as defined in this title.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed one year.
Truck gardening and other horticultural uses, where no building is involved and when no sale of products is conducted on the premises. (Ord. 02-12-46,
12-2-2002)
10-5E-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses and purposes may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.
Golf courses, public or private.
Municipal or privately owned recreation building or community center, when operated not for profit.
Planned developments, as defined and regulated in this title.
Public or private park or playground.
Public utility facilities, i.e., filtration plant, water reservoir or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station, treatment plant and other similar
facilities.
Schools, elementary, high and college, public or private. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-5E-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as follows:
One-family detached dwellings 30 feet and not over 21/2 stories
Church 100 feet for towers or steeples but not more than 65 feet for the main structure
B. Lot Size:
1. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than eighteen thousand
(18,000) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than ninety feet (90'), except as provided in section 10-3-2 of this
title.
2. Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than thirty six thousand
(36,000) square feet, and a width at the established front building line of not less than one hundred eighty feet (180').
C. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure
or enlargement:
Front yard 40 feet minimum
Interior side yards 10 percent of the actual lot width
Corner side yards 25 feet minimum
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 320/525
Rear yards 30 feet minimum
(Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
ARTICLE F. RESERVED
ARTICLE G. R-1 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
10-5G-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted uses in the R-1 one-family dwelling district:
Accessory buildings, as defined herein and as regulated by section 10-3-5 of this title.
Churches.
Convents, monasteries, rectories or parish houses to be occupied by not more than ten (10) persons.
Home occupations, as defined in this title.
Off street parking facilities, as required or permitted by chapter 11 of this title.
One-family detached dwellings.
Signs, as defined and regulated by village ordinance.
Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed one year.
Truck gardening and other horticultural uses where no building is involved and when no sale of products is conducted on the premises. (1976 Code
§ 150.072(A))
10-5G-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.
Golf courses, public or private.
Hospitals or sanatoriums, public or private.
Institutions or hospitals for the care of the insane or feeble minded, public or private.
Municipal or privately owned recreation building or community center, when operated not for profit.
Planned developments, as defined in section 10-2-1 of this title.
Police station or fire station.
Public or private park or playground.
Public utility facilities, i.e., filtration plant, water reservoir or pumping station, heat or power plant, transformer station, treatment plant and other similar
facilities.
Schools, elementary, high and college, public or private. (1976 Code § 150.072(B))
10-5G-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be as follows:
Church 100 feet for towers or steeples but not more than 65 feet for the main structure
One-family detached dwellings 30 feet and not over 21/2 stories
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 321/525
B. Lot Size:
1. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet, and a width at the established building line of not less than seventy five feet (75'), except as provided in section 10-3-2 of this
title.
2. Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet and a width at the building line of not less than seventy five feet (75').
C. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building, structure
or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: Each lot on which a dwelling or church is constructed shall have a front yard of not less than thirty feet (30'). Where lots comprising forty
percent (40%) or more of the frontage between two (2) intersecting streets are developed with buildings having front yards with a variation of not
more than fifteen feet (15') in depth, the average of these front yards shall establish the minimum front yard depth for the entire frontage. In no case
shall a front yard of more than forty feet (40') be required.
2. Side Yards: On each lot on which a dwelling is constructed there shall be a side yard on each side equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the
width of the lot; the combined total of side yards on interior lots shall be not less than twelve feet (12'). On corner lots there shall be maintained a
side yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') on the side adjacent to the street which intersects the street on which the building or structure maintains
frontage, and in the case of a reversed corner lot there shall be maintained a setback from the side street of not less than fifty percent (50%) of the
front yard required on the lots in the rear of corner lots, but the setback need not exceed fifteen feet (15'). No accessory building on a reversed
corner lot shall project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than five feet (5') to the side lot line of that
adjacent lot.
3. Lots With Church: On lots on which a church is constructed or extensions made to an existing church, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten
feet (10') on each side of the main structure and a combined total of side yards of not less than twenty five feet (25').
4. Rear Yard: Every lot or parcel of land on which a building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
D. Lot Coverage: Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the lot area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
(1976 Code § 150.072(C) _ (G))
E. Permitted Obstructions: The following shall not be considered as obstructions when located within or over required yards for single-family detached
residential products. As exceptions to the zoning code, the following sections do not grant persons the authority to locate permitted obstructions into
easements or waive the requirements of the building code or its adopted amendments:
Arbors and trellises.
Awnings and canopies.
Breezeways, decks, and open porches under the following conditions:
1. Decks and open porches must be less than two feet (2') as measured from grade;
2. Encroachment may only occur in the rear yard (side yards behind the principal building setback must remain unobstructed);
3. Must maintain a minimum ten foot (10') setback as measured from the outermost structure limits to the rear property line;
4. Cannot encroach into any easement;
5. Cannot obstruct natural or designed drainage patterns;
6. Must be set back ten feet (10') from and ten feet (10') beneath overhead utilities; and
7. Must be set back five feet (5') from underground utilities.
Children's playset (rear yard only).
Chimney, not exceeding two feet (2') or two percent (2%) of the width of the yard, whichever is greater.
Fences or walls as provided in section 10-5-2 of this chapter.
Masonry patios (at grade in rear yard only).
Retaining walls or landscape walls less than four feet (4') in height (side yard excluded).
Sidewalks (maximum width 4 feet and minimum 3 feet off the side yard).
Steps not over four feet (4') in height.
Swimming pool, private, under the following conditions:
1. Pools must be inground;
2. Encroachment may only occur in the rear yard;
3. Must maintain a minimum ten foot (10') setback as measured from the outermost pool deck limits to the rear property line;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 322/525
4. Cannot encroach into any easement;
5. Cannot obstruct natural or designed drainage patterns;
6. Must be set back ten feet (10') from and ten feet (10') beneath overhead utilities;
7. Must be set back five feet (5') from underground utilities; and
8. Must be set back eight feet (8') from the principal structure.
Terraces. (Ord. 10-04-16, 4-19-2010)
ARTICLE H. R-2 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
10-5H-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted uses in the R-2 one-family dwelling district:
Any use permitted in the R-1 one-family dwelling district. (1976 Code § 150.073(A))
10-5H-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Any use permitted as a special use in the R-1 one-family dwelling district. (1976 Code § 150.072(B))
10-5H-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The same regulations shall apply in the R-2 district as are permitted or required in the R-1 district.
B. Lot Size:
1. Every one-family dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square
feet, and a width at the established building line of not less than sixty five feet (65'), except as provided in section 10-3-2 of this title.
2. Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and a width at the building line of not less than seventy five feet (75').
C. Yard Areas: The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 one-family dwelling district.
D. Lot Coverage: No more than thirty five percent (35%) of any lot may be occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
E. Permitted Obstructions: The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 one-family dwelling district. (1976 Code § 150.072(C) _
(G))
ARTICLE I. R-3 ONE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
10-5I-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted uses in the R-3 one-family dwelling district:
Any use permitted in the R-1 one-family dwelling district. (1976 Code § 150.074(A))
10-5I-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Any use permitted as a special use in the R-1 one-family dwelling district. (1976 Code § 150.074(B))
10-5I-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The same regulations shall apply in the R-3 district as are permitted or required in the R-1 district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 323/525
B. Lot Size:
1. Every one-family dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square
feet, and a width at the established building line of not less than fifty feet (50'), except as provided in section 10-3-2 of this title.
2. Churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and a width at the building line of not less than seventy five feet (75').
C. Yard Areas: The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 one-family dwelling district.
D. Lot Coverage: Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
E. Permitted Obstructions: The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 one-family dwelling district. (1976 Code
§ 150.074(C) _ (G))
ARTICLE J. R-4 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
10-5J-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted uses in the R-4 two-family dwelling district:
Any use permitted in the R-3 dwelling district.
Attached one-family dwellings, on a lot having a side or rear lot line adjoining a public park or common open space dedicated to the homeowners'
association in which the attached one-family dwellings are located. There shall not be more than four (4) units within one building located on a parcel(s)
with a net area of not less than four thousand two hundred fifty (4,250) square feet per dwelling unit (maximum net density of 8.2 dwelling units per acre).
Other dwellings:
A. Three- and four-family dwellings, either stacked, or attached one-family, as transitional uses, when located on a lot having a side lot line adjoining or
facing a business or manufacturing use or railroad right of way, provided the building is located on a lot having a width of not less than seventy five
feet (75') and an area of not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet per dwelling unit.
B. Transitional nonresidential off street parking when authorized by the village board of trustees as outlined in subsection 10-11-3E of this title.
Two-family dwellings, either stacked, or attached one-family. (1976 Code § 150.075(A))
10-5J-2: SPECIAL USES:
Attached one-family dwellings, with not more than four (4) units within one building, when developed as part of a planned development, with appropriate
net densities and common open space pursuant to chapter 9 of this title.
Any use permitted as a special use in the R-3 one-family district may be permitted as a special use in any R-4 district in accordance with the provisions of
section 10-15-5 of this title. (1976 Code § 150.075(B))
10-5J-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The same regulations shall apply as permitted in the R-3 one-family dwelling district.
B. Lot Size:
1. For one-family dwellings, the same regulations shall apply as permitted in the R-3 dwelling district.
2. Every two-family dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot having an area of not less than eight thousand five hundred
(8,500) square feet and a width at the building line of not less than seventy five feet (75') except as provided in section 10-3-2 of this title.
3. An existing one-family dwelling located on a lot of less area than required in this section may be converted to a two-family dwelling without
increasing the lot size, provided the building is not enlarged beyond its present outside dimensions and that all other regulations of this title are
complied with. Additions may be made to an existing building only when lot size and yard requirements of this section are complied with.
4. For churches, convents and monasteries hereafter erected or structurally altered, the same regulations shall apply as required in the R-3 district.
C. Yard Areas: No buildings shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the building, structure,
or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-3 district.
2. Side Yards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 324/525
a. One-Family Detached Dwellings: The same regulations shall apply as required or permitted in the R-3 district.
b. Two-Family Dwellings: The same regulations shall apply as required for one-family detached dwellings.
c. Converted Dwellings: An existing one-family dwelling located on a lot having side yards of less width than required herein may be converted to a
two-family dwelling provided the building is not enlarged beyond its present outside dimensions.
3. Rear Yard: Every lot or parcel of land upon which a building is constructed shall have a rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30').
D. Lot Coverage: Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
E. Permitted Obstructions: The same regulations shall apply as permitted or required in the R-1 dwelling district. (1976 Code § 150.075(C)-(G))
ARTICLE K. R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
10-5K-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted uses in the R-5 multiple-family dwelling district:
Any use permitted in the R-4 district.
Boarding and lodging houses.
One-family row dwellings (party wall type) with not more than six (6) dwelling units in a building.
Other dwellings:
A. Multiple-family dwellings and apartments.
B. State or federally subsidized elderly/low income one-family row dwellings (party wall type) with not more than eight (8) dwelling units in a building
and multiple-family dwellings and apartments, or combinations thereof, in accordance with a plan approved by the governmental agency subsidizing
the development.
Tourist homes having not more than five (5) rooms for transient guests.
Transitional uses, such as principal offices of physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, real estate brokers and other professional occupations, when
conducted in a residential structure used primarily as a home and when located on lots having a side lot line adjoining a lot in a business or manufacturing
district, or adjacent to a railroad right of way, or when facing a business or manufacturing district or a railroad right of way directly across a street or alley,
provided that:
A. The lot on which the transitional use is located does not extend more than seventy five feet (75') from the adjoining business or manufacturing
district or more than one hundred twenty feet (120') in depth from the street line in cases where the lot does not adjoin but faces a business or
manufacturing district.
B. The home occupations are conducted in conjunction with the use of a dwelling unit as a home by the occupant thereof, with not more than two (2)
employees other than members of the related family, and that the residential character of the exterior of the dwelling is not changed. Medical clinics
are not included or permitted. (1976 Code § 150.076(A))
10-5K-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of sections 10-15-5 of this title:
Any use permitted in the R-3 dwelling district.
Hotel or motel.
Off street public parking areas and garages, provided there is a need for this facility and that no appropriate site is available in nearby business or
manufacturing districts.
Public buildings, including art gallery, library, museum or similar structure.
Rest homes and nursing homes.
Telephone exchanges, antenna towers and other outdoor equipment essential to the operation of the exchange. (1976 Code § 150.076(B))
10-5K-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered to exceed three (3) stories nor shall it exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 325/525
B. Yard Areas: No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure shall hereafter be erected or maintained unless the following yards
are provided and maintained in connection with the structure and enlargement:
1. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty feet (20').
2. Side Yards:
a. On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than five feet (5') and a combined total of side yards of not
less than fifteen feet (15') for all multiple-family dwellings of not more than two (2) stories in height. For each additional story added above the two
(2) stories, the side yard on each side of the main building shall be increased two feet (2') in width.
b. On corner lots the side yard on the intersecting street side shall be not less than ten feet (10'), except in the case of a reversed corner lot where
there shall be a side yard on the street side of the corner lot of not less than fifty percent (50%) of the front yard required in the lots in the rear of
the corner lot. No accessory building on a reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line required on the key lot in the rear, nor be
located nearer than five feet (5') to the side lot line of the key lot.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20') for interior lots and not less than fifteen feet (15') for corner lots.
C. Lot Coverage: Not more than thirty five percent (35%) of the area of a lot may be covered by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
D. Lot Area: Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered as a multiple-family dwelling, apartment, or row dwelling of more than two (2) dwelling
units shall provide a lot area per dwelling unit of not less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. Every building hereafter erected or
structurally altered in the R-5 multiple-family dwelling district shall have a total lot area of not less than ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet
and a lot width at the established building line of not less than seventy five feet (75') shall not apply to any lot zoned R-5 on the effective date hereof,
unless said lot is adjoined by a lot under common ownership then said minimum requirements shall apply.
E. Courts: No inner courts or courts completely surrounded on all sides by a building shall be permitted. Outer courts are permitted, provided the depth of
the court is no greater than the width of the court. (1976 Code § 150.076(C)-(G))
Chapter 6
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
The business districts set forth in this chapter are established to protect public health, to promote public safety, comfort, convenience and the general
welfare, and to protect the economic base of the village and the value of property. These general purposes include, among others, the following specific
objectives:
A. To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate locations for the
various types of business uses, thereby protecting and strengthening the economic base of the village.
B. To place in separate districts those businesses which may create noise, odors, hazards, unsightliness or which may generate excessive traffic.
C. To permit selected business uses in districts where adjacency to or inclusion in a residential area has sufficient elements of service and convenience to
such areas to offset the disadvantage.
D. To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually interchangeable and so
promote public convenience and business prosperity and contribute to the alleviation of traffic and pedestrian congestion.
E. To provide for the establishment of off street parking facilities, permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so promote shopping
convenience and business prosperity. (1976 Code § 150.080)
10-6-2: FENCES AND WALLS:
A. No fence or party wall shall be erected in a B-1, B-2 or B-3 business district without issuance of building permit by the building inspector of the village in
accordance with the regulations and fee schedules in effect for other buildings and structures.
B. No permit for the building and construction of fences or party walls in a B-1, B-2 or B-3 business district and no permit for the building and construction
of any structure whose plans and specifications include or contemplate the erection of fences or party walls in a B-1, B-2 or B-3 business district shall
issue upon the determination by the building inspector that the building and construction of fences or party walls would be deleterious to the public
health, safety and welfare.
C. The building inspector shall make this determination upon the following criteria:
1. Whether there would result increased difficulty in transporting firefighting equipment in and about these business districts;
2. Whether there would result increased obstruction of light and air in these districts;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 326/525
3. Whether there would result increased vehicular traffic congestion in these districts.
D. Upon the determination by the building inspector that no building permit shall issue, the building inspector shall appear before the village board of
trustees at its next regularly scheduled meeting and shall thereupon present and explain the application for the permit for building and construction
relative to fences or party walls, shall indicate his determination upon the criteria hereinabove set forth and shall seek ratification for his determination
by a majority of the members present of the village board of trustees.
E. Before appearing to seek ratification for his determination that a building permit shall not issue as provided in subsection D of this section, the building
inspector shall cause the village clerk to serve notice by certified mail upon the applicant for the permit, the notice to be mailed five (5) days or more in
advance of appearance before the village board of trustees, the notice to set forth the exact time and place for such appearance. (1976 Code
§ 150.084)
10-6-3: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
ARTICLE A. B-1 LIMITED RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
10-6A-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are uses permitted in the B-1 limited retail business district. All activities, except for automobile off street parking facilities, the sale of
seasonal "agricultural products" (defined in section 10-2-1 of this title) pursuant to section 4-7-7 of this code and the use of outdoor eating cafes on private
property in the downtown overlay district, pursuant to section 4-6-3 of this code, as permitted or required in the B-1 district, shall be conducted wholly
within an enclosed building. (1976 Code § 150.081(A); amd. Ord. 94-5-14, 5-2-1994)
Any similar type retail store not specifically listed herein and which has economic compatibility with the established uses on adjoining property.
Any use permitted in the B-2 district may also be permitted in this district, provided it is located above the first floor or in the basement.
Art and school supply stores.
Auto accessory stores, where there is no driveway entrance across the sidewalk into the main building.
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products when prepared for retail use on the premises only.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barber, beauty, chiropody or similar personal service shops.
Books and stationery stores.
Camera and photographic supply shops for retail sale.
Candy and ice cream shops.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Currency exchanges.
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, or shoe repair shops, when conducted for retail sales on the premises only.
Department stores.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaning and pressing establishments when employing facilities for the cleaning and pressing of not more than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
pounds of dry goods per day, and when using perchlorethylene or other nonflammable nontoxic solvents approved by the fire department.
Dry goods stores.
Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and above a permitted business use. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the ground floor
of business buildings or in the rear of business establishments on the ground floor.
Electrical appliance stores and repairs, but not including appliance assembly or manufacture.
Florist shops and conservatories for retail trade on the premises only.
Food stores, grocery stores, fruit stores, meat markets, bakeries, delicatessens, and frozen food stores, including locker rental in conjunction therewith.
Furniture stores, including upholstering, when conducted as part of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use.
Furriers, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 327/525
Garden supplies and seed stores.
Gift shops.
Haberdasheries.
Hardware stores.
Hobby stores, for retail of items to be assembled or used away from the premises.
Household appliance stores.
Interior decorating shops, including upholstering and making of draperies, slipcovers, and other similar articles, when conducted as part of the retail
operations and secondary to the principal use.
Jewelry stores, including watch repair.
Launderettes and laundromats.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Loan offices.
Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only.
Notions stores.
Office supply stores.
Offices, business and professional, including medical and dental clinics.
Opticians, optometrists.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Photography studios, including the developing of film and pictures when conducted as part of the retail business on the premises.
Plumbing showrooms, without shop or repair facilities.
Public utility collection offices.
Restaurants, tearooms, or cafes, when the establishments are not of the drive-in type where food is served to occupants remaining in motor vehicles.
Savings and loan associations.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Shoe stores.
Signs, as defined and regulated by village ordinance1.
Sporting goods stores.
Tattoo and piercing studio subject to licensing requirements stated in section 4-7-8 of this code.
Telegraph offices.
Telephone booths.
Telephone exchanges.
Tobacco shops.
Toy stores.
Typewriter and adding machine sales and service.
Variety stores.
Wearing apparel shop. (1976 Code § 150.081(A); amd. Ord. 06-06-20, 6-5-2006; Ord. 08-12-26, 12-15-2008; Ord. 08-12-31, 12-15-2008; Ord. 11-09-14,
9-6-2011)
10-6A-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Airport, heliport, landing field or landing strip, subject to the federal aeronautics administration certifying that a new or reoriented runway will not interfere
with the flight pattern of any established airport, landing field or landing strip.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 328/525
Auditoriums, stadiums, arenas, armories, gymnasiums, theaters (indoor), bowling alleys, skating rinks and other similar places of entertainment or public
events.
Bowling alleys, billiard and pool rooms, dance halls, gymnasiums, meeting halls, lodge halls, fraternal organizations and clubs, places of entertainment
assembly, are permitted provided they are located in a basement or above the first floor and above a business use permitted in this section, or said uses
may be located on the ground floor when permitted business establishments occupy street frontage, except for an entranceway to the rear use.
Bus terminal, railroad passenger station, freight terminal or any other public transportation terminal facilities.
Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), fraternal or religious institutions.
Coin operated, self-servicing, dry cleaning establishments.
Daycare facilities which are duly licensed and regulated by the state of Illinois.
Electric substations.
Massage parlors.
Meeting halls.
Planned business development, as defined in section 10-2-1 of this title.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Tavern, bar, nightclub, or lounge, places of entertainment assembly.
Telephone exchanges, antenna towers and other outdoor equipment essential to the operation of the exchange in the interest of the public convenience
and necessity. (1976 Code § 150.081(B); amd. Ord. 11-09-14, 9-6-2011; Ord. 11-12-25, 12-19-2011)
10-6A-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed thirty five feet
(35'). Parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevated bulkheads, stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected over and above
the maximum height of thirty five feet (35'), provided they are constructed in accordance with all other ordinances of the village.
B. Yard Areas: No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the building:
1. Front Yard:
a. General: No front yard shall be required when all frontage between two (2) intersecting streets lies within this district. However, when lots within
this district are adjacent to and adjoining lots in a residential district, all of which front upon the same street between two (2) intersecting streets,
there shall be established the same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has been established in the residential district.
b. Exception: When existing buildings located in this district have already established a building line at the street line at a depth less than required
above, then all new buildings may conform to the same building line, except for the first fifty feet (50') of the B-1 district frontage adjacent to the
residential district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than ten feet (10').
2. Side Yards: No side yard is required, except for a corner lot which abuts upon a residential district or upon an alley separating this district from a
residential district. There shall then be provided a side yard equal to one-half (1/2) of the front yard required in the abutting residential district, but in
no case more than ten feet (10'). The setback shall also apply if the business building fronts the intersecting street, commonly referred to as the side
street.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20'). A one-story accessory building may be located thereon, except for the five
feet (5') adjacent and parallel to the rear lot line or alley line for the storage of motor vehicles and the unloading and loading of vehicles under roof,
as provided in chapter 11 of this title. (1976 Code §§ 150.081(C),(D))
ARTICLE B. B-2 GENERAL RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
10-6B-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted uses in the B-2 general retail business district. All activities, except for automobile off street parking facilities, the sale of
seasonal "agricultural products" (defined in section 10-2-1 of this title) pursuant to section 4-7-7 of this code, and the use of outdoor eating cafes on private
property in the downtown overlay district, pursuant to section 4-6-3 of this code, as permitted or required in the B-2 district, shall be conducted wholly
within an enclosed building. (1976 Code § 150.082(A); amd. Ord. 94-5-14, 5-2-1994)
Any similar type retail stores not specifically permitted herein and which have economic compatibility with the established uses on adjoining properties.
Any use permitted in the B-1 district.
Antique shops.
Art galleries and studios.
Automobile service stations and automobile rental.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 329/525
Bicycle stores, including sales, rental and repair.
Billiard and pool rooms.
Clothing and costume rental shops.
Clubs and fraternal organizations.
Dwelling units, provided they are located above the first floor and above a permitted business use. Dwelling units shall not be permitted on the ground floor
of business buildings or in the rear of business establishments on the ground floor.
Hand laundries, employing not more than four (4) persons.
Hotels, including dining and meeting rooms.
Liquor stores, package goods only.
Locksmiths.
Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
Mirror and glazing shops.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not including the assembly or manufacture of such articles.
Pet shops, but not including animal hospitals.
Physical culture and health services.
Picture framing, when conducted on the premises for retail trade only.
Public auction rooms.
Schools: music, dance, business, commercial or trade.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Signs, as defined and regulated by village ordinance.
Taxidermists.
Theaters, indoor.
Undertaking establishments.
Upholstering shops, if conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. (1976 Code § 150.082(A); amd. Ord. 11-09-14, 9-6-2011)
10-6B-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the B-1 limited business district.
Daycare facilities which are duly licensed and regulated by the state of Illinois.
Pawnshops.
Planned business developments, as defined in section 10-2-1 of this title.
Public utility and public service uses, including electric substations, fire stations, police stations, public libraries, water pumping stations, water reservoirs
and other similar uses.
Taverns, as defined in section 10-2-1 of this title. (1976 Code § 150.082(B); amd. Ord. 11-09-14, 9-6-2011; Ord. 11-12-25, 12-19-2011)
10-6B-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The same regulations shall apply as required or permitted in the B-1 business district.
B. Yard Areas: No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the building:
1. Front Yard:
a. General: No front yard shall be required when all frontage between two (2) intersecting streets lies within this district. However, when lots within
this district are adjacent to and adjoining lots in a residential district, all of which front upon the same street between two (2) intersecting streets,
there shall be established the same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has been established in the residential district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 330/525
b. Exception: When existing buildings located in this district have already established a building line at the street line or at a lesser depth than
required above, then all new buildings may conform to the same building line, except for the fifty feet (50') of the B-2 district frontage adjacent to
the residential district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than ten feet (10').
2. Side Yards: No side yard is required except for a corner lot which abuts upon a residential district or upon an alley separating this district from a
residential district. There shall then be provided a side yard equal to one-half (1/2) the front yard required in the abutting residential district, but in no
case more than ten feet (10'). The same setback shall apply also if business buildings front the intersecting street, commonly referred to as the side
street.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty feet (20'). A one-story accessory building may be located thereon, except for the ten
feet (10') adjacent and parallel to the rear lot line or alley line, for the storage of motor vehicles and the unloading and loading of vehicles under roof,
as provided in chapter 11 of this title. (1976 Code §§ 150.082(C),(D))
ARTICLE C. B-3 SERVICE AND WHOLESALE BUSINESS DISTRICT
10-6C-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are uses permitted in the B-3 service and wholesale business district:
Any use permitted in the B-2 business district.
Agricultural implement sales and services when conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
Air conditioning and heating sales and service.
Automobile and truck motor repair and minor service shop, and automobile and truck rental.
Automobile washing, including the use of mechanical conveyors, blowers, and steam cleaning devices.
Battery and tire service stations.
Beverages, nonalcoholic, bottling and distributing.
Bicycle and motorcycle sales and repair.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Boat showroom.
Bookbinding.
Building material sales, when conducted wholly within a building, except as permitted outdoors as an accessory use to a hardware store in compliance
with the performance standards described in this article.
Catering establishments.
Contractors' offices and shops, where no fabricating is done on the premises and where all storage of material is within a building.
Daycare facilities which are duly licensed and regulated by the state of Illinois.
Exterminating shops.
Feed and seed stores, wholesale.
Garages, public, for storage of private passenger vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
Glass cutting and glazing establishments.
Greenhouses, wholesale growers.
Household appliance repair shops.
Laboratories, commercial (medical, dental, research, experimental and testing), provided no production or manufacturing of products takes place.
Monument sales.
Motels.
Outdoor storage of retail merchandise when incidental and accessory to outdoor business material sales and in compliance with the performance
standards described in this article.
Parcel delivery stations.
Pet shops, kennels or animal hospitals, when conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
Photograph developing and processing.
Plumbing, heating and roofing supply shops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 331/525
Plumbing shops.
Printing, publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books, stationery and other reading matter.
Processing or assembly limited to the following, provided that space occupied in a building does not exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet of total floor
space and basement space, not including stairwells or elevator shafts, and provided the processing or assembly can be conducted without noise,
vibration, odor, dust or any other conditions which might be disturbing to occupants of adjacent buildings. When manufacturing operations of the same or
similar products demand space exceeding six thousand (6,000) square feet, they shall be located in the M-1 manufacturing district.
Advertising displays.
Awnings, venetian blinds, and window shades.
Bakeries, wholesale.
Brushes and brooms.
Cosmetics, drugs, and perfumes.
Electrical equipment appliances.
Food processing, packaging, and distribution.
Jewelry.
Medical and dental supplies.
Optical goods and equipment.
Pattern making.
Scientific and precision instruments.
Products from finished materials such as plastic, bone, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, precious or semiprecious
stones, rubber, shell or yarn.
Radio and television broadcasting stations.
Recreation places, including bowling alleys, dance halls, gymnasiums, skating rinks, archery ranges, golf practicing ranges, miniature golf courses, or
other similar places of amusement or entertainment when operated for pecuniary profit.
Restaurants, drive-ins, car service.
Sheet metal shop, provided floor area occupied does not exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet.
Signs, as defined and regulated by village ordinance.
Silver plating and repair shops.
Smoking and processing meat products.
Trailer sales or rental (house trailers or mobile homes) on an open lot or within a building.
Uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses and accessory buildings when located on the same premises.
Wholesale business, excluding a building the principal use of which is for a storage warehouse. (1976 Code § 150.083(A); amd. Ord. 08-12-26, 12-15-
2008; Ord. 08-12-31, 12-15-2008; Ord. 11-12-25, 12-19-2011)
10-6C-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the B-2 business district.
New and used boat sales, along with the operation of a commercial marina with docking and gas facilities, boat repair, painting and boat storage and all
necessary and proper ancillary use to the marina business.
Outside sales and storage of merchandise and nonmechanical rental equipment when accessory to a principal and permitted use within the B-3 zoning
district under the following conditions:
A. Sites shall be a minimum of 3.5 acres.
B. Sites shall include three hundred (300) linear feet of frontage along a state highway.
C. Sites shall meet the landscaping and lighting standards pursuant to this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 332/525
D. Sites shall be contained on the same parcel and zone lot as the principal use, which shall include a structure of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.
E. Sites shall comply with the outside sales and storage requirements found within the village zoning code regarding screening, paved surfaces, and
heights.
Planned business developments, as defined in section 10-2-1 of this title.
Sale of new automobiles as a principal use, with the following ancillary uses: a) sale of used cars; and b) minor automobile service shop. In order to create
these special uses, the following conditions must be met:
A. Minimum lot size of four (4.0) acres;
B. Frontage along a marked state highway, except for that part of Illinois Route 83 situated within the downtown overlay district;
C. Minimum highway frontage of four hundred feet (400');
D. Average lot depth of three hundred feet (300');
E. Vehicular access from either the state highway or an adjacent major collector road;
F. Minimum front setback to paved surface of five feet (5'). The paved surface must be curbed or precast concrete with curb stops installed;
G. Minimum landscaped area consisting of at least ten percent (10%) of the site;
H. Landscaping and lighting in accordance with chapter 13 of this title; and
I. Prohibition of motor vehicle body repair shops, motor vehicle paint shops and major engine overhaul and/or machine shops. (1976 Code
§ 150.083(B); amd. Ord. 01-04-16, 4-16-2001; Ord. 12-12-29, 12-3-2012)
10-6C-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of three (3) stories nor shall it exceed forty five feet
(45') in height.
B. Yard Areas: No building shall be constructed or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with the building:
1. Front Yard:
a. General: No front yard shall be required when all frontage between two (2) intersecting streets lies within this district. However, when lots within
this district are adjacent to and adjoining lots in a residential district, all of which front upon the same street between two (2) intersecting streets,
there shall be established the same front yard setback for all of the frontage as has been established in the residential district.
b. Exception: When existing buildings located in this district have already established a building line at the street line or at a lesser depth than
required above, then all new buildings may conform to the same building line, except for the fifty feet (50') of B-3 district frontage adjacent to the
residential district, whereupon there shall be provided a front setback of not less than ten feet (10').
2. Side Yards: The same regulations shall apply as required or permitted in the B-1 limited business district.
3. Rear Yard: The same rear yard regulations shall apply as required or permitted in the B-1 limited business district. (1976 Code § 150.083(C),(D))
10-6C-4: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
10-6C-4-1: SALES AND STORAGE OF SEASONAL MERCHANDISE ACCESSORY TO PERMITTED RETAIL USES:
A. The conduct of accessory sale and storage of seasonal merchandise shall conform to the following performance standards:
1. Accessory outdoor sales and storage shall be restricted to the same parcel or zone lot as the principal permitted retail use;
2. Outdoor sales and storage shall be limited to lawn, garden, yard maintenance, exterior yard improvement products, building facade and
improvement products, and other related products offered at retail. All merchandise shall be new, in its original consumer product packaging, shall be
displayed in a neat and orderly manner. Secondhand goods, used equipment, parking or storage of motor vehicles, including towing services; motor
freight terminals; contractor yards for vehicles, equipment and supplies; automobile wrecking or dismantling; solid waste transfer stations;
manufacturing equipment; defective or repairable goods are strictly prohibited;
3. Products such as fertilizers, salts, and yard chemicals will be maintained and organized so as to prevent erosion, spillage, evaporation, or infiltration
into the village's storm system or off site. Village staff shall have the authority to mandate necessary measures to assure compliance with this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 333/525
subsection;
4. The area from which retail merchandise shall be displayed and sold shall be:
a. Incorporated into the overall site plan for the lot by application of similar colors, building materials, or architectural standards as adopted for the
principal building; and
b. Screened from the view of contiguous lots through the use of berms, decorative fencing, landscaping, wing walls, building placements, or a
combination thereof, each in compliance with section 10-6-2 of this chapter;
5. The merchandise shall not obstruct any views or routes required for safe traffic and pedestrian movement;
6. The area from which retail merchandise shall be displayed and sold shall not be considered in determining the parking requirements for the principal
use, nor diminish the availability of the minimum number of parking spaces required by this title;
7. The area from which retail merchandise shall be displayed and sold shall not be located within:
a. Any required yard or setback provided for in this article;
b. Any public right of way, including the public sidewalk;
c. Any required loading or fire zone;
d. Ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant or fire department connection;
e. Any accessible route serving as a means of ingress or egress;
8. If the area from which retail merchandise shall be displayed and sold is located on a private sidewalk, an unobstructed walkway not less than five
feet (5') wide shall be maintained for pedestrian use;
9. The retail merchandise shall not be displayed above eight feet (8') from the grade on which it is stored;
10. The area from which retail merchandise shall be displayed and sold shall be an impervious, slip resistant surface of asphalt or concrete and be kept
broom clean; and
11. The area from which retail merchandise shall be displayed and sold and stored, if applicable, shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total
aggregate retail sales area.
B. Before any premises may engage in outdoor building material sales, the owner or authorized occupant shall submit to the director a site plan and
operating manual describing the means by which the applicant intends to engage in outdoor building material sales. Within seven (7) business days
from receipt, the director shall review the site plan and operating manual and either: 1) approve the site plan and operating manual and issue a
certificate of compliance, or 2) reject the site plan and operating manual and provide a written explanation of the manner in which such documents fail
to comply with the foregoing standards. From and after the time a certificate of compliance is issued, any violation of the operating manual for the
premises shall be deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. 08-12-31, 12-15-2008)
10-6C-4-2: OUTDOOR STORAGE:
A. The conduct of outdoor storage shall conform to the following performance standards:
1. Allowed As Accessory Use On Same Lot: Outside storage shall be allowed only as accessory to a permitted use on the same parcel or zone lot;
2. Screening: Outside storage shall be screened by an opaque fence and other appropriate treatment. Such fence and treatment shall be as tall as the
materials they have been designed to screen and adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and rights of way. Acceptable barriers
include a combination of fencing, berming, and/or other landscape treatment. Chainlink fencing with slats for screening is prohibited;
3. Prohibited Storage Locations: The area in which merchandise or materials shall be stored shall not be located within:
a. Any required yard or setback provided for in this article;
b. Any public right of way, including the public sidewalk;
c. Any required loading or fire zone;
d. Ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant or fire department connection;
4. Required Storage Location: The area reserved for outdoor storage shall be located behind the front principal building elevation, be screened from
adjacent properties, parking areas, and rights of way by a berm, decorative fencing, landscaping, wing walls, building placements, or a combination
thereof, each in compliance with section 10-6-2 of this chapter;
5. Storage Height: The merchandise or materials shall not be stored above eight feet (8') from the grade on which it is stored;
6. Parking: The area for outdoor storage shall not be considered in determining the parking requirements for the principal use, nor diminish the
availability of the minimum number of parking spaces required by this title;
7. Paved Storage Area: The area utilized for outdoor storage shall be paved in an impervious, dust free surface of asphalt or concrete;
8. Storage Containers: No tractor trailer trucks, trailers, or other mobile storage containers shall be used as permanent outside storage. Tractor trailers
or mobile containers may be used as temporary storage if located in the designated loading dock area or service area. Temporary storage containers
of this nature shall be subject to the following:
a. All containers shall be a color compatible with the main structure and kept in good repair;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 334/525
b. Areas around containers shall be kept free of trash or debris;
c. All containers shall remain locked or secured to prohibit unauthorized entry;
d. No container shall be used for signage or advertising;
e. All containers shall be screened from adjacent property in conformance with this section; and
B. Before any premises may engage in outdoor storage or prior to the installation and use of mobile containers, the owner or authorized occupant shall
submit to the village board for review and approval a site plan and operating manual describing the means by which the applicant intends to engage in
outdoor or container storage. At a regularly scheduled meeting the board shall review the site plan and operating manual and either: 1) approve the site
plan and operating manual and issue a certificate of compliance, or 2) reject the site plan and operating manual and provide a written explanation of
the manner in which such documents fail to comply with the foregoing standards. From and after the time a certificate of compliance is issued, any
violation of the operating manual for the premises shall be deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. 08-12-31, 12-15-2008)
Chapter 7
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
The manufacturing districts set forth in this chapter are established to protect public health, safety, comfort, convenience and the general welfare and to
protect the economic base of the village as well as the value of real estate by regulating manufacturing development in appropriate locations. These
general objectives include, among others, the following specific objectives:
A. To protect established residential areas and the health of families living therein by restricting those nearby manufacturing activities which may create
offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, fire hazards and other objectionable influences to those areas which are appropriate
therefor.
B. To provide adequate space in appropriate locations for most types of manufacturing and related activities so that the economic structure of the
community may be strengthened and that employment opportunities may be found in the interest of public prosperity and welfare.
C. To provide more space for manufacturing activities in locations accessible to rail and highways, so that the movement of raw materials, finished
products, and employees can be carried on efficiently and with a minimum danger to public life and property.
D. To establish proper standards of performance which will restrict obnoxious manufacturing activities and at the same time encourage and permit the
manufacturing activities which have adopted facilities for the processing of finished products, without adversely affecting the health, safety,
convenience and welfare of the people living and working in nearby areas.
E. To protect manufacturing districts from incompatible uses of land by prohibiting the use of this space for new residential development, thereby
preserving the land for a more appropriate use in accordance with the plans for village improvement and development.
F. To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan of land use for all of the village, to conserve the use of property, to
promote stability of manufacturing activities and related development, to protect the character and established development in each area of the
community, to enhance and stabilize the value of land and to protect the tax base of the village. (1976 Code § 150.090)
10-7-2: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
ARTICLE A. M-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
10-7A-1: PERMITTED USES:
Since most uses permitted in this district will be in proximity to residential districts, it is declared that performance standards shall be high and that all
manufacturing, processing or assembly of materials and products must be carried on in a manner not injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent
premises by reason of the emission of odors, fumes or gas, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations or fire hazards. Therefore, the following uses may be permitted,
provided there is compliance with the performance standards established herein:
Any use permitted in a business district, but not including residences or apartments, except dwelling accommodations as may be needed to house a
caretaker or watchman employed on the premises and his family.
Adult uses as defined in title 4 of this code and subject to performance standards.
Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 335/525
Artificial limb manufacturing.
Automobile sales and service of new vehicles, with the sale of used vehicles as an ancillary use only, automobile painting, upholstering, repairing,
reconditioning and body and fender repairing when the repair work is done within the confines of a structure.
Batteries, manufacture and rebuilding.
Bedspring and mattress manufacture.
Belting.
Blacksmith or welding shops.
Boat building and repair.
Brooms and brushes.
Building equipment, building materials, lumber, coal, sand and gravel yards and yards for contracting equipment, maintenance or operating equipment of
public agencies or public utilities or materials or equipment of a similar nature.
Canning and preserving.
Canvas and canvas products.
Carpet and rug cleaning.
Carting, express hauling or storage yards.
Ceramic products, pottery and glazed tile.
Cleaning and dyeing establishments when employing facilities for handling more than one thousand (1,000) pounds of dry goods per day.
Coated fabrics, except rubberized.
Coin operated, self-servicing, dry cleaning establishments.
Creameries and dairies.
Drapery and bedding manufacture.
Drugs and pharmaceutical products.
Electric motors and generators.
Engraving.
Felt manufacture.
Fur goods, not including tanning or dyeing.
Glass products from previously manufactured glass.
Heating appliances and sheet metal products, including stoves and ranges.
Ice cream and ice manufacture.
Laundries, more than one thousand (1,000) pounds' daily capacity.
Machine shops and metal products manufacture when not equipped with heavy (exceeding 50 ton pressure) punch presses, drop forges, riveting and
grinding machines, or any other equipment which may create noise, vibration, smoke, odor, heat, glare or fire hazards exceeding the performance
standards set out in section 10-7A-4 of this article.
Metal polishing and plating.
Metal stamping.
Musical instruments.
Perfumes and cosmetics.
Pianos and organs.
Plastic products, but not including the processing of the raw materials.
Public utility electric substations and distribution centers, gas regulation centers and underground gas holder stations.
Rubber products (small) such as washers, gloves, footwear and bathing caps, but excluding rubber and synthetic rubber processing.
Sewage treatment plants.
Shoes and boots.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 336/525
Signs, as defined and regulated by Village ordinance.
Sporting and athletic equipment.
Storage and sale of trailers, farm implements and other similar products on an open lot.
Storage of household goods.
Textiles - spinning, weaving, dyeing and printing.
Tool and die shops.
Tools and hardware, such as hand tools, bolts, nuts, screws, cutlery, house hardware, locks and plumbing appliances.
Toys and children's vehicles.
Truck, tractor, trailer or bus storage yard, but not including a truck terminal which shall be treated as a special use.
Warehousing, public and private.
Wire brush manufacture. (1976 Code § 150.091(A); amd. Ord. 01-04-16, 4-16-2001; Ord. 10-04-13, 4-19-2010; Ord. 17-12-46, 12-11-2017)
10-7A-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Any use which may be allowed in the B-2 or B-3 Business District.
Airport and aircraft landing fields.
Bulk petroleum storage facilities.
Outdoor theaters.
Planned developments, industrial.
Public or privately owned and operated fairgrounds, permanent carnivals, kiddie parks and other similar amusement centers.
Recycling.
Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas.
Truck, tractor, trailer or bus storage yard, including truck terminals. (1976 Code § 150.091(B); amd. Ord. 18-05-18, 5-14-2018)
10-7A-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of three (3) stories nor shall it exceed forty five feet
(45') in height, except as provided in section 10-1-3 and chapter 3 of this title.
B. Lot Area: The maximum ground area occupied by all buildings shall be not more than sixty percent (60%) of the area of the lot or tract on which a
building permit has been issued:
1. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25'), wherein there shall be no structure of any kind, open
storage of materials or equipment.
2. Side Yards:
a. There shall be a minimum side yard of not less than fifteen feet (15') on both sides of the building or buildings, except in the following instances:
(1) Where the property is adjacent to a residential district, there shall be a side yard of not less than twenty five feet (25') on the side nearest to
residential lots;
(2) Where a side yard is adjacent to a street, there shall be a side yard of not less than twenty five feet (25') on the side nearest to the street.
b. The parking of private automobiles is permitted within a side yard area except as follows:
(1) When the side yard area is adjacent to a residential district, parking shall be prohibited within the five feet (5') of the side lot closest to the lot
zoned for residential use;
(2) When the side yard area is adjacent to a street, the parking of private automobiles in the side yard is prohibited except a use permitted by the
rules and regulations of the zoning code.
3. Rear Yard:
a. A rear yard is not required except as follows:
(1) Where a lot abuts upon a residential district, there shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30');
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 337/525
(2) Where a rear yard abuts upon a street, there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25').
b. The storage of materials or equipment or the parking of automobiles in a rear yard is permitted except as follows:
(1) No storage of materials or equipment or the parking of automobiles shall take place within the ten feet (10') closest to any residential lot or lots;
(2) No storage of materials or equipment or the parking of automobiles shall take place within the rear yard when the rear yard abuts upon a street.
(1976 Code § 150.091(C),(D))
10-7A-4: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following requirements shall apply in the M-1 district:
A. Noise:
1. Sound Pressure Level: The sound pressure level, to be measured as described following, shall not exceed the following decibel levels in the
designated octave bands when adjacent to the designated types of use districts:
Octave Band
Cycles Per Second
All Residential
Districts
Sound Level
In Decibels
B-1, B-2, B-3
Districts
37.5 to 75 58 73
75 to 150 54 69
150 to 300 50 65
300 to 600 46 61
600 to 1200 40 55
1200 to 2400 33 48
2400 to 4800 26 41
Over 4800 20 35
Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature which are not easily measured shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
2. Method Of Measurement: Measurement is to be made at the nearest boundary of the nearest residential area or any other point along the boundary
where the level is higher. The sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter as prescribed by the
American Standards Association.
B. Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission of smoke and dust by manufacturing plants in an amount sufficient to create a general nuisance to
adjoining properties shall be prohibited.
C. Odors: No odor shall be emitted by any use permitted in this district in such quantities as to be readily detectable by an average observer at any point
on the boundary line of the premises or beyond.
D. Noxious Gases: Processes and operations of permitted uses capable of dispensing noxious gases or toxic particulates into the atmosphere must be
hooded or otherwise suitably enclosed. The emission of such noxious gases or toxic particulates shall be from a stack.
E. Glare And Heat: Operations producing intense light or heat shall be performed within an enclosed building and shall not be visible beyond any lot line
bounding the property whereon the use is conducted.
F. Vibrations: There shall be no uses which create heavy, earthshaking vibrations which are noticeable at the property line of the subject premises. (1976
Code § 150.091(E))
G. Storage: All storage, except of motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively screened in compliance
with the standards contained within the supplemental regulations of section 10-3-6 of this title.
H. Adult Uses: All adult uses, such as adult bookstores, adult entertainment cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theaters, and adult motion picture theaters,
shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. No adult use shall be allowed within six hundred feet (600') of another existing adult use.
2. No adult use shall be located within six hundred feet (600') of any zoning district which is zoned for a residential use.
3. No adult use shall be located within six thousand feet (6,000') of a preexisting school or place of worship. (Ord. 10-04-13, 4-19-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 338/525
ARTICLE B. M-2 GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
10-7B-1: PERMITTED USES:
The uses permitted in this district generally include those manufacturing and industrial activities which cannot be operated economically without creating
some conditions which may be objectionable or obnoxious to the occupants of the adjoining properties, and for that reason must be grouped in areas
where similar industrial uses are now located or where the permitted uses will be best located in accordance with the comprehensive land use plan of the
village, which is designed to protect the welfare of the community:
Any use permitted in the M-1 manufacturing district.
Asphalt mixing plants.
Automobiles, trucks and trailers.
Box and crate manufacture.
Building materials, such as prefabricated houses, composition wallboards, partitions and panels.
Cement products.
Chemicals, not including those which may be inflammable or explosive.
Coffin manufacture.
Cooperage works.
Corrugated metal products.
Dyes, aniline, ink pigments and others.
Feed milling and processing.
Glass blowing and manufacture.
Graphite and graphite products.
Hemp products.
Ink from primary raw materials, including colors and pigment.
Linoleum.
Lumber, preserving treatment, processing, sawmills and planing mills.
Machinery, heavy manufacturing and repair, including electrical, construction, mining and agricultural.
Meat and fish products, packing and processing of, but not including slaughtering and glue and size manufacturing.
Motor testing and internal combustion motors.
Porcelain products, such as bathrooms and kitchen equipment.
Stone, marble and granite grinding and cutting.
Wax products, manufactured from paraffin.
Wool scouring and pulling.
Any other manufacturing establishment that can be operated in compliance with the requirements of this section without creating objectionable noise, odor,
dust, smoke, gas, fumes or vapor and that is a use compatible with the use and occupancy of adjoining properties. (1976 Code § 150.092(A))
10-7B-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-15-5 of this title:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the M-1 district, unless already permitted in section 10-7B-1 of this article.
Areas for the dumping or disposal of garbage, refuse or trash, provided the sanitary landfill method is used.
Extraction of gravel, sand or other raw materials. (1976 Code § 150.092(B))
10-7B-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 339/525
A. Building Height: No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered to exceed a height of four (4) stories or sixty feet (60') except
as provided in section 10-1-3 and chapter 3 of this title.
B. Lot Area:
1. Front Yard: No front yard shall be required when all of the frontage on one side of the street between intersecting streets, a public area or a railroad
right of way is located in an M-2 district. Where the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is located partially in an M-2
district and partially in some other use district, the front yard requirements of the other use district shall apply to the M-2 district.
2. Side Yard: The same as required in the M-1 manufacturing district.
3. Rear Yard: The same as required in the M-1 manufacturing district. (1976 Code § 150.092(C),(D))
10-7B-4: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following requirements shall apply in the M-2 district:
A. Noise: The sound pressure levels shall be the same as those permitted in the M-1 manufacturing district.
B. Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission of smoke and dust in an amount sufficient to create a general nuisance to occupants of adjoining
properties or to the occupants in the general area wherein the use is located shall be prohibited.
C. Odors: No odors shall be emitted by any use permitted in this district in such quantities as to be readily detectable by an average overserver at any
point on the boundary line of the nearest residential or business district.
D. Noxious Gases: Processes and operations of permitted uses capable of dispersing noxious gases or toxic particulates into the atmosphere must be
hooded or otherwise suitably enclosed. The emission of noxious gases or toxic particulates shall be from a stack not less than twenty five feet (25') in
height.
E. Glare And Heat: Operations producing intense light or heat when adjacent to a residential or business district, shall be performed within an enclosed
building and not be visible beyond the boundary separating the subject premises from the adjoining residential or business district.
F. Vibrations: There shall be no uses which create heavy earthshaking vibrations which are noticeable at any district boundaries separating residential and
business districts from an M-2 manufacturing district. (1976 Code § 150.092(E))
Chapter 8
OTHER DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. OS OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
10-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of the OS open space district is twofold:
A. To provide for passive areas which conserve natural resources such as floodplain, wetland and wildlife habitat areas; and
B. To provide for active recreational facilities on upland areas to meet the needs of village residents. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-8A-2: SPECIAL USES:
Arboretum or botanical garden on a parcel containing a minimum of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.
Boat launching ramp.
Campgrounds on parcels of forty (40) acres or larger.
Cemetery, mausoleum on a parcel containing a minimum of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.
Community or institutional service on a parcel containing a minimum of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.
Conservation club on parcels of forty (40) acres or larger.
Crop lands on parcels of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more.
Dwelling unit for caretaker as an accessory use on a parcel containing a minimum of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet with a designated
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 340/525
housing site consisting of a minimum of eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet, but no larger than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
Golf course on parcels of sixty (60) acres or larger.
Nature preserve; wildlife habitat; public open land.
Public or community park, playgrounds, playfields and related equipment on upland areas.
Stable for horses on parcels of two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet or larger.
Trails for pedestrians, bicycles, horses, etc. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-8A-3: LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building Height: The maximum height of buildings permitted shall be thirty feet (30').
B. Parcel Size: There is no restriction concerning parcel size, except as may be indicated in section 10-8A-2 of this article, or dictated by compliance with
subsections D and E of this section.
C. Yard Areas: There shall be a minimum setback for any building or parking areas of thirty feet (30') as measured from all property lines.
D. Intensity Of Improvements: Maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.07 and maximum impervious surface ratio shall be 0.15.
E. Maintenance Restrictions: Restrictions on the means of maintaining the land may be imposed as recommended by the Illinois department of natural
resources, the Lake County soil and water conservation district or other agency. Such restrictions shall be established by restrictive covenant or other
legal instrument. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
Chapter 9
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
Planned developments are of such substantially different character from other special uses that specific and additional standards and exceptions are
established to govern the recommendations of the plan commission and the action of the village board of trustees.
A. The village, through the board of trustees, shall have the final approval as to the placement of all roads, entryways, public buildings, well houses,
pumping stations and the like, and shall also have final say as to preservation and improvement of sloughs, ponds, watercourses, streams and open
areas.
B. Should there be requirements for varying ordinances of the village, the developer and owner shall follow the variance procedures outlined in section 10-
15-6 of this title. (1976 Code § 150.105)
10-9-2: ADMINISTRATIVE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The administrative development review committee shall consist of the following personnel:
Village administrator and/or director of planning, zoning and building, one of whom shall chair the committee meeting;
Superintendent of water and sewer, or his designee;
Superintendent of streets, or his designee;
Public safety inspector; and
Consulting village engineer. (1976 Code § 150.106(A)(3))
10-9-3: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
10-9-3-1: CONCEPT PLAN:
A. Prior to the preparation for filing of a preliminary plan and applications thereof for a planned development, the applicant shall file a concept plan and
supporting documentation which, at minimum, shall contain the following: (Ord. 00-06-12, 6-5-2000)
1. Names, addresses, phone numbers of the current owner of the subject property, petitioner and land planner or person preparing the sketch plan;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 341/525
2. Location map or aerial photo at a minimum scale of one inch equals four hundred feet (1" = 400') which shows the site in relationship to adjacent
properties within two hundred feet (200') of the subject site;
3. Sketch plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') (with 1 inch = 100 feet, or larger scale, being preferred). The scale
shall be clearly indicated on the plan; (1976 Code § 150.106(A))
4. Photostatic enlargements of the following, with a sketch plan overlay or sketch plan superimposed; the USGS flood hazard map (or in the alternative,
the FEMA flood insurance rate map in conjunction with a topographic survey of the site); and the USDA resource conservation service (formerly the
soil conservation service) soil map; (Ord. 00-06-12, 6-5-2000)
5. A letter from the school district as to whether or not the school district shall require land or monetary donations, or a combination thereof, in order for
the developer to conform with the school donation ordinance.
B. The plan and ten (10) copies shall be filed with the department of planning, zoning and building, which shall arrange for a meeting of the administrative
development review committee at the earliest possible convenience, but within fifteen (15) calendar days from the completed concept plan submittal.
C. The administrative development review committee1 meeting shall be attended by the petitioner and/or his representatives. No formal vote will be taken,
but a consensus opinion will be arrived at and documented in writing. Such written documentation shall be transmitted to the petitioner within seven (7)
calendar days of the committee meeting. (1976 Code § 150.106(A))
10-9-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND SPECIAL USE APPLICATIONS:
A. Review:
1. Applications and supporting documentation for a preliminary plan and a special use permit shall be filed with the village clerk a minimum of twenty
eight (28) days prior to a plan commission hearing. The application shall be on such forms and contain such information as shall be established from
time to time by the plan commission and shall be accompanied by twenty (20) copies of the preliminary plan and twenty (20) copies of all supporting
documentation. PUDs shall include all items required for a zoning amendment, pursuant to section 10-15-4 of this title, plus all information specified
in this chapter, both inclusive.
2. On receipt of the applications for approval of a preliminary plan and a special use permit, the village clerk shall transmit same on a timely basis to the
director of planning, zoning and building.
3. On receipt of the applications, the director of planning, zoning and building shall transmit same to the plan commission with directions to hold a
public hearing and thereafter to make findings and recommendations and forward same to the village board of trustees. (Ord. 00-06-12, 6-5-2000)
4. The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the applications at such time and place as shall be determined by the commission. The hearing
shall be conducted and a record of the proceedings shall be preserved in such manner and according to such procedures as the plan commission
shall by rule prescribe from time to time. However, all testimony shall be taken under oath which shall be administered by that member of the plan
commission presiding at the hearing. (1976 Code § 150.106(B))
5. The plan commission shall cause notice of the hearing to be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date of
the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers in circulation in the village. The notice shall include such
description of the property affected by the preliminary plan and special use permit as the plan commission may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
The published notice may be supplemented by any additional form of notice that the plan commission may prescribe. The public hearing may be
continued from time to time by mutual consent of the plan commission and the applicant. Said continuance and/or any application for rezoning of the
property or determination by the plan commission that rezoning is required in order to permit consideration of the proposed use of the property shall
toll or stop the running of the ninety (90) day limitations period set out in subsection A6 of this section.
6. Within ninety (90) days following the date of the application, or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever is
later, the plan commission shall act to approve or disapprove the application for preliminary approval and shall forward its findings and
recommendations to the village board of trustees.
7. Within thirty (30) days following its next regular meeting after receipt of the findings and recommendations from the plan commission, the village
board of trustees shall disapprove or approve the preliminary plan and special use permit with such modifications or requirements as it may deem
necessary.
8. Approval of the preliminary plan shall not constitute authority to proceed with construction of any improvements, but rather an approval of the
physical features of the plan as a basis for preparing the final plan. The preliminary plan is an entitlement plan which runs with the land. However, if a
final plan or plat for the first phase is not approved within one year (unless a lesser period is specified by individual PUD ordinance) from the date of
preliminary plan approval by ordinance, the village reserves the right to conduct a public hearing to revert the zoning and annul the preliminary PUD
plan. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
9. Petitions shall also include any correspondence, applications for review or preliminary review by other governmental agencies, as may be required
by specific circumstances. These may (or may not) include, but are not necessarily limited to: U.S. army corps of engineers; U.S. federal emergency
management agency (FEMA), relative to letter of map amendment or map revision; Illinois historic preservation agency, archeological study of the
site; Illinois department of transportation; Lake County highway department; and Lake County stormwater management commission. (Ord. 00-06-12,
6-5-2000)
B. Contents Of Preliminary Plan: The preliminary plan or plans shall be drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and
shall contain the following:
1. Accurate dimensions of the boundaries of the property to be developed. Dimensions shall be in feet and shall be accurate to the nearest foot.
2. Indicate location, type of structures on adjacent properties within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed development.
3. Show the approximate proposed size, location, use and type of all buildings and structures, except single-family detached home developments shall
show typical driveways, lot layout and size range of homes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 342/525
4. Show proposed location, size, height, elevations and orientation of all signs.
5. Show the approximate proposed number and arrangement of all off street parking and loading spaces, location and width of driveways, entrances
and exits and their relationship to existing streets, except as provided in subsection B3 of this section.
6. Show all areas to be maintained as permanent open space.
7. Proposed landscaping plan shall be shown on the preliminary plan. The use of existing landscaping and plant materials shall be encouraged in
conformance with standard landscaping practices and in compliance with chapter 13 of this title. The use of an overall landscape concept plan plus
details showing size and species for entry treatments and a typical lot shall satisfy the provisions of this section. (1976 Code § 150.106(B))
8. A traffic impact study pursuant to subsection 10-15-4A1f of this title. (Ord. 00-06-12, 6-5-2000)
9. For each proposed use area, provide a tabulation of land coverage factor; usable open space ratios; acres of land; and each percentage of total land
area.
10. For all proposed residential use areas, provide a tabulation by use area and dwelling type of estimated population, number of units and bedroom
ratios.
11. Show existing and proposed locations for parks, playgrounds, schools, community buildings and other open spaces. Where the plan provides for
open space, this space shall not be used for the construction of a building or structure, nor shall the open space ever be computed as a part of the
required minimum lot size or any required yard of any other building or structure. Tennis courts, roof decks suitably improved and swimming pools
shall also be regarded as open space. Adequate safeguards shall be provided to prevent the subsequent development of this open space and to
prevent the future construction of buildings and structures on this open space, except public buildings, such as well or pump houses, or recreational
buildings for the common good.
12. Show location and dimensions of pedestrian walks and ways. (1976 Code § 150.106(B))
13. Show existing topography with contour intervals not greater than two feet (2'), drainage channels, wetlands, streams, lakes, swamps, flood zones,
rock outcrops, buildings, young and mature woodlands and other features likely to affect the plan. The source and accuracy of the topographic
information shall be based on the village datum plane. If wetlands are present on the site based upon the latest Lake County wetlands inventory, the
developer shall submit a wetlands delineation report prepared by a certified ecologist and supplemented by a review letter from the USDA natural
resource conservation service. If floodplains are present on the site, the developer shall submit accurate topography and calculations upon which to
determine the base flood elevation (BFE). Relative to proposed stormwater detention, preliminary engineering plans and calculations shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to determine conformance with the watershed development ordinance2. For those sites previously farmed, a drain tile
survey and plan drawing shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or professional engineer and submitted. All plans submitted shall include the
name, address, telephone number and fax number of the surveyor, engineer or other design professional who prepared the plans. (Ord. 00-06-12, 6-
5-2000)
14. Submit a copy of the Lake County soil and water conservation district report regarding this proposal.
15. Indicate the preliminary time schedule showing the stages, if any, which will be followed in carrying out construction of the proposed development
and interim use and maintenance of areas not under construction at any given time.
16. Contain the written consent of all property owners within the development filed with the petition before the public hearing on the preliminary plan
and special use permit. List the names of any beneficiaries of trusts holding property in question. The statement will provide that the petitioners agree
to be bound by the conditions and regulations proposed and further agree to record and to register such agreements with the Lake County recorder
of deeds or registrar of titles. (1976 Code § 150.106(B))
10-9-3-3: FINAL PLAN:
A. Review:
1. Filing Of Application: An application for approval of a final plan shall be filed with the village clerk. This application shall be upon such form and
contain such information as shall be established from time to time by the plan commission, and shall be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of the
final plan containing all information specified in this section.
2. Transmission Of Application To Plan Commission: Upon receipt of an application for approval of a final plan, the village clerk shall transmit same to
the plan commission prior to its next scheduled meeting.
3. Review, Findings And Recommendations: The plan commission shall review the final plan for its conformance with the preliminary plan as approved,
and shall, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the plan, make its findings and recommendations to the village board of trustees.
4. Decision: After receipt of the aforesaid findings and recommendations, the village board of trustees shall, within sixty (60) days, approve or
disapprove the final plan.
5. Inspection: Prior to the approval of the final plan or any part thereof, the developer, along with the plan commission, the village board of trustees and
any employee of the village, including the village engineer and the village attorney, shall make a physical inspection of the property to be developed
as a planned unit development or as a subdivision, for the purpose of determining the actual layout of the roads, public utility easements, public
buildings, entryways and other public improvements and to further determine the topography of the property for the purpose of preserving the natural
setting of the development, including trees, waterways, ponds, sloughs and the like. Said inspection shall be scheduled at the convenience of the
village.
B. Approval; Time Valid: Final approval, valid for one year from the date of approval, shall be secured for each phase, state or section of the development
as delineated on the preliminary plan approved by the plan commission and village board.
C. Contents Of Final Plan: The final plan shall include the following:
1. Final site plan indicating:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 343/525
a. Location of all buildings and structures, and any other special facility or feature to be constructed;
b. Location of all parking and loading spaces, driveways, entrances and exits;
c. Location of all substantive plant materials including type and size; and including existing tree cover, in conformance with title 8, chapter 6 of this
code;
d. Location of all common open spaces;
e. Location of all drainage facilities;
f. Soils, existing tree cover over ten inches (10") in diameter, and existing topography, with contour intervals of not less than two feet (2'), obtained
from a field survey and referred to an approved bench mark;
g. Building plans for all buildings other than detached single-family dwellings, including floor plans; exterior elevations; cross sections; perspective
drawings; outline specifications of type of building materials; type of wall and roof construction; and type of pavement and surfacing materials;
h. Dedication of any rights of way for the widening, extension or connection of major streets as shown on the official comprehensive plan;
i. A written statement signed by the owner(s) of the property describing the arrangements by which the owner(s) proposes to regulate use of the
property and otherwise ensure development in accordance with the preliminary plan. Covenants, which include adequate provisions to assure
proper maintenance and repair, and provisions for maintaining adequate personnel to assure security of all areas and facilities under common
ownership, including the payment therefor and enforceability thereof by or on behalf of the village. It shall also include the proposed charter and
bylaws of an association, if any, for owners or tenants within the development; and
j. Requirements of subsections C1a and C1b of this section shall not be required in a single-family detached dwelling development when a typical
layout for landscaping or typical housing elevations will be provided.
2. Engineering plans and specifications for all sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water distribution lines and street lights along with the then existing utilities
which are adjacent to the property in question, shall be shown.
3. Final version of the covenants, conditions and restrictions of record by which the owner proposes to regulate land and building use, assure adequate
maintenance, security, institution of a homeowners' association and otherwise protect the proposed development, accompanied by the written
representation and warranty of the owner, in form and substance satisfactory to the village board of trustees, to the effect that said owner of the real
property which is the subject of the proposed development will not sell or otherwise dispose of any interest in said property prior to the filing of record
of said covenants, conditions and restrictions of record in the office of the recorder of deeds in Lake County, Illinois.
a. Should the developer, owner or his successor in interest develop the planned unit development in separate phases, the original declarations of
covenants, conditions and restrictions of record shall state that when any subsequent phase in the development is finalized by the recording of a
final plat for that particular phase, the owner or his successors shall prepare an instrument legally sufficient to subject the new phase to the original
declarations of covenants, conditions and restrictions of record and the existing homeowners' association.
b. A phased development is one where only a portion of the entire approved development will be developed at any one time.
c. Any modification to this requirement, that all phases of a planned unit development must be in one homeowners' association and subject to one
set of covenants, conditions and restrictions of record, must be approved by ordinance after a public hearing before the combined planning and
zoning board with final approval by the village board of trustees.
4. Such deeds or easement agreements, if any, as are required or approved by the village board of trustees conveying a suitable ownership interest in
any parcels within the proposed development which are to be subject to public ownership.
5. A current copy of the articles of incorporation of the owners' or tenants' association, if any, certified by the secretary of state, and a copy of the
bylaws shall be submitted along with the final plan.
6. A written concurrence from the village engineer accepting the development engineer's estimate of probable costs of the proposed public and quasipublic
improvements, (e.g., storm water detention basins or retention ponds on outlots).
D. Guarantees: The developer/owner shall provide an irrevocable letter of credit to the village within seven (7) calendar days from the recording of the plat
of the planned unit development or the village reserves the right to consider vacating the plat of the planned unit development. The irrevocable letter of
credit shall be:
1. In the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved engineer's estimate as determined by the village engineer, pursuant to subsection
C6 of this section;
2. An irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village and issued from a viable financial institution;
3. Said irrevocable letter of credit shall be filed prior to the issuance of any building permit or construction permit, including site development permit;
4. The irrevocable letter of credit shall have periodic drawdowns, when requested from the financial institution in writing and backed by lien waivers or
proof of payment. The drawdown related to the final payment to contractors shall be presented to the mayor and board of trustees along with:
a. A written request from the village formally accepting the planned unit development's public improvements;
b. An indication that, following the final payment to contractors, the balance remaining within the letter of credit equals at least ten percent (10%) of
the original approved engineer's estimate. Such balance shall remain as a maintenance guarantee, in the letter of credit, which shall remain in
force for a minimum of one year from the date of the village board's formal acceptance of the planned unit development's public improvements;
5. The irrevocable letter of credit shall be between the village and the financial institution only, the developer, owner, etc., shall have no interest in the
proceeds set out in the letter of credit. A sample letter of credit is on file at the village hall.
E. Revocation Of Approval: Approval of the final plan shall be subject to revocation by the village board of trustees, if construction of all improvements is
not completed within three (3) years of the date of approval of the final plan. Extensions of the time schedule may be granted by the village board of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 344/525
trustees. (1976 Code § 150.106(C),(E))
10-9-3-4: RECORDING DOCUMENTS:
The final plan, as approved by the village board of trustees, shall constitute the final land use and zoning plat and shall be filed with the Lake County
recorder of deeds. No permit allowing construction of a building or any other improvement shall be issued until the final plan is recorded. All recording
costs shall be paid by the applicant. Any changes to the approved final plan shall be accomplished by the submission of preliminary plans and final plans
of the change, which shall be approved under the procedures as set forth herein for the approval of the original preliminary plans and the approval of the
original final plans. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or use that is not in accordance with an approved final
plan. (1976 Code § 150.106(D))
10-9-3-5: FEES:
The fees for examination and inspection and legal fees for any planned unit development project shall be in accordance with the applicable fee sections of
the village code. (Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-9-4: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A planned development shall conform to the following requirements:
A. The number of dwelling units erected shall not exceed the number permitted by the regulations of the district where located.
B. The amount of off-street parking must be adequate to serve the needs of the projects, and the village board may require more off-street parking than is
otherwise required by this title and specifically chapter 11 of this title.
C. If any open space or recreational facility is to be used solely by the residents of the project, unless the development is under single ownership,
adequate provisions shall be made for assessments against the property within the project so that the facilities can be properly improved, maintained
and operated.
D. Underground utilities, including communications and electric systems, are required within the limits of a planned development. Appurtenances to these
systems which can be effectively screened may be exempted from this requirement if the village board finds that the exemption will not violate the
intent or character of the development. (1976 Code § 150.107; amd. Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
10-9-5: DESIGN REGULATIONS:
For the uses permitted on the approved preliminary plan the standards and provisions set out in this section shall be required. (1976 Code § 150.108)
10-9-5-1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Residential Density:
1. Residential density shall be expressed as dwelling units per acre. The area or acreage shall be based upon net development area, as defined in
section 10-2-1 of this title.
2. The number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by dividing the net development area by the minimum lot area per family required by the
district or districts in which the site is located. Consideration of the maximum number of dwelling units on a site shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to:
a. The land set aside for common open space, or public or recreational use;
b. The extent to which developer financed park improvements (whether private or public) are part of the proposal;
c. The extent to which environmentally sensitive lands and mature trees are protected;
d. The ability of the village to service the site with sanitary sewers and potable water; and
e. The extent to which a range of lot sizes is provided (rather than maximizing the gross density by proposing all, or nearly all, minimum sized lots).
Lot size variations may be considered up to fifteen percent (15%) of that lot area considered minimum within the underlying zoning district,
provided that the average lot size within the proposed development or proposed zoning category meets or exceeds the minimum lot size. (Ord. 02-
12-46, 12-2-2002)
B. Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage of residential buildings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%). (1976 Code § 150.108(A)(2))
C. Yard And Lot Size Requirements:
1. Yards and open spaces adjoining the boundaries of the development shall not be less than the yard requirements of the adjoining village residential
district. A landscaped and land sculptured buffer strip at least ten feet (10') wide shall be provided along all peripheral lot lines. Larger than minimum
width buffer strips may include pedestrian walkways, bike paths or recreational trails; and are encouraged where such trails could connect the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 345/525
residential area to various community amenities, including, but not necessarily limited to, schools and parks. Spacing between principal buildings in
the development shall be at least twelve feet (12') and shall be consistent with recognized site planning principles, including, but not necessarily
limited to: natural landscape, topography, usable backyard area for use by residents and openness normally afforded by intervening streets and
alleys.
2. Single-family residential planned unit developments (PUDs) shall provide for a range of lot sizes, as regulated by subsection A2e of this section.
D. Usable Open Space: There shall be at least ten percent (10%) of the gross land area in the development provided for park and recreational purposes
which shall not be covered by buildings, parking lots, driveways or streets. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the usable open space shall be covered
by permanent bodies of water or streams. In residential PUDs of one hundred sixty (160) acres or more, a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the
site shall be devoted to open space, as opposed to the ten percent (10%) requirement noted above. The minimum amount of land required to be
dedicated as public park, as determined by section 11-3-8 of this code shall be upland area, graded, seeded and equipped by the developer. (Ord. 02-
12-46, 12-2-2002)
E. Land Improvements: Sanitary sewer, water and stormwater drainage systems, including all appurtenances thereto, curbs, paving, street lights,
pedestrianways, street signs and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the standards and specifications of the village as set forth in this
code.
F. Private Streets: The designation of private streets in planned developments shall be subject to the approval of the plan commission and the village
board. The design of private streets, including street lights, street signs and landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the department of public
works.
G. Off-Street Parking: Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. (1976 Code § 150.108(A))
10-9-5-2: COMMERCIAL/BUSINESS AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS:
A. Intensity Of Use: The land coverage of all principal and accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area,
except that the percentage of land coverage may be increased two percent (2%) for each ten percent (10%) of required off-street parking which is
located either below grade or in a parking structure, up to a maximum lot coverage of forty percent (40%).
B. Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid illumination of any adjacent property or streets or public rights of way.
C. Site Development:
1. An opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all lot lines, other than streets, abutting areas zoned for residential use. Except as
otherwise provided, it shall have a total height of not less than six feet (6') nor more than seven feet (7'). Where there is a difference in elevation on
opposite sides of the screen, the height shall be measured from the highest elevation. A screen shall consist of one or more of the following types:
a. Walls: A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, tile or similar type of masonry material a minimum of eight inches (8") thick.
b. Berms: A berm may be banked on both sides, or with one side banked toward the lot line with a retaining wall. A berm shall be not less than
twenty feet (20') wide at the base and shall have an undulating contour and shall be sloped for ease of maintenance. It shall be constructed of
earthen materials and shall be landscaped.
c. Planting: Plant materials, when used as a screen, shall consist of a mixture of compact evergreen plants and taller deciduous plants. They shall be
of a kind, and used in a manner, so as to provide screening having a minimum width of three feet (3') within eighteen (18) months after initial
installation. Plant materials shall not be limited to a maximum height.
2. The chief building inspector may require, with approval of the village board, that either walls or berms, as set out in subsections A1a or A1b of this
section shall be installed if, after eighteen (18) months after installation, plant materials have not formed an opaque screen, or if an opaque screen is
not maintained.
3. Landscaping, consisting of standard evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs in combination with vines and ground cover, shall be installed and
maintained according to the following standards:
a. Boundary landscaping is required for a minimum depth of twenty five feet (25') from the right of way line along all abutting streets or rights of way
except for the openings and the area within ten feet (10') on either side of the street openings. Within the boundary landscaping area, there shall
be one standard tree and two (2) standard shrubs for each ten feet (10') of street frontage and, to the extent practicable, these shall include any
existing standard trees or shrubs within the boundary landscaping area.
b. An additional landscaped area, equal to at least five percent (5%) of the total area of the parcel is required. Within this area, one standard tree and
one standard shrub is required for each five hundred (500) square feet of area to be landscaped.
c. Within the off-street parking area, planting bays containing one standard tree for each ten (10) parking spaces are required.
d. Any landscaped area shall be separated from an adjacent vehicular area by a wall or curb at least six inches (6") higher than the adjacent
vehicular area.
e. Landscaping along all streets and boundaries shall be limited to a height of not more than three feet (3') within twenty feet (20') of the point of
intersection of two (2) or more vehicular trafficways, driveways or streets.
f. Required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthy condition. This shall include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding,
removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and the regular watering of all plants.
4. Existing topographic patterns shall be preserved, except where modifications will specifically contribute to increased utility of the site and/or
enhancement of the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 346/525
5. The provisions of subsections C1, C2 and C3 of this section may be satisfied by the developer using a registered landscape architect or a registered
architect who will use the above provisions for subsections C1, C2, C3 and C4 as a guide.
D. Vehicular Access: (To be added in conformance with state standards).
E. Off-Street Parking And Loading Facilities: Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with chapter 11 of this title.
F. Land Improvements: Sanitary sewer, water and stormwater drainage systems, including all appurtenances thereto, curbs, paving, street lights,
pedestrianways and street signs shall be provided in accordance with the standards and specifications of the village as set forth in this code.
G. Private Streets: The designation of private streets in planned developments shall be subject to the approval of the plan commission and the village
board. The design of private streets, including street lights, street signs, and landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the department of public
works.
H. Signs: All signs in the development shall conform with village ordinances3.
I. Yard Requirements: Yards and open spaces adjoining the boundaries of the development shall not be less than the yard requirements of the adjoining
zoning district. (1976 Code § 150.108(B))
10-9-6: VARIANCES:
The petitioner, his attorney or agents, shall have the right to request a variation or modification to any of the terms and provisions of the village ordinances
as part of the planned development request. The petitioner shall state, in writing, the reasons for the requested variance. The plan commission may
recommend variations as part of a planned development request in specific cases where it finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties unique
to the site may result from strict compliance with the village's regulations. Variances to the technical provisions of the subdivision code4 may be granted
without a public hearing. (1976 Code § 150.110)
Chapter 10
DOWNTOWN ANTIOCH FORM BASED CODE
10-10-1: INTRODUCTION:
The intent of this downtown Antioch form based code is to help set the foundation for a set of guiding principles that will foster a vibrant, pedestrian
friendly, mixed use, transit oriented downtown. This chapter will outline and establish new development regulations for streets, blocks, and buildings that
emphasize "building form", "public realm" and high quality site and building design in each of the distinct downtown districts.
This chapter shall act as a component to this title and shall be administered pursuant to the ordinances and regulations of the village of Antioch in
compliance with the laws and statutes of the state of Illinois.
In order to clearly organize this chapter, a regulating plan has been developed (see figure 1.1 of this section). The downtown Antioch regulating plan
outlines five (5) distinct character districts within the greater downtown area. These districts include:
Village core (VC)
Transitional core (TC)
Main Street transitional (MT)
Business park (BP)
Commercial edge (CE)
Additionally, areas of open space (OS) are found throughout the downtown area. While not its own unique district, preservation, enhancement and
improvement to existing and new open spaces should be provided throughout downtown Antioch.
A more detailed discussion, illustrations of future target development sites and urban design standards are addressed in the following sections.
Additionally, an outline of permitted and special land use categories is included per district.
FIGURE 1.1
DOWNTOWN ANTIOCH REGULATING PLAN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 347/525
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 348/525
(Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-2: REGULATING FRAMEWORK PLAN:
A. Purpose: The regulating framework plan defines the desired physical form for downtown Antioch and sets development/building parameters such as
land use, building height, massing, siting and setbacks and parking placement and ratios. This chapter incorporates not only the vision of the regulating
plan, but also applies to, and regulates, parcels not specifically referenced in the plan.
Figure 2.1, "Downtown Antioch Target Opportunity Sites", of this section highlights downtown opportunity sites identified in the transit oriented
planning/design process. For illustrative purposes, figures 2.2 and 2.3 of this section show the potential desired build out of these sites. These plans
reflect the goals and objectives of the regulating plan and serve as a guide for village officials, property owners, and developers as they move forward
with approving and implementing these projects within downtown.
FIGURE 2.1
DOWNTOWN ANTIOCH TARGET OPPORTUNITY SITES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 349/525
FIGURE 2.2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 350/525
FIGURE 2.3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 351/525
B. Applicability: This chapter applies in the following instances:
1. Any new development/construction;
2. If the primary use within a building changes;
3. Rehabilitation projects that change over fifty percent (50%) of a building's exterior.
As mentioned, the regulating framework plan helps define physical form of the urban space. More specifically, the components that must be
considered when developing, rehabilitating or renovating within each of the districts include: allowed land use, building height, building
placement/massing and parking and servicing. (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-3: USES; HEIGHT; PARKING AND SERVICING:
A. Allowed Uses: Permitted and special use considerations are shown in table 1, "Allowed Uses", of this section for each district defined in the regulating
plan. Allowed uses are discussed further by district in sections 10-10-5 through 10-10-9 of this chapter.
TABLE 1
ALLOWED USES
P = Permitted use S = Special use
Use
Downtown Antioch
VC TC MT BP CE
Commercial/retail/office:
Automobile repair/body - - - - -
Drive-through S S S S S
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 352/525
Eating and drinking establishment P P S - P
Financial institution S S S S S
Lodging P S S - P
Office, administrative, professional, and medical P P P P P
Personal service P P P - P
Recycling - - - S -
Retail P P P - P
Industrial:
Limited manufacturing - - - P -
Product showroom - - - P -
Research services - - - P -
Warehouse and distribution - - - P -
Public and civic:
Educational facility P S S S S
Parks and recreation P P P P P
Residential:
Mixed use (residential above ground floor) P P P/S S S
Multi-family building S P S S -
Townhouse/row house S P P S -
(Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011; amd. Ord. 18-05-18, 5-14-2018)
While uses can be "mixed" within buildings by floor in some districts as noted, residential and commercial (retail, service, or office) uses cannot be mixed
on the same floor in a building (i.e., a floor containing housing units cannot contain retail, office or service uses), unless it is determined by the Village
Administrator that there are no impacts of mixing uses on the same floor to public health, safety and welfare.
For new development, a residential lobby is required on the ground floor in all buildings with residential uses on upper floors. Commercial uses on the first
floor may have a secondary entrance from this lobby as long as the primary commercial entrance is from the sidewalk on the street. Rehabilitation projects
that change the use to a public facility must meet all Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. All standards set forth by the Illinois Accessibility
Code and Federal guidelines apply for all new development regarding access in multi-story mixed use and residential buildings. The chief building official
will have the ability to review and approve departures in conformance with the Illinois Accessibility Code.
Parking is allowed on the ground floor behind commercial uses in buildings with retail, service or office uses on the ground floor.
B. Height: Base allowed heights are defined by district in sections 10-10-5 through 10-10-9 of this chapter.
1. Additional Height: In addition to the maximum height listed for each district, a bonus of up to ten feet (10') can be added to the height of a building to
allow for such architectural features as pitched roofs and parapet walls that enhance or benefit the building architecture or streetscape presence.
2. Architectural Features And Rooftop Accessory Structures: Architectural features or rooftop accessory structures, such as heating and ventilation
equipment and antennas are not counted as stories. All heating, ventilation and similar rooftop equipment must be fully screened and enclosed in an
architecturally sympathetic enclosure not to exceed ten feet (10') in height. Any such enclosure must be set back a distance of at least ten feet (10')
from any front or side building wall and not visible from street level.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 353/525
For all buildings, an additional bonus of ten feet (10') (beyond the 10 feet allowed for pitched roofs and parapet walls) may be allowed in specific
circumstances to provide space for an interesting architectural feature such as a clock tower or a cupola. The floor area of the feature shall not constitute
more than ten percent (10%) of the building's ground floor area.
3. First Floor Commercial Uses: The first floor of a commercial building must have a minimum floor to ceiling height of fifteen feet (15') and a maximum
floor to ceiling height of twenty feet (20').
4. One-Story Commercial Buildings: For one-story commercial buildings, the minimum height is twenty feet (20') and the maximum height is twenty two
feet (22') to provide an increased physical presence and shopping "streetwall".
5. Decks/Terraces: Active use is permitted on terraces created by building stepbacks. Decks or terraces are permitted on rooftops or above enclosed
ground floor parking. All decks or terraces shall be designed per village safety codes and regulations.
C. Parking And Servicing: Parking for new development shall be provided for each use according to the following ratios:
1. Minimum Parking By Use:
Apartments/condominiums 1.5 spaces per unit
Nonresidential under 2,000 s.f. None
Office 1 space per 400 gross square feet
Restaurant 1 space per 400 gross square feet
Retail/service 1 space per 400 gross square feet/none for VC and TC districts
Townhomes/row homes 2 spaces per unit
All existing buildings are "grandfathered" in, unless it is determined that a new use will bring a negative parking impact to the surrounding district.
2. Shared Parking:
a. Collective Provisions: Shared parking shall be considered to minimize the visual impact of land devoted to parking and to provide more efficient
parking downtown.
b. Location: All required parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the building or use being served or within six hundred feet (600') of the property
line, provided that no off street parking for a business use shall be in a residential district. Shared parking opportunities shall be considered for all
uses within the downtown area. Where feasible, use of METRA surface lots may be considered for evening and weekend off peak periods and
special events. Shared parking with METRA is encouraged as long as the uses are compatible and do not conflict with the times commuters would
use them.
c. Waiver: The village administrator may waive the number of spaces required in part or entirely if shared parking is deemed efficient based on the
location of the proposed use, anticipated hours of peak parking demand, potential for shared parking, and availability of alternative parking. A
written agreement or parking management plan covering such collective use shall be filed with the village department of planning and zoning.
3. Servicing: All service areas should be hidden from view, not located on primary or main street frontages, screened with solid masonry screen walls
or year round landscape buffer. Minimum loading/services and trash collection standards must be met per existing code requirements. All
loading/services areas shall be well lit to maintain a safe environment per existing village codes and regulations. (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 354/525
10-10-4: ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Purpose And Intent: All downtown special district parcels have been assigned a designation to define an optimal "building envelope" and "public realm"
using setbacks, sidewalk and street widths, as well as other design parameters.
Along with section 10-10-10, "Urban Design Standards", of this chapter, the required street, sidewalk and building relationships are intended to foster
new development that enhances and expands the traditional "Main Street" scale of downtown and builds upon the potential for transit oriented
development around the train depot.
New development, as well as rehab projects, should also refer to the following village documents for guidelines related to the public realm: "Village Of
Antioch Urban Design Manual", village of Antioch street graphics and village landscaping, signage and lighting standards. Where there is a conflict
between this chapter and these documents, the more restrictive standard will apply.
As illustrated in section 10-10-1, figure 1.1, "Downtown Antioch Regulating Plan", of this chapter five (5) distinct districts have been identified that
establish the location and relationships of the districts.
1. Build-To Zone: The build-to zone is an area that helps establish consistent "streetwalls", sidewalk widths and streetscape zones.
The relationship of the build-to zone to the public right of way or property line is that the build-to zone may differ from the current location of the right
of way or property line. In these cases the apparent rights of way/property lines will need to be adjusted through dedication of property between the
property owner and village. More specifically, the property owner may need to dedicate property to the public right of way to create the desirable
street and streetscape width, or the village may transfer right of way to the buildable development site.
Over time, desired or common sidewalk widths will be established to create a more regular walking experience from block to block that incorporates
a minimum five foot (5') "free zone" walking area and additional space for street trees, parkways or outdoor seating.
For Main Street, the build-to zone is intended to eventually bring all buildings more in line with a fifteen foot (15') sidewalk width primarily found in the
village's core shopping district between Orchard Street and Lake Street/Park Avenue.
For Orchard Street, Lake Street and Toft Avenue, the build-to zone is intended to eventually eliminate parking lots in front of buildings and bring
buildings closer to the sidewalk to better frame the street, reduce its perceived width and scale and establish these roadways as physical extensions
of the traditional village core along Main Street. This chapter also incorporates standards for the frontages of residential buildings, including
apartment buildings and row homes/townhomes along these streets as compatible uses within the downtown area.
For primarily residential and industrial districts, the building line may not be the primary indicator of future development form, where instead
consistent street and pedestrian zone treatments and building setbacks will drive the form.
B. Zoning Districts Defined: The five (5) designations of downtown Antioch zoning districts as outlined in the introduction are (see section 10-10-1, figure
1.1, of this chapter):
VC - Village core: Downtown's primary pedestrian oriented shopping district with the highest intensity of buildings and main activity center.
TC - Transitional core: Parcels, many of which are undeveloped and include the redevelopment opportunity sites, adjacent to the village core with
frontages on Main, Lake and Orchard that have potential to become an extension of the village core's mixed use character. This district also includes
Depot Street and areas around the METRA station.
MT - Main Street transitional: Surrounding residential primarily north and south of the village core along IL-83/Main Street. This district consists of both
single-family and multi-family housing, as well as educational/institutional uses. The MT district consists of parcels which are seen as areas where
change of land uses may or should occur in a controlled environment that architecturally and physically blends with the mixed use retail/service
character of downtown.
BP - Business park: The large manufacturing district east of the tracks where the regulating plan and form based goals focus and encourage physical
improvements of streetscapes and the pedestrian environment.
CE - Commercial edge: Commercial districts both north and south comprised predominantly of auto oriented uses. This chapter seeks to improve the
physical environment of the area over time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 355/525
Existing conditions at IL-83 and 173, an area included in the CE district.
(Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-5: VILLAGE CORE DISTRICT - VC:
A. Description: The village core district - VC is intended to protect the character of downtown Antioch's traditional pedestrian oriented shopping streets,
primarily Main Street between Orchard Street on the north and Wilton/Ida on the south. It also covers a portion of Lake Street closest to Main. These
areas are characterized by relatively low scale commercial buildings between one and three (3) stories in height on small lots. Retail, commercial and
service uses predominantly activate the street level/first floor pedestrian environment. The VC district is intended to protect and enhance the existing
historic character at the heart of Antioch's village center and to accommodate redevelopment that is in keeping with this character in terms of use,
height, scale and detail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 356/525
The village core district, shown in red, is located around Antioch's traditional shopping streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 357/525
The VC district is intended to protect and enhance Antioch's historic character.
B. Use:
1. Ground Floor: As defined by zoning, only retail sales, service uses, entertainment uses (e.g., eating and drinking establishments), and commercial
office uses may be located on the ground floor of buildings in the VC per local zoning and building code.
2. Above The Ground Floor: Any combination of allowed retail, commercial, office, personal service or residential is allowed per local zoning and
building code.
C. Height: Building height limits in the VC are established to ensure reasonable, predictable limits on maximum building height and preserve the low rise
pedestrian shopping street character of the designated village core district. The maximum allowed building height in the VC district is forty five feet
(45').
1. Context Sensitivity: When considering additions, renovations or new development within the VC, it is imperative that new building heights and
facades carefully balance and "fit" within the streetwall character. New construction must consider its neighboring context and carefully blend heights,
building form and articulation to ensure continuous streetwall rhythm in the VC district (see figure 3.1 of this section).
FIGURE 3.1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 358/525
Balance in height, form and scale of new construction.
D. Building Placement: Buildings placed close to the sidewalk help "frame" the streetscape, creating an active, intimate pedestrian environment. This type
of mixed use storefront building placement is one of the key characteristics of downtown Antioch with the majority of buildings in the core of Main Street
and Lake Street forming a definitive, continuous "streetwall".
The outer perimeter of buildings must be placed within the "build-to zone" as shown in figures 3.2 and 3.3 of this section, except as otherwise noted in
this chapter.
FIGURE 3.2
Plan view of "build-to zone" for VC district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 359/525
FIGURE 3.3
Section of typical downtown streetscape frontage.
1. Building Setback:
a. Building setback to "build-to zone": Zero feet (0') minimum/three feet (3') maximum build-to zone is measured from fifteen foot (15') minimum
setback from face of curb to face of building (buildings may be set back more than 3 feet if additional setback is used to ensure minimum 15 foot
sidewalk and parkway width). (A)
b. Building setback abutting other adjacent (side/rear) property lines: Zero feet (0') minimum/ten feet (10') maximum. A ten foot (10') pedestrian passthrough
is allowed if necessary to access a rear parking lot or part of a continuous pedestrian linkage system in the greater downtown. (B)
c. Side yard, adjacent to an access drive: Ten feet (10') minimum. (C)
d. Corner side yard on a side street: Zero feet (0') minimum/three feet (3') maximum (buildings may be set back more than 3 feet if additional setback
is used to ensure minimum 15 foot sidewalk and parkway width). (D)
e. Rear yard, adjacent to an alley: Five feet (5') minimum. (E)
f. Rear yard, not adjacent to an alley: Twenty feet (20') minimum. (F)
2. Main Street View Corridor: In order to create a defined and protected view corridor to two (2) of the village's significant historic building assets, new
buildings located on both sides of Main Street between Orchard and Depot must be set back further (see figure 3.4 of this section) to ensure an open
view to the Lakes Regional Museum and United Methodist Church Of Antioch from the Main and Orchard intersection.
FIGURE 3.4
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 360/525
View corridor of Lakes Regional Museum and United Methodist Church Of Antioch.
3. General - New Development: In order to enhance pedestrian safety and movement, all new development must allow for a total combined sidewalk
and parkway width not less than fifteen feet (15') as measured from the curb face and not more than eighteen feet (18') in width.
E. Building Frontage: Building frontage standards address the ground floor profile of buildings. These standards work with building placement guidelines to
ensure an appropriate relationship between buildings and the sidewalk, which helps preserve the unique character of the village core district.
1. A minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the street facing building facade between two feet (2') and eight feet (8') in height, above the sidewalk,
must consist of nonreflective windows that allow views of indoor retail/merchandising areas. The bottom of any window used to satisfy this
requirement may not be more than 4.5 feet above the adjacent sidewalk. Consistency in this bottom area, or knee wall zone, should be considered
between adjacent buildings (see figure 3.5 of this section).
FIGURE 3.5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 361/525
Articulated commercial building facade.
2. Window fenestration shall strive to achieve interest and variety and avoid monotony.
3. Buildings must have a recognizable and defined public entrance facing the main street (sidewalk) frontage. If a lot abuts two (2) public streets, the
required pedestrian entrance must face the street (sidewalk) with the highest pedestrian volumes. Lots that front on more than two (2) streets must
have at least one public entrance on at least two (2) street frontages.
4. The depth and width of recessed building frontages may not exceed six feet (6') (see figure 3.6 of this section).
FIGURE 3.6
Recessed building entry.
5. For new development, the building's ground floor elevation must provide an accessible and barrier free entry and should be no more than zero and
one foot (1') above existing adjacent building sidewalk grade. For rehabilitation of existing buildings, where practical the entrance shall be barrier
free.
6. The facade of all buildings exceeding seventy five feet (75') in width must be vertically divided into bays or other segments no more than thirty feet
(30') in width. New buildings must have articulation and variety in the facade to ensure Main Street character is developed over time.
FIGURE 3.7
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 362/525
Example one-story storefront.
FIGURE 3.8
Example two-story mixed use building.
F. Parking Placement: Off street parking not contained within the building is required to be placed in the rear of the building or underground to reduce the
visibility and impact on safety of the pedestrian environment. As shown in figure 3.9 of this section, surface parking must be placed as follows:
FIGURE 3.9
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 363/525
Typical parking placement in VC district.
1. Placed in the rear fifty percent (50%) of the lot depth (from the front building line to the rear property line). (A)
2. Five feet (5') from the side yard (adjacent commercial parking lots must be connected) at grade level. (B)
3. Ten feet (10') minimum from the rear of the lot if not adjacent to an alley. (C)
4. Five feet (5') minimum from the rear of the lot if adjacent to an alley. (D)
5. Five feet (5') from the building line on the side yard of a corner lot. (E)
Note: Existing buildings undergoing rehabilitation shall relocate all parking behind the principal building setback, where practical.
Figure 3.10 of this section further illustrates parking location requirements and building massing standards that apply to the entire downtown area.
FIGURE 3.10
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 364/525
Building massing/parking location requirements.
See section 10-10-10, "Urban Design Standards", of this chapter for parking lot screening and landscaping requirements.
Note: Exceptions for off street parking placement can be made where unique site, grade or environmental conditions warrant preservation of a specific site
feature. Additionally, a height bonus of one additional floor is given to new development that provides structured parking in the principal structure.
G. Off Street Parking And Loading Access: Mid block curb cuts and access drives, unless already existing, are not allowed in the village core district.
Loading, if required or provided, and parking access must be from an alley, side street or at the rear of the building. (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-6: TRANSITIONAL CORE DISTRICT - TC:
A. Description: The transitional core district - TC is intended to extend Antioch's downtown building and urban form character in adjacent downtown
redevelopment parcels and train station areas. This district strives to create a physical connection to the train station and potential transit oriented
development. The TC district consists primarily of the superblock bounded by Orchard Street, Toft Avenue, Lake Street and Hillside Avenue, as well as
the immediate area around the train station. Currently, these sites or areas predominantly contain a mix of auto oriented uses including large areas of
surface parking and strip center style buildings set back from the primary street frontages. This district is intended to establish the setting for future
redevelopment by creating physical relationships that harmonize with Antioch's downtown character in terms of development, height, scale and
function.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 365/525
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 366/525
The TC district, shown in brown, consists primarily of the superblock west of Main Street (above), as well as the area around the train station (below).
B. Use:
1. Ground Floor: Only retail sales, service uses, entertainment uses (e.g., eating and drinking establishments), residential uses (as part of an overall
multi-family residential building or development parcel) and commercial office uses may be located on the ground floor of buildings in the TC district.
2. Above The Ground Floor: Retail, commercial, office, personal service or residential is allowed above the ground floor.
C. Height: Building height limits are established to ensure reasonable, predictable limits on maximum building height and to match the pedestrian shopping
mixed use street character of adjacent existing buildings in the village core. The maximum allowed building height in the transitional core district is forty
five feet (45').
D. Building Placement: New buildings placed close to the sidewalk help "frame" the street, creating an active pedestrian environment. This type of building
placement helps support and enhance the character of the adjacent village core district, creates a continuous "streetwall" and reinforces the already
successful pedestrian environment.
The outer perimeter of buildings must be placed within the "build-to zone" as shown in figures 3.11 and 3.12 of this section, except as otherwise noted
in this section.
FIGURE 3.11
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 367/525
Commercial/office/mixed use building placement in TC.
FIGURE 3.12
Residential building placement in TC.
1. Building Setback:
a. Building setback to "build-to zone":
(1) Commercial/office/mixed use (figure 3.11 of this section): Zero feet (0') minimum/three feet (3') maximum. Build-to zone is measured from
fifteen foot (15') minimum setback from face of curb to face of building (buildings may be set back more than 3 feet if additional setback is used
to ensure minimum 15 foot sidewalk and parkway width). (A)
(2) Residential (figure 3.12 of this section): Ten feet (10') minimum/twenty feet (20') maximum setback measured from right of way. (A)
b. Building setback abutting other property lines: Zero feet (0') minimum/ten feet (10') maximum. A ten foot (10') pedestrian pass-through is allowed if
necessary to access a rear parking lot or provide a continuous planned pedestrian linkage consistent with downtown planning. (B)
c. Side yard, adjacent to an access drive: Ten feet (10') minimum. (C)
d. Side yard, corner lot on side street:
(1) Commercial/office/mixed use (figure 3.11 of this section): Zero feet (0') minimum/three feet (3') maximum (buildings may be set back more than
3 feet if additional setback is used to ensure minimum 15 foot sidewalk and parkway width). (D)
(2) Residential (figure 3.12 of this section): Ten feet (10') minimum/twenty feet (20') maximum. (D)
e. Rear yard, adjacent to alley: Five feet (5') minimum. (E)
f. Rear yard, not adjacent to an alley: Twenty feet (20') minimum. (F)
g. Garage to alley: Four feet (4') minimum (apron only).
2. Sidewalks And Parkways:
a. Commercial/Mixed Use: In order to enhance pedestrian safety and movement, all new commercial or mixed use development must allow for a
minimum of fifteen foot (15') wide sidewalk and parkway, which is the typical sidewalk width in this district. Generally, the width of sidewalks and
parkways must be consistent with adjoining properties. The total combined sidewalk and parkway width must not be less than fifteen feet (15') and
not more than eighteen feet (18') in width.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 368/525
b. For Residential Uses: For areas with adjacent ground floor residential uses, a minimum sidewalk width of five feet (5') should be provided.
Landscaped or tree parkways must be a minimum of six feet (6') and no larger than ten feet (10') (see figure 3.13 of this section).
FIGURE 3.13
Section of typical residential streetscape frontage in TC district.
FIGURE 3.14
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 369/525
Section of typical Orchard Street roadway section in TC district.
FIGURE 3.15
Section of typical Toft Avenue roadway section in TC district.
E. Building Frontage: Building frontage standards address the ground floor profile of both commercial/mixed use buildings and residential buildings. These
standards work with building placement guidelines to ensure an appropriate relationship between buildings and the sidewalk, which helps preserve the
character of the transitional core.
1. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the street facing building facade between three feet (3') and eight feet (8') in height, above the sidewalk, must
consist of nonreflective windows that allow views of indoor areas. The bottom of any window used to satisfy this requirement may not be more than
4.5 feet above the finished floor of the first floor of the building.
2. With the exception of mid or big box stores, such as a grocery store, which may have the primary entrance from a parking lot in the rear or side,
buildings must have a public entrance facing the primary street (sidewalk). If a lot abuts two (2) streets, the required pedestrian entrance must face
the street (sidewalk) with the highest pedestrian volumes. Lots that front on more than two (2) streets should have at least one public entrance on at
least two (2) street frontages.
3. Key corner buildings on the west side of Toft at the intersections of Toft with Orchard and Lake are required to have unique corner architectural
feature(s) (see figures 3.16 and 3.17 of this section).
FIGURE 3.16
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 370/525
New buildings at the Orchard/Toft and Lake/Toft intersections are required to have architectural features.
FIGURE 3.17
Example of corner architectural feature.
4. The depth and width of recessed or articulated building frontages may not exceed six feet (6').
5. Retail, commercial and lobby entrances to multi-tenant residential building's ground floor elevation must be accessible and barrier free and be
between zero and one foot (1') above the existing public sidewalk grade. Attached single-family unit entrances may have finished floor elevations up
to six feet (6') above the sidewalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 371/525
6. The facade of all buildings exceeding seventy five feet (75') in width (including attached multi-family residential) must be vertically divided and
articulated into bays or other segments no more than thirty feet (30') in width. Facade planes must be offset a minimum of three feet (3').
7. Attached single-family/multi-family residential units shall have front doors facing primary streets.
F. Parking Placement: Off street parking not contained within the building is encouraged to be placed in the rear of the building or underground to reduce
the visibility and impact on safety of the pedestrian environment. In the case of a larger development such as a grocery store or big box store, which
would require a larger number of parking spaces, parking must be placed as follows:
1. Larger Development:
a. Parking lot frontages along main streets must not be greater than fifty percent (50%) of the lot's frontage.
b. Parking lots must not be located at corners of main street intersections.
c. Parking lots should be shared between uses with connected driveways at grade (see figure 3.18 of this section).
FIGURE 3.18
Shared parking between uses.
d. Parking lots should be broken down into cells or smaller pods of one hundred (100) spaces or less divided by areas of open space, landscape or
pedestrian amenities and facilities.
e. Parking lot perimeters should be adequately buffered through landscape plantings that soften the visual impact of the vehicular use area (see
figure 3.19 of this section).
FIGURE 3.19
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 372/525
Parking lot screening.
f. All parking lot areas shall be well lit to maintain a safe environment per existing village codes and regulations.
As noted in the planning process, METRA forecasts the need for additional parking within the TC district. The parcels south of Depot Street, which
are planned to be future parking, as well as the current METRA lot are exempt from other TC parking restrictions, but must meet landscaping and
screening standards addressed in section 10-10-10, "Urban Design Standards", of this chapter. In addition, METRA parking lots must meet the
standards set forth by METRA's parking manual, where compatible.
2. Other Surface Parking: As shown in figure 3.20 of this section, all other surface parking in the TC district must be placed as follows:
FIGURE 3.20
Typical parking placement in TC district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 373/525
a. Placed in the rear fifty percent (50%) of the lot depth (from the front building line to the rear property line). (A)
b. Five feet (5') from the side yard (adjacent commercial parking lots must be connected at grade). (B)
c. Ten feet (10') minimum from the rear of the lot if not adjacent to an alley. (C)
d. Five feet (5') minimum from the rear of the lot if adjacent to an alley. (D)
e. Five feet (5') from the building line on corner side yards. (E)
G. METRA Parking: Most grant dollars, including METRA's, are not available for financing the replacement of commuter parking spaces that are displaced
from designated and/or historical commuter parking facilities. METRA only participates in building new parking spaces where demand warrants and
funding is available.
The land for the existing commuter parking was purchased with state and federal funds, thus redevelopment will need to be discussed with IDOT. As
such, the use of federal funds for the construction of new parking facilities may be restricted, if parking spaces that were federally funded, are removed
or altered during redevelopment.
Should development occur near the train station, throughout each step of the redevelopment process the amount of commuter parking in the station
area should remain at its current level, resulting in no net loss of spaces during any phase of development. Note: Any property transactions with
METRA may require approval by METRA's board of directors.
H. Off Street Parking And Loading Access: Parking lots and loading should be accessed from interior access drives, alleys or limited/shared curb cuts from
main (primary) streets. Mid block curb cuts and access drives, unless already existing, are discouraged in the transitional core district. One exception is
the large superblock bounded by Orchard Avenue, Toft Avenue, Lake Street and Hillside Avenue. Any new curb cuts must be evaluated and
determined safe by licensed traffic engineers and village engineering staff.
As shown in figure 3.21 of this section, an internal schematic grid street network has been envisioned for the superblock site bounded by Orchard
Avenue, Toft Avenue, Lake Street and Hillside Avenue. Three (3) north/south streets or access drives, including Spafford Street extended, may divide
the block between Hillside and Toft Avenues and one east/west street or access drive should bisect the block between Orchard Avenue and Lake
Street. These streets/access drives will increase vehicular and pedestrian "permeability", distribute automobile traffic more evenly and increase access
to new development and parking.
These internal drives or access routes are diagrammatic and refer to the village's ultimate desire to have this block organized and interconnected in a
vehicular/pedestrian network. As this site is developed over time, the village will require individual projects to maintain the desired north/south,
east/west connections through a formal set of site access easements, which generally may take the shape as depicted in figure 3.21 of this section.
FIGURE 3.21
Schematic internal access structure - superblock site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 374/525
FIGURE 3.22
Toft Avenue redevelopment and streetscape improvements.
(Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-7: MAIN STREET TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT - MT:
A. Description: The Main Street transitional district - MT is intended to accommodate a variety of single-family and multi-family residential, commercial and
institutional uses on the edges of the village core. These areas currently consist of a variety of single-family and multi-family residential, limited
commercial uses, educational and civic facilities, such as Antioch High School and Public Library, as well as many single-family homes that have been
converted for commercial use.
B. Use:
1. Ground Floor: Only residential (single-family and multi-family), retail sales, service uses, educational, entertainment uses (e.g., eating and drinking
establishments), and commercial office uses may be located on the ground floor of buildings in the MT district.
2. Above The Ground Floor: Any combination of allowed educational, civic/institutional, retail, commercial, personal service or residential is allowed
above the ground floor.
C. Height: Building height limits are established to ensure reasonable, predictable limits on maximum building height and preserve the low rise main street
character of the designated Main Street transitional district. The maximum allowed building height in the MT district is thirty five feet (35').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 375/525
D. Building Placement: Buildings should be placed in a similar relationship to the road as adjacent buildings to help create a consistent streetscape
setback character throughout the neighborhoods. Where possible building siting should also focus on reducing views of building sides, rear yards and
other spaces.
The outer perimeter of buildings must be placed within the "build-to zone" as shown in figures 3.23 and 3.24 of this section, except as otherwise noted
in this chapter.
FIGURE 3.23
MT district building placement.
FIGURE 3.24
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 376/525
Typical section in MT district.
1. Building Setback:
a. Building setback abutting apparent street right of way: Thirty feet (30') minimum/forty five feet (45') maximum. (A)
b. Building setback abutting interior side property lines: Five feet (5') minimum. (B)
c. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20'). (C)
d. Side yard, corner lot on side street: Thirty feet (30') minimum/forty five feet (45') maximum from the building line on corner side yards. (D)
E. Building Frontage: Building frontage standards address the ground floor profile of buildings. These standards work with building placement guidelines to
ensure an appropriate relationship between buildings and the sidewalk, which helps preserve the character of the Main Street transitional.
1. All buildings must be oriented to primary or secondary street with street facing windows and doors.
2. In order to provide articulation to buildings, facades should consider porticoes, stoops, porches, arcades or other forms of defining entries.
F. Parking Placement: All off street parking shall be placed in garages or in the rear portion of the lot. For other uses requiring larger parking lots, such as
institutional or commercial, off street parking not contained within the building shall be placed in the rear of the building or underground to reduce the
visibility and impact on safety of the pedestrian environment. As shown in figure 3.25 of this section, surface and garage parking for these uses must
be placed as follows:
FIGURE 3.25
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 377/525
MT district parking placement.
1. Placed in the rear fifty percent (50%) of the lot depth (from the front building line to the rear property line). (A)
2. Five feet (5') from the side yard. (B)
3. Ten feet (10') minimum from the rear of the lot. (C)
4. Twenty five feet (25') from the building line on the corner side yard. (D)
Note: Existing buildings undergoing rehabilitation shall relocate all parking behind the principal building setback, where practical.
G. Access: Mid block curb cuts and access drives are permitted in the MT district to access single-family and multi-family residences, as long as they do
not adversely affect safe traffic flow or ingress/egress movements. Where feasible, locate driveways off side streets/access drives to avoid an
overabundance of curb cuts on primary streets.
Shared driveways/access points are encouraged for multi-family residential buildings and institutional/educational uses.
FIGURE 3.26
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 378/525
MT district residential conversion character sketch.
FIGURE 3.27
MT district residential conversion character sketch.
H. Carriage Houses/Accessory Structures: A carriage house is a second dwelling unit located above a parking garage and subordinate to a single-family
dwelling unit on the same lot. The following requirements must be met for carriage houses/accessory structures within the Main Street transitional:
1. General Requirements:
a. The parcel must be greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Only one carriage house or structure shall be allowed per lot.
c. At least one of the dwelling units must be owner occupied on the property.
d. The carriage house may not be divided from the property ownership of the primary dwelling.
e. A single-family home and a newly developed carriage unit shall have a minimum of one water meter and may share a common side sewer line to
the sewer main.
f. A minimum of ten feet (10') of separation is required between the primary residence and the carriage house.
2. Bulk And Massing:
a. The majority of the carriage unit must be located over a garage.
b. The maximum carriage unit size is eight hundred (800) square feet or forty percent (40%) of the primary structure, whichever is less.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 379/525
c. Height must be less than or equal to primary structure.
d. The maximum single floor area shall be five hundred (500) square feet, excluding garage space.
3. Design Standards:
a. The carriage house shall have a separate exterior entrance, not including the garage access.
b. It shall have similar building materials, including roof pitch, siding and windows as the primary structure and meet design standards as described
in section 10-10-10 of this chapter.
c. Porches, patios and walkways are encouraged for carriage units since they can extend the living areas of the primary structure. (Ord. 11-10-15,
10-17-2011)
10-10-8: BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT - BP:
A. Description: The business park district - BP is intended to preserve this area as an effective, well planned industrial/business park, while improving site
and design standards for development of new buildings, streets, streetscapes and landscape character.
The BP district is located on the east side of the METRA tracks.
B. Use:
1. Ground Floor: Any combination of allowed commercial, office, and manufacturing uses may be located on the ground floor of buildings in the BP.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 380/525
2. Above The Ground Floor: Any combination of allowed office or industrial use is allowed above the ground floor.
Note: Performance standards for noise, smoke and particulate matter, odors, noxious gases, glare and heat and vibrations within the BP district must
meet requirements per local zoning standards.
C. Height: Building height limits are established to ensure reasonable, predictable limits on maximum building height. The maximum allowed building
height in the BP district is forty five feet (45').
D. Building Placement: Buildings shall be placed in a similar relationship to the road as adjacent buildings to help create a consistent "streetwall"
throughout the business park, where possible building siting should also focus on reducing views of building sides, loading zones, parking areas and
service areas.
The outer perimeter of buildings must be placed within the "build-to zone" as shown in figures 3.28 and 3.29 of this section, except as otherwise noted
in this chapter.
FIGURE 3.28
BP district building placement.
FIGURE 3.29
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 381/525
Anita Avenue roadway section - BP district.
1. Building setback abutting street right of way: Twenty five feet (25') minimum/fifty feet (50') maximum. (A)
2. Building setback abutting other property lines: Fifteen feet (15') minimum. When a property is adjacent to a residential district, twenty five feet (25')
should be provided. (B)
3. Side yard, adjacent to an access drive: Fifteen feet (15') minimum/twenty five feet (25') if adjacent to residential district.
4. Corner side yard on a side street: Twenty five feet (25') minimum. (D)
5. Rear yard, adjacent to a street: Twenty five feet (25') minimum/thirty feet (30') if adjacent to residential district. (E)
E. Building Frontage: Building frontage standards address the ground floor profile of buildings. These standards work with building placement guidelines to
ensure an appropriate relationship between buildings and the sidewalk, which would help improve the character of the business park.
1. Any office uses and main entries for visitors must be oriented to the primary or secondary street with street facing windows and doors.
2. Blank unarticulated walls exceeding thirty feet (30') in length are not allowed facing any roadways.
F. Parking Placement: Off street parking not contained within the building is encouraged to be placed in the rear of the building or underground to reduce
the visibility and impact on safety of the pedestrian environment. As shown in figure 3.30 of this section, surface parking must be placed as follows:
FIGURE 3.30
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 382/525
BP district parking placement.
1. Placed in the rear seventy five percent (75%) of the lot depth (from the front building line to the rear property line). (A)
2. Five feet (5') from the interior side yard. (B)
3. Five feet (5') from the rear if adjacent to a rear alley. (C)
4. Ten feet (10') minimum from the rear of the lot. (E)
5. Five feet (5') from the building line on the side yard of a corner lot. (D)
Note: Existing buildings undergoing rehabilitation shall relocate all parking behind the principal building setback, where practical.
G. Off Street Parking And Loading Access: Mid block curb cuts and access drives are permitted, but adjacent uses are strongly encouraged to share
access drives wherever possible. For new development, loading is required to be placed in the rear of the building or on the interior of a block and
accessed from an alley, interior drive or side street/access drive. (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-9: COMMERCIAL EDGE DISTRICT - CE:
A. Description: The commercial edge district - CE is intended to create an improved transitional "gateway" district at the primary southern entry point to
downtown Antioch at the intersection of State Highway 173 and IL-83/Main Street. This area currently consists of predominantly auto oriented
commercial uses, such as fast food restaurants and convenience retail. The CE district strives to enhance the character of the area by improving site
and design standards for development of new buildings, streets, streetscapes and landscape character, as well as providing the opportunity to create
an extended mixed use district matching that of the village core.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 383/525
The CE district, shown in blue, is located on the far southern edge of the downtown study area.
B. Use:
1. Ground Floor: Any combination of allowed commercial, retail, and office uses may be located on the ground floor of buildings in the CE.
2. Above The Ground Floor: Any combination of allowed commercial, retail and office uses are allowed above the ground floor.
C. Height: Building height limits are established to ensure reasonable, predictable limits on maximum building height. The maximum allowed building
height in the CE district is forty five feet (45').
D. Building Placement: Buildings may be placed in a similar relationship to the road as adjacent buildings, but also shall be encouraged to be placed closer
to the right of way line to reduce the amount of parking along primary street frontages. Where possible, building siting should also focus on reducing
views of building sides, drive-throughs, loading zones, parking areas and service areas.
The outer perimeter of buildings must be placed within the "build-to zone" as shown in figure 3.31 of this section, except as otherwise noted in this
chapter.
FIGURE 3.31
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 384/525
CE district building placement.
1. Building setback abutting street right of way: Ten feet (10') minimum/twenty five feet (25') maximum. (A), (D)
2. Building setback abutting other property lines: Zero feet (0') minimum/ten feet (10') maximum. When a property is adjacent to a residential district or
alley, ten feet (10') should be provided.
3. Side yard, adjacent to an access drive: Ten feet (10') minimum.
4. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20') minimum. (C)
E. Building Frontage: Building frontage standards address the ground floor profile of buildings. These standards work with building placement guidelines to
ensure an appropriate relationship between buildings and the sidewalk, which would help improve the character of the commercial edge.
1. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the street facing building facade between two feet (2') and eight feet (8') in height, above the sidewalk, must
consist of nonreflective windows that allow views of indoor retail/merchandising areas. The bottom of any window used to satisfy this requirement
may not be more than 4.5 feet above the adjacent sidewalk. Consistency in this bottom area, or knee wall zone, should be considered between
adjacent buildings.
2. Buildings must have a recognizable and defined public entrance facing the main street (sidewalk) frontage. If a lot abuts two (2) streets, the required
pedestrian entrance must face the street (sidewalk) with the highest pedestrian volumes. Lots that front on more than two (2) streets must have at
least one public entrance on at least two (2) street frontages.
3. The depth and width of recessed building frontages may not exceed six feet (6').
4. The building's ground floor elevation must provide an accessible and barrier free entry and should be no more than zero and one foot (1') above
sidewalk grade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 385/525
5. The facade of all buildings exceeding fifty feet (50') in width must be vertically divided and articulated into bays or other segments no more than
twenty five feet (25') in width.
F. Parking Placement: Off street parking not contained within the building is encouraged to be placed in the rear of the building to reduce the visibility and
impact on safety of the pedestrian environment. As shown in figure 3.32 of this section, surface parking must be placed as follows:
FIGURE 3.32
CE district parking placement.
1. Placed in the rear seventy five percent (75%) of the lot depth (from the front building line to the rear property line). (A)
2. Five feet (5') from the side yard (adjacent commercial parking lots must be connected) at grade level. (B)
3. Ten feet (10') minimum from the rear of the lot if not adjacent to an alley. (C)
4. Five feet (5') minimum from the rear of the lot if adjacent to an alley.
5. Five feet (5') from the building line on the side yard of a corner lot. (D)
Note: Existing buildings undergoing rehabilitation shall relocate all parking behind the principal building setback, where practical.
G. Off Street Parking And Loading Access: Mid block curb cuts and access drives are permitted, but adjacent uses are strongly encouraged to share
access drives wherever possible. For new development, loading is required to be placed in the rear of the building or on the interior of a block and
accessed from an alley, interior drive or side street/access drive. (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-10: URBAN DESIGN STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 386/525
These general urban design standards are intended for use in all downtown Antioch districts and should be applied as appropriate to any individual
district's character. Project specific requirements or land use will dictate the appropriate standards to consider when developing, renovating or improving a
district property. (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-10-1: BUILDING DESIGN:
A. General:
1. Buildings shall be oriented toward public primary and secondary streets, sidewalks and public plazas/open spaces to maintain an active and inviting
pedestrian environment.
Typical pedestrian "Main Street" streetscape character.
2. Commercial buildings on corner lots shall be designed with two (2) front facades.
3. Building facades shall be proportioned to respect the human scale and the intended land use/streetscape character.
4. Structures shall be designed to a mass and scale which is harmonious to neighboring structures and avoids monotony in color, mass and form.
5. Facade elements shall provide a change in plane (articulation), creating interest in light and shadow, such that monotonous, blank facades are not
created.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 387/525
Unattractive/disproportional retail storefront facade character.
6. Standardized, formulaic, corporate or nonregional architecture and architectural features used primarily for advertising purposes are not allowed.
7. Developers should consider creative adaptive reuse of high quality existing buildings.
8. Garages within row homes, including materials, shall be compatible with the design of row homes, including facade/roof variation and window
treatments.
B. Articulation/Fenestration:
1. A building's base, middle and top proportions shall be well articulated through materials, details and changes in wall plane, including upper floor step
backs for all multi-story buildings and patios and terraces on residential buildings.
Articulated building with clearly defined base, middle and top.
2. Where used in conjunction with an overall design, pitched roofs may project or overhang into space where upper story floors have been step backed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 388/525
3. Mixed use buildings shall have a distinct ground floor base with easily identifiable, traditional retail storefronts with clear glass, defined entry and
consistent knee walls/detailing.
4. Facades shall be articulated to express vertical rhythm related to structural columns and bays.
Articulated vertical and horizontal rhythm of first floor retail storefront.
5. Building design shall feature a balance of vertical and horizontal elements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 389/525
6. Unarticulated, flat front, all glass or all metal building facades are prohibited.
Example of unarticulated retail storefront.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 390/525
Example of unacceptable retail storefront building facade articulation.
7. Ground floor elevations of buildings in the village core (VC) and transitional core (TC) districts shall especially be articulated with architectural
features to prevent "blank" or dead walls along pedestrian routes and other key open spaces visible from the right of way.
8. Rear facades visible from public streets and sidewalks should be treated with similar articulated architecture, detailing and fenestration as the front
and sides of the same building. Architecture and fenestration on the rear facade should extend at least forty feet (40') from the curb on a side street.
9. Building orientation and design elements shall be "context sensitive" by encouraging overall visual continuity between buildings and developments
on the same block.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 391/525
Complementary building forms and retail streetscape character.
10. Clearly defined entries, signage and lighting shall be located on the rear of all first floor commercial buildings facing an alley or rear parking service
area.
11. Buildings should be articulated with projections, recesses, material changes, parapets, cornices and varying roof heights that are planned as part of
a building's overall design character.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 392/525
Facades "broken up" with articulation and roofline changes to create a "built over time" appearance.
12. Solid walls necessary to the interior function of a building shall incorporate features or elements such as awnings, display windows, material and
color variations, arches, piers, columns, high quality graphics, spandrel glass, landscaping, signage and other elements to reduce perceived mass
and building scale and add visual interest.
13. Commercial and mixed use buildings should be varied so that no continuous building elevation greater than seventy five feet (75') occur, the goal of
which is to create more intimate building scales and character along Antioch's downtown streetscapes.
14. Because of the prominence and visibility of corner buildings, features such as cupolas, rotundas, atriums, clock towers, pilasters, roofline
balustrades and varying rooflines should be considered to add visual interest in the VC and TC districts.
15. Ground level retail or office space shall include large, clear glass windows that allow views into building interiors to reinforce an active shopping and
business environment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 393/525
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 394/525
Inadequate fenestration does not allow views into interior spaces.
16. Blank unarticulated walls exceeding thirty feet (30') in length are not allowed, regardless of use.
17. For retail or mixed use buildings, at least twenty five percent (25%) of every upper floor facade shall be fenestrated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 395/525
Well articulated and proportional upper floor fenestration.
18. For retail or mixed use buildings, at least twenty five percent (25%) of ground floor facades facing rear parking/service areas or alleys shall be
fenestrated.
19. A masonry knee wall of at least twelve inches (12") and not more than twenty four inches (24") is required on commercial/mixed use storefronts.
C. Building Entries:
1. All building entries shall be clearly defined and articulated.
2. On mixed use commercial buildings, residential or office entrances/lobbies shall be clearly distinguished from storefronts and preferably located on
public side street frontages, away from major intersections wherever possible.
3. Recessed, but visible, building entries for retail and service uses are encouraged to provide cover from the elements and to allow easier accessible
opening of doors. Such entries shall not be greater than six feet (6') in depth. Nonrecessed entry doors should not encroach into the five foot (5')
pedestrian clear zone when opened.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 396/525
4. All building entrances shall be clearly signed, addressed and lit for safety and security.
D. Building Materials:
1. All first floor building fenestration must be either windows or doors that allow views into shops, working areas, lobbies or pedestrian entrances or
window displays.
2. Dark tinted, spandrel, frosted or smoked glass shall be used sparingly and for decorative or accent purposes or on solid walls necessary to the
function of the building only (such as storage areas, kitchens and bathrooms). Reflective glass is prohibited on first floor uses, and is only allowed
sparingly on upper floor office buildings.
3. Modular brick, stone and glass are the preferred primary building materials. Other durable material accents such as tile, wood, metal and stucco may
be considered for details or accents where appropriate to building design.
4. Concrete block (smooth or decorative split face), stucco or plaster (smooth or textured synthetic), precast concrete, poured in place concrete,
synthetic stone and metal shall not be used as primary materials on facades or walls that are visible from public streets, driveways, sidewalks and/or
parking areas. They shall be used only for decorative accent purposes and limited in their use on building facades and visible walls.
5. The primary building material used on front facades shall be continued as the primary material on the side, cornerside and rear facades, except
where the side of a building directly abuts the side of an existing building or parking structure.
6. The number of materials on an exterior building face should be limited (no more than 5) to prevent visual clutter.
7. When parking is located behind buildings, rear building entrances and facades shall be designed and detailed in a manner consistent with the front
and side facades with defined entries.
E. Utilities And Service Areas:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 397/525
1. Loading, trash collection and utility areas (including pipes, conduit, utility boxes, transformers and utility doors) shall be located out of view wherever
possible and in all cases screened from street and sidewalk views. Rooftop mechanicals shall be located in the middle of the roof area and fully
shielded by a screening wall element similar in design and materials to those found on the building. These areas should be incorporated into site
plans and building designs and clearly tested to accommodate screening from public streetscape view.
2. Accessory service areas behind buildings that are visible from streets and sidewalks shall be designed in a manner consistent with the building front
or side.
3. Loading, trash collection and utility areas shall be designed to accommodate snow removal by eliminating unnecessary obstacles and providing
snow storage locations where feasible to site design.
4. Access to service areas and parking lots/structures should be clearly defined and visible from the street.
5. All screening materials should complement the building and adjacent buildings in materials and color, and be effective in every season. Materials
such as solid wood fencing, masonry screen walls, dense deciduous shrubs or evergreens should be considered. Screening must be at least seven
feet (7') in height at time of installation. Chainlink, wood without columns, tap cap or borders are prohibited.
Solid wood fencing is an appropriate material for screening trash or service areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 398/525
All screening materials should complement the building and adjacent buildings in materials and color.
6. Separate areas for loading, trash and utilities for individual businesses are discouraged. Shared service areas between businesses should be
considered for ease of maintenance and improved aesthetics.
7. Buildings shall provide an adequate means of storing refuse between collections, and shall comply with all applicable village requirements, including
recycling. Storage systems shall be designed to minimize adverse aesthetic impact.
8. All new on site television, power and communication lines, as well as all on site water, sewer and storm drainage lines, shall be installed
underground in the manner prescribed by the regulations of the government agency or utility company having jurisdiction. Any utility equipment that
must be located aboveground shall be adequately screened from view in an attractive manner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 399/525
All new utilities throughout the downtown area shall be installed underground.
9. Where possible, all utilities shall be placed within the public right of way or easements, and all possible steps shall be taken to avoid the placement
of utilities under the pavement to assure ease of future maintenance.
10. Television hookups shall either be by cable television or a central antenna system designed to minimize adverse aesthetic impact. Location shall be
considered to minimize visibility.
F. Building Projections:
1. Balconies, decks or terraces shall not cross the build-to line or project over a sidewalk.
2. Inset or recessed balconies, decks or terraces are allowed on the front, sides or rears of buildings and shall be designed so that they are integrated
into the building's architecture and not "add ons".
3. Balconies, decks or terraces are allowed to encroach into areas where the building has been stepped back from the building or property line.
G. Building Colors:
1. Building colors shall be compatible with the area's architectural character and enhance the building's visual appeal. Principal colors shall be natural
or earth tones to complement existing buildings.
2. Primary, bright or excessively brilliant colors are prohibited unless used sparingly for subtle trim accents or part of signage elements.
H. Fencing:
1. Brick, stone or decorative metal shall be used for fencing. Ground level decorative or nonscreening fence height shall not exceed forty eight inches
(48") in front of principal building setback. Railings along terraces may be solid walls, open fencing or glass walls and must meet all local building
codes for minimum required height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 400/525
Screen parking lots with decorative metal fence with masonry columns and shrub/perennial border.
2. Chainlink fencing is not allowed.
3. Fencing for rear yards behind the principal building shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. Chainlink fencing is not allowed.
4. Fences shall be considered an extension of building architecture and shall make an attractive transition between the building mass, natural forms of
a site and the "public realm" or streetscape.
5. Residential development projects that include a fence element as part of the overall site or landscape character may use wood fencing or a similar
composite material.
I. Awnings:
1. Building awning design and colors shall be consistent and complementary in color, style and size with the overall building facade, use and adjacent
buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 401/525
Awnings shall complement the building facade.
2. Awnings shall be constructed of high quality, fade resistant fabrics or metal. Plastic, vinyl, or "bubble" awnings are not allowed. Internally lighted
awnings are not allowed.
3. The bottom of awnings shall be placed a minimum of eight feet (8') above the sidewalk.
4. Graphic content, scale and sizing shall meet with Antioch's sign code requirements.
J. Lighting:
1. Site and building lighting shall strive to incorporate "dark sky" principles to limit "light pollution" and spillage and preserve the nighttime environment.
Fixtures and mounting systems shall incorporate styles which contain downlighting distribution through shields, glass type and internal refractor
systems.
2. Lighting shall provide a sense of safety without having a negative affect on neighboring properties and shall be located, aimed or shielded to
minimize glare, sky glow and stray light trespassing across property lines, especially along alleys.
3. Exterior lighting for signage shall be down directed or internal.
K. Outdoor Cafes:
1. Outdoor cafes/seating areas are encouraged to make the VC - village core district more active and enhance its overall pedestrian character.
2. Outdoor cafes shall maintain at least five feet (5') of clear space for movement of pedestrians along the sidewalk.
3. Tables, chairs and other equipment should be kept out of the pedestrian zone. The pedestrian zone also should be clear of street trees, tree grates
and other landscaping, and should be continuous from property to property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 402/525
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 403/525
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 404/525
Example of a unified streetscape with outdoor cafes, seating and attractive building signage.
4. Second story terraces for outdoor dining are also encouraged. Second story terraces shall be integrated into the design of the restaurant and overall
building.
5. A temporary or seasonal barrier or edge is encouraged to define outdoor cafe spaces and ensure the pedestrian clear zone. The barrier should be a
simple decorative railing, fence, planters or similar element. Velvet rope is prohibited as a barrier. The design of the barrier should reflect the style of
the building and coordinate with the streetscape, and shall be reviewed and approved by the village. (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-10-2: STREETSCAPE/LANDSCAPE:
An attractive and effective streetscape will provide visual continuity from block to block and define the VC - village core as a special place. Developers
should incorporate the village's streetscape design into the development, including standards for street trees, street furniture, pavers and other streetscape
elements. This will help visually unify the district.
A. Civic Open Space: Downtown Antioch includes public open spaces that are incorporated that will serve the various districts. The following standards
shall be followed to accomplish the plan goals:
1. Plazas And Open Space:
a. In addition to existing open spaces, plazas and small open spaces shall be considered within new developments where feasible.
b. The type and design of an open space shall be appropriate to the character of the building(s), and shall consider dimensions, solar access, wind
protection and views.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 405/525
c. Open spaces should connect to the pedestrian pathways and existing natural amenities of the site and its surroundings.
d. Usable open space can be an aboveground terrace or second level roof deck of a building.
e. Open space should be located to activate the street facade and increase "eyes on the street" when possible.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 406/525
f. Private and public open space shall be provided so that it is easily accessible for the residents, visitors and/or employees of a site.
g. Decorative paving such as brick, clay pavers, stone, decorative precast concrete pavers or stamped concrete shall be considered when designing
the hardscape for new plazas, open spaces and corner sidewalk bump outs.
h. Open spaces should incorporate special features such as fountains, artwork, plantings and other elements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 407/525
i. Where pedestrian paths or pass-throughs are used to access parking, they shall incorporate decorative fencing, arches, lighting, paving or signage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 408/525
2. Street Furniture:
a. Decorative metal benches, trash receptacles and bike racks shall be provided at high activity pedestrian/bicycle areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 409/525
Small pocket parks within downtown should provide seating opportunities and access to rear parking areas.
b. Decorative stands or corrals for newspaper vending machines shall be considered to consolidate clutter.
c. Decorative planters shall be placed in plazas and along pedestrian paths and sidewalks where they will not impede safe flow of pedestrians. (Ord.
11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-11: BUILDING AND GROUND MOUNTED SIGNAGE:
All signs shall be planned and designed to meet village requirements, and shall comply with the village of Antioch street graphics ordinance.
A. Acceptable forms of signage may include:
1. Building mounted tenant signage.
2. Identification or directional signage.
3. Hanging "blade style" signage.
4. Low level ground mounted signage.
5. Window and awning signage.
a. Temporary signage in excess of ten percent (10%) of window area shall be prohibited. (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
10-10-12: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT POLICY:
By creating a vibrant mixed use transit oriented downtown character, incorporating transit supportive services, clustering buildings, establishing
interconnected, attractive streetscapes and creating a shared stormwater management system, Antioch intends to foster sustainable development within
the downtown. This policy and planning objective decreases vehicle trips on area roads, reduces energy consumption and air pollution and limits paved
surfaces dedicated to parking.
A. All new development within the downtown districts shall consider "best management practices" in regards to sustainable building design, site planning,
streetscape/landscape design and infrastructure engineering.
B. Sustainable design and materials should be incorporated into any new proposals. Green building design principles should consider the overall
downtown environment during design and construction. In general, sustainable buildings are energy efficient, water conserving, durable and nontoxic,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 410/525
with high quality spaces and high recycled content materials. The following considerations should be included in any new site and building design and
construction activities within the downtown districts:
1. Consider adaptive reuse or preservation of high quality/character buildings within the district. Preservation and adaptive reuse through renovation is
considered one of the most sustainable development solutions.
2. Optimize building orientation for maximum heat gain, shading, daylighting and natural ventilation.
3. Design site landscape and hardscape character, as well as building rooftop systems to create comfortable microclimates and reduce heat island
effects.
4. Select native, low maintenance landscape materials and consider the reuse of stormwater runoff or "graywater" where feasible to reduce or eliminate
the need for potable water in landscape irrigation. (Leadership in energy and environmental design or LEED)
5. Incorporate design for easy pedestrian, bicycle and transit access.
6. Maximize alternative and traditional on site stormwater management through natural solutions, such as landscaping and permeable pavement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 411/525
Bioswales and best practices in stormwater management shall be considered in all new site development.
7. Maintain or reduce the peak stormwater discharge rate and quantity. (LEED)
8. Use sustainable, rapidly renewable or recycled building materials. (LEED)
9. Use building materials manufactured within the region to reduce transportation and shipping energy. (LEED)
10. Design and select lighting and equipment for efficient energy use and long term durability.
11. Increase water efficiency through the use of high efficiency systems and fixtures or through graywater reuse to decrease use on the village's water
supply and wastewater system. (LEED)
12. Minimize off site light pollution. (LEED)
13. Create healthy, comfortable indoor environments through increased natural lighting, control of thermal systems, reduced VOCs (volatile organic
compounds) and improved indoor air quality and ventilation. (LEED)
14. Create/enact natural plan solutions to control erosion, sedimentation and dust during construction. (LEED)
15. Conduct commissioning of building energy systems to ensure desired performance. (LEED)
16. Include on site renewable energy sources where feasible. (LEED)
17. Reduce or eliminate heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration (HVAC & R) equipment that emits compounds that contribute to ozone
depletion and climate change. (LEED)
18. Provide for an easily accessible dedicated area for the collection and storage of materials for recycling. (LEED)
19. Incorporate universal design into building floor plans and streetscapes/open spaces, where feasible. (LEED-ND) (Ord. 11-10-15, 10-17-2011)
Chapter 11
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
10-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public streets and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which property is put. (1976 Code
§ 150.050)
10-11-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
A. Building Permit Application Requirements: An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged building, structure, or use shall include therewith a
plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Application Of Regulations: The off-street parking and loading requirements of this chapter shall apply as follows, and nothing in this chapter shall
prevent the establishment of off-street automobile parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, subject to full compliance
with the provisions of this section:
1. All buildings and structures erected and land uses initiated after the effective date of this chapter shall provide accessory off-street parking or loading
facilities as required in this chapter for the use thereof, except that a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall not be required to furnish parking or loading facilities if construction is begun thereon within six (6) months of the
effective date of this chapter and diligently prosecuted to completion.
2. When a building or structure erected prior to or after the effective date of this chapter shall undergo any decrease in number of dwelling units, gross
floor area, seating capacity, number of employees or other unit of measurement specified in this chapter for required parking or loading facilities, and
further, when the decrease would result in a requirement for fewer total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this chapter
thereto, parking and loading facilities may be reduced accordingly, provided that existing parking or loading facilities shall be so decreased only when
the facilities remaining would at least equal or exceed the parking or loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter
to the entire building or structure as modified.
3. When a building or structure shall undergo any increase in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other unit of
measurement specified hereinafter for required parking or loading facilities, and further, when the increase would result in a requirement for
additional total parking or loading spaces through application of the provisions of this chapter thereto, parking and loading facilities may be increased
accordingly, provided that existing parking or loading facilities shall be so increased that the facilities would at least equal or exceed the parking or
loading requirements resulting from application of the provisions of this chapter to the entire building or structure as modified.
C. Existing Parking And Loading Spaces: Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces in existence on the effective date of this title may not be
reduced in number unless already exceeding the requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction; in which event said spaces shall not be
reduced below the number required herein for such equivalent new construction.
D. Damage Or Destruction: Any building, structure or use which is in existence and is a conforming use on the effective date of this title and which
subsequently is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause may be reconstructed, reestablished or repaired with or without off
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 412/525
street parking or loading facilities, except that parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of the damage or destruction shall be
restored or continued in operation. However, it shall not be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by
this chapter for equivalent new construction. (1976 Code § 150.051)
E. Use And Place Restrictions:
1. Prohibited Uses: No parking area shall be used for the sale, storage, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or
supplies. Required parking, vehicle stacking spaces, and off street loading spaces shall be reserved exclusively for their design purpose.
2. Prohibited Parking: Parking or storage of any vehicle or part thereof, including, but not limited to, trailers, campers, boats, and recreation vehicles, on
lawn areas in front or side yards, on areas set aside for landscaping, or on any other area not surfaced for off street parking as provided in this title is
prohibited.
3. Restrictions On Parking Of Vehicles: The following vehicles shall neither be parked nor stored on a residentially zoned lot:
a. Commercial truck, trailer or construction vehicle or bus exceeding eight thousand (8,000) pounds.
b. Truck tractor.
c. Semitrailer.
This provision shall apply except when the vehicle is being used to render services, such as deliveries, pick ups, or construction activity to property
within two hundred feet (200') of where the vehicle is parked.
4. Recreational Equipment And Vehicles: Recreational equipment shall include vehicles with recreational vehicle registration plates, motor homes, van
campers, off highway vehicles, motorcycle trailers, travel trailers, campers, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers, snowmobiles, aircraft and
nonmotorized equipment used for transporting recreational equipment.
a. Recreational equipment may be parked on private property in a garage or carport, in rear yards and side yards, shall be placed on a permitted
driveway surface (concrete, asphalt or approved brick pavers), and located in compliance with the regulation of this chapter.
b. Overnight parking or recreational equipment on a public street or within a right of way is prohibited.
c. No recreational equipment shall be parked within ten feet (10') of any adjacent dwelling on an adjoining lot, nor shall it be parked within one foot
(1') of lot line and in any event, drainage of the lot must be maintained.
d. No recreational equipment shall be parked across public sidewalks.
e. No recreational equipment shall be parked in front yards or side yards adjacent to a street.
f. Recreational equipment that is licensed for road use, less than ten feet six inches (10'6") in height, may be parked on a driveway in a required front
yard or side yard adjacent to a street and shall be placed on a permitted driveway surface (concrete, asphalt or approved brick pavers).
g. Recreational equipment parked in a side yard must be located farther back than the front building line of the adjacent property.
h. Driving over a lawn to park/retrieve a lawfully parked and permitted trailer, boat or camper is allowed. This does not warrant users from covenant
or grant rights to owners to trespass onto private property.
5. Vehicles Used For Other Purposes: The following shall not be used for conduct of business or for a dwelling: travel trailer, tent trailer, pickup camper
or coach, motorized dwelling or van. (Ord. 10-04-15, 4-19-2010)
10-11-3: PARKING FACILITIES:
A. Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with the
requirements of this section shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which the
facilities are accessory, or by guests of the occupants. Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures be
used for the storage of commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors or customers of
business or manufacturing establishments, except as permitted in subsection B of this section.
B. Joint Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any
zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so located
together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use.
C. Control Of Off Site Facilities: When required accessory off street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot on which the principal use
served is located, they shall be in the same possession, either by deed or long term lease, as the property occupied by the principal use, and the owner
shall be bound by covenants filed of record in the office of the recorder of deeds or the registrar of titles of Lake County, Illinois, requiring the owner and
his heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of parking spaces during the existence of the principal use.
D. Permitted Districts For Accessory Parking: Accessory parking facilities provided elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the principal use served in
accordance with subsection C of this section may be located in any zoning district except as follows: (1976 Code § 150.052)
1. No parking facilities accessory to an apartment use shall be located in an R-1 district or any SE and RE districts. (1976 Code § 150.052; amd. Ord.
02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
2. No parking facilities accessory to any business or manufacturing use shall be located in a residential district except when authorized by the village
board of trustees as prescribed hereinafter.
3. No parking facilities accessory to a manufacturing use shall be permitted in a B-1 or B-2 district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 413/525
E. Nonresidential Parking In Residential Districts: Accessory off street parking facilities serving nonresidential uses of property may be permitted in an R-4
or R-5 district when authorized by the village board of trustees, subject to the following requirements in addition to all other relevant requirements of
this section:
1. The parking lot shall be accessory to and for use in connection with one or more nonresidential establishments located in adjoining districts or in
connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions.
2. The parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles.
3. No commercial work or service of any kind shall be conducted on the parking lot.
4. Each entrance to and exit from the parking lot shall be at least twenty feet (20') distant from any adjacent property located in any residential district,
except where egress and ingress to the parking lot is provided from a public way or public alley separating the residential areas from the proposed
parking lot.
5. In addition to the foregoing requirements, these parking lots shall conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be prescribed by the
village board of trustees for the protection of properties adjacent to and in the vicinity of the proposed parking lot.
F. Design And Maintenance:
1. Parking Space Area: A required off street parking space shall be an area of not less than one hundred sixty two (162) square feet nor less than eight
and one-half feet (81/2') wide by eighteen feet (18') long, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas accessible
from streets or alleys or from private driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys, and to be used for the storage or parking of passenger
automobiles or commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity. Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall be not less than
twelve feet (12') in width when serving automobiles parked at a forty five degree (45°) angle in one direction nor less than twenty feet (20') in width
when serving automobiles parked perpendicular to the aisles and accommodating two-way traffic.
2. Measurement Of Space: When determination of the number of required off street parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be interpreted as one parking space.
3. Open And Enclosed Spaces: Parking areas may be open or enclosed, except that when parking facilities accessory to a multiple-family dwelling are
located in a residential or B-1 or B-2 district elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the principal use served, the parking facilities shall be open
to the sky.
4. Access: Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as will least interfere
with the movement of traffic. No driveway or curb cut in any district shall exceed twenty five feet (25') in width.
5. Required Setbacks: No parking space nor portion thereof established on the same zoning lot with a building shall be located within a required front
yard. No parking spaces nor portion thereof established on a zoning lot without a building shall be located closer to any street line than the
established building line on adjacent properties nor closer than the front yard setback required for the district in which the parking lot is located.
Further, any wall, fence or hedge developed around any parking area shall be subject to the front yard setback requirements of this title in the same
manner as a building or structure. The above required setbacks shall not apply to property zone M-1 or M-2. Rather, the location of and access to
any front or side parking in an M-1 or M-2 zoning district shall be subject to the rules and regulations of this title.
6. Surfacing: All open, off street parking areas, except those accessory to single-family dwellings, shall be improved with a compacted macadam base,
not less than four inches (4") thick, surfaced with asphaltic concrete or some comparable all weather, dustless material.
7. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining properties.
G. Special Use Public Parking Areas: Any automobile parking area developed for transient trade, and not accessory to specific main uses or groups of
uses for which parking is required by this title, shall be treated as a special use as defined in section 10-15-5 of this title and as allowed in accordance
with the provisions of section 10-15-4 of this title by the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 150.052)
10-11-4: LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS:
Off street automobile parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified; where a distance is specified, the distance shall be walking distance
measured from the nearest point of the parking area to the nearest entrance of the building that the parking area is required to serve.
A. For one- and two-family dwellings: on the same lot with buildings they are required to serve.
B. For three- and four-family dwellings not over two feet (2') in height: on the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve. For the
purpose of this requirement, a group of these uses constructed and maintained under single ownership or management shall be assumed to be on a
single lot or parcel of land.
C. For apartment houses containing four (4) or more dwelling units: on the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are required to serve, or on a
separate lot or parcel of land not more than three hundred feet (300') from the nearest entrance to the main building being served, provided the lot or
parcel of land selected for the parking facilities is located in an apartment district or a less restricted district.
D. For rooming houses, lodging houses, clubs, hospitals, sanatoriums, orphanages, homes for the aged, convalescent homes, dormitories, sorority and
fraternity houses, and for the other similar uses: The off street parking facilities required shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the main building
or buildings being served, or upon properties contiguous to the zoning lot on which is located the building or buildings they are intended to serve.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 414/525
E. For uses other than those specified above, off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the same lot or parcel of land as the main building being
served, or on a separate lot or parcel of land not over one thousand feet (1,000') from the entrance of the main building, measured from the nearest
point of the parking area, provided the separate lot or parcel of land intended for the parking facilities is located in the same district as the principal
permitted use or in a less restricted district. (1976 Code § 150.054)
10-11-5: APPLICABILITY OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. The number and location of off-street parking facilities in relation to the use of property are as follows, and the parking requirements for any use not
specified herein shall be the same as for a similar specified use, as determined by this section.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "floor area", in the case of office, merchandising or service types of use, shall mean the gross floor area of a
building or structure used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients or tenants, including areas occupied
by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. For the purpose of this section, "floor area" shall not include any area used for:
1. Storage accessory to the principal use of a building;
2. Incidental repairs;
3. Processing or packaging of merchandise;
4. Show windows, or offices incidental to the management or maintenance of a store or a building;
5. Restrooms;
6. Utilities;
7. Dressing, fitting, or alteration rooms. (1976 Code § 150.051(F))
10-11-6: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS:
One- and two-family dwellings 2 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit
Three or more family dwellings 2 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit
State or federally subsidized elderly/low income one-family row
dwellings (party wall type) and multiple-family dwellings and apartments,
as permitted by subsection 10-5K-1 of this title
1.05 parking spaces per dwelling unit
COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING:
Alcoholic beverages, food, or refreshments establishments handling
sales and consumption on the premises
1 parking space for the first 1,000 square feet of floor area under 1
roof devoted to such use or uses; plus 1 additional parking space for
each additional parking space for every 4 seats in the establishment
Banks, business or professional offices or public administration buildings
1 parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area
Bowling alleys 2 parking spaces for each alley plus provide the parking requirements
for each affiliated use as prescribed elsewhere in this chapter
Business centers, planned 3 feet of parking area for each foot of floor area, including access
drives and aisles
Church or high school auditoriums 1 parking for every 4 seats provided in said buildings or structures
Dance halls, skating rinks, assembly halls, exhibition halls or other
places of assembly
1 parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area used for
assembly
Furniture and appliance shops, motor vehicle sales, wholesale stores,
household equipment, or furniture repair shops, or machinery sales
1 parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area
Hospitals 1 parking space for each 3 hospital beds, plus 1 parking space for
each 1,500 square feet of gross floor area in residents' quarters, plus
1 additional space for each staff or visiting doctor
Hotels and clubs 1 space for each 4 guests or 1 parking space for each sleeping room
or suite, plus such additional space as shall be deemed necessary by
the director of planning, building and zoning because of any
supplementary parking generative activities,such as bars, ballrooms,
dining rooms, nightclub facilities and the like
Lodging, rooming and boarding houses 1 parking space for each 4 guests, plus 1 additional space for the
owner or manager thereof, if resident on the premises
Manufacturing and industrial uses; research and testing laboratories;
laundry and dry cleaning plants; printing, binding, publishing, and
issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books, and other reading matter;
1 parking space for each 1,200 square feet of gross floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 415/525
warehouses and storage buildings; engraving shops; assembly of
materials and products; and other similar uses
Medical or dental clinics 5 parking spaces per doctor engaged at the clinic
Mortuaries or funeral parlors 10 parking spaces for each room used as a chapel or parlor, plus 1
space for each funeral vehicle maintained on the premises, plus 1
space for each family residing on the premises
Private clubs or lodges, without sleeping rooms Parking spaces equal in number to 25% of the total membership
Railroad passenger stations, bus depots or other passenger terminal
facilities (special uses)
Such parking space as the village board of trustees, subject to the
recommendations of the plan commission shall deem to be adequate
for employees, passengers, spectators, visitors and others
Retail stores and service shops (individual or in groups) under 1 roof 2 parking spaces for each store plus 1 parking space for every 600
square feet of floor area
Sanitariums, convalescent homes or homes for the aged 1 parking space for each 6 patient beds, plus 1 additional space for
each staff or visiting doctor
Stadium, sports arena, auditorium, or gymnasium, other than incidental
to school
1 parking space for each 8 seats
Theaters
Indoor 1 parking space for every 5 seats
Outdoor Reservoir space equal to 10% of the capacity
Tourist homes, cabins, motels 1 parking space for each guest or sleeping room or suite, plus 1
additional space for the owner or manager on the premises
(1976 Code § 150.055)
10-11-7: OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING FACILITIES:
A. Spaces Required: Any nonresidential structure hereafter erected or enlarged to exceed forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area shall
provide off-street loading and unloading facilities as directed by the director of planning, building and zoning and approved by the plan commission.
(1976 Code § 150.053)
B. Design:
1. Size Of Space: An off-street loading berth shall be a hard surfaced area of land, open or enclosed, other than a street or a public way, used
principally for the standing, loading or unloading of motor trucks, tractors and trailers so as to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets
and alleys. A required loading berth shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width, forty five feet (45') in length, and fourteen feet (14') in height,
exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space, except as otherwise specifically dimensioned in this section.
2. Location: No permitted or required loading berth shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residential district unless completely enclosed
by building walls or a uniformly painted solid fence or wall or any combination thereof not less than six feet (6') in height. No permitted or required
loading berth shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets. Loading berths open to the sky
may be located in any required yard.
3. Measurements: When determination of the number of required off-street loading berths results in a requirement of a fractional berth, any fraction up
to and including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded, and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall be interpreted as one loading berth.
4. Surfacing: All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted macadam base not less than seven inches (7") thick, surfaced with
not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete or some comparable material which is dustless and all weather. (1976 Code § 150.056)
10-11-8: SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
In all districts where property uses include the loading and unloading of materials or merchandise from vehicles, off-street loading and unloading facilities
shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
Banks, business or professional offices or public administration buildings containing 40,000 to
100,000 square feet of gross floor area
1 off-street loading and unloading space, plus
1 additional such space for each additional
100,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof in excess of 100,000 square
feet.
Bowling alleys, taverns, restaurants or any retail shops and having 10,000 to 100,000 square
feet of gross floor area
1 off-street loading and unloading space plus
1 additional such space for each additional
100,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof in excess of 100,000 square
feet.
Furniture and appliance stores, motor vehicle sales, wholesale stores, household equipment or
machinery sales, having 8,000 to 25,000 square feet of gross floor area
1 off-street loading and unloading space, plus
1 additional space for each additional 25,000
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 416/525
square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof in excess of 25,000 square feet.
Hospitals or sanitariums containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area 1 off-street loading and unloading space, plus
1 additional such space for each additional
100,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof in excess of 100,000 square
feet.
Hotels or apartment hotels wherein there are contained exhibition halls, convention halls,
auditoriums, office facilities or retail shops
1 off-street loading and unloading space for
the first 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 additional off-street loading
space for each 150,000 square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof of gross floor
area in excess of 40,000 square feet.
Manufacturing uses; research and testing laboratories; laundry and dry cleaning establishments,
printing, binding, publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books and other reading
matter; warehouses and storage facilities; engraving shops; assembly of materials and products;
processing and distribution of materials and products; and other similar uses having more than
10,000 square feet of gross floor area, exclusive of basement area, and less than 40,000 square
feet of gross floor area
1 off-street loading and unloading space, plus
1 additional such space for each additional
60,000 square feet of gross floor area in
excess of 40,000 square feet.
(1976 Code § 150.057)
Chapter 12
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
10-12-1: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Continuance Of Use:
1. Any lawfully established use of a building or land, at the effective date of this title or of amendments hereto, that does not conform to the use
regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise
provided herein.
2. Any legal nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use, provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted in this title.
3. Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of this title, or of amendments thereto, may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is started within six (6) months and diligently prosecuted to completion. The building shall
thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building. (1976 Code § 150.035)
B. Discontinuance Of Use:
1. Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions
of this title, the premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by any nonconforming use, even though the building may have been originally
designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
2. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof has been discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, or for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months if the building was originally designed and constructed for a nonresidential use, or whenever it is evident that
there is a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, the use shall not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be
reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
3. Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months shall constitute abandonment. (1976
Code § 150.036)
C. Change Of Use:
1. A nonconforming use of a building or structure, or part thereof, may be changed to a use of the same or of a more restricted character, but may not
thereafter be changed to any less restricted use.
2. Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a nonconforming use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of
this title shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use. (1976 Code § 150.037)
D. Termination And Removal Of Nonconforming Use: The period of time during which the following nonconforming uses of buildings, structures or land
may continue or remain shall be limited to two (2) years from the effective date of this title, or of any amendment thereto, which causes the use to be
nonconforming. Every such nonconforming use shall be completely removed from the premises at the expiration of the two (2) year period:
1. Any nonconforming building or structure having an assessed valuation not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on the effective date of this
title.
2. Any nonconforming use of land where no enclosed building is involved or where the only buildings employed are accessory or incidental to the use,
or where the use is maintained in connection with a conforming building. (1976 Code § 150.038)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 417/525
10-12-2: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
A. Repairs And Alterations:
1. Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary alterations which do not
extend nonstructural repairs and incidental or intensify the nonconforming use.
2. No structural alterations shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
a. When the alteration is required by law;
b. When the alteration will actually result in elimination of the nonconforming use;
c. When a building containing residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability, provided no structural alteration shall
be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building. (1976 Code § 150.039)
B. Additions And Enlargements:
1. A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to conform
to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
2. No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by the nonconforming use.
3. No nonconforming building in any residential district shall be so altered as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
4. No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any required usable open space or any land beyond the
boundaries of the zoning lot as it existed at the effective date of this title, or to displace any conforming use in the same building or on the same
parcel of land. (1976 Code § 150.041)
10-12-3: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION:
A. If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its
replacement value at the time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the
provisions of the district. In the event the damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, based upon prevailing costs,
the building may then be restored to its original condition and the occupancy or use of the building may be continued which existed at the time of the
partial destruction.
B. In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure must be started within a period of one year and diligently prosecuted to completion.
(1976 Code § 150.040)
10-12-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Whenever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms to the use regulations of this title, but is nonconforming only in the particular
manner hereinafter specified, the building and use thereof shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections 10-12-1D and 10-12-2A of this
chapter.
B. In any residential district where a dwelling is nonconforming only as to the number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building shall be
altered in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
C. In any R-5 district where a use permitted in the B-1 district occupies ground floor space within a multiple-family dwelling located on a corner lot.
D. In any business or manufacturing district where the use is less distant from a residential district than that specified in the regulations for the district in
which it is located. (1976 Code § 150.042)
10-12-5: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 13
SITE PLAN REVIEW
10-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive procedure and appropriate standards for the design and landscaping of commercial, industrial,
office, civic, institutional, multi-family and townhome uses and thus ensure a high quality of development and redevelopment. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 418/525
10-13-2: APPLICABILITY:
Site plan reviews shall be required prior to all building permits for all new construction and additions of commercial, industrial, office, civic, institutional,
multi-family and townhome development in the village of Antioch. However, any commercial, industrial, office, civic, institutional, multi-family or townhome
refurbishing, renovation or structural addition which constitutes less than twenty five percent (25%) of the existing structure's total square footage shall not
require a site plan review or approval by the planning and zoning board, but shall be subject to the review of the appropriate staff member as identified by
the village board. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all requirements and conditions of the site plan approval have been implemented and all improvements
completed in accordance with approved plans. Any significant change to the approved site plan or elevations that affect the physical character of the
building and/or site, in the absence of an approved amended site plan reflecting said changes, shall cause the certificate of occupancy to be withheld until
such change is approved by the village board. The community development director shall determine the significance of any such changes. (Ord. 16-10-27,
10-3-2016)
10-13-4: MAINTENANCE:
Properties receiving site plan approval shall maintain all improvements in good condition including landscape plantings and materials, painted surfaces,
structures, pavement, walkway, signage, light fixtures and fences. Any re-imaging of the building or removal of landscaping other than what has died,
requires administrative approval by a village staff member as identified by the village board. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-5: AUTHORIZATION:
The planning and zoning board shall review and recommend approval, approval with modification, or denial of site plans. The village board shall approve,
approve with modification, or deny site plans. Approval shall be valid for a period of one year. If after such time construction has not commenced or if
construction is stopped for a period of one year, the approval of the site plan becomes void. An extension of the approval period may be authorized by the
village board upon the written request of the developer. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-6: APPLICATION:
An application for site plan review shall be filed with the community development director on the official application provided for such purpose. The
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution by the village board. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-7: COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT:
A. Desirable Elements Of Commercial Project Design: As the village of Antioch attracts new commercial development, it is important that commercial
development be constructed with good design and quality materials. The quality in design of the village's commercial corridor will help maintain the
village's unique sense of place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 419/525
1. Richness of building surface and texture.
2. Articulated mass and bulk.
3. Clear visibility of entrances.
4. Well organized commercial signage.
5. Landscaped and screened parking.
6. Special paving identifying intersections and crosswalks.
7. Pedestrian friendly streetscapes and open spaces.
8. Thoughtful consideration of circulation.
9. Screening of mechanical equipment, service areas, parking lots and any undesirable elements.
10. Step down of building scale along pedestrian routes and building entrances.
11. Recognition of building hierarchy.
12. Formal entry plazas and courtyards for outdoor eating adjacent to restaurants.
13. Attractively designed detention areas.
14. Existing trees incorporated into development.
15. Multiplaned, pitched roofs.
16. Roof overhangs and arcades.
17. Defined entrance roads into developments and provision of adequate vehicle storage bays at egress drives.
18. Significant gateway defining entry into the village.
19. Unique intersection enhancements to provide visual landmarks and repetitive design elements.
20. Significant landscape areas with interesting hardscape design.
21. Comprehensive, uniformly themed signage program for public and private spaces.
22. Consistent and cohesive architectural elements on buildings.
23. Consistent window and door patterns.
24. Significant wall articulation.
25. Building facades with many windows for streetscape interest and appeal.
26. Consistent family of site furnishings and light fixtures.
27. Continuation of landscape buffer yards.
B. Undesirable Elements Of Commercial Project Design: The village considers the following design features to be undesirable elements of commercial
development:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 420/525
All Precast Building
All EIFS Building/Metallic Colors
All EIFS/Glass
CMU Block
Design Elements With No Context
Metal Structures
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 421/525
Metallic Colors
Outdoor Storage With No Screening
1. All glass and EIFS buildings.
2. CMU buildings.
3. Large, blank, unarticulated wall surfaces.
4. Visible outdoor storage, loading, equipment and mechanical areas.
5. Disjointed parking areas and confusing circulation patterns.
6. Large expanses of parking/asphalt.
7. Service areas near major entries and easily visible from roadway.
8. Poorly defined site access points.
9. Large "boxlike" structures.
10. Use of retaining walls within detention basins.
11. Large, billboard type signage structures for individual businesses.
12. Wide ranging lighting and site furnishing styles.
13. Large, out of scale signs with flashy colors.
14. Highly reflective surfaces or heavily tinted glass fronts.
15. Sparsely landscaped parking lots, entries and rights of way.
16. Large nonresidential building facades with few or no windows. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-8: DESIGN STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 422/525
(Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-8-1: COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, AND CIVIC BUILDINGS:
All buildings and proposed development should be visually and physically compatible with one another and with existing buildings on adjacent sites.
Buildings shall demonstrate a high quality of design and incorporate a variety of planes, materials and elements combined to create structures with
character that enhance the aesthetics of the area.
A. Building Form:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 423/525
1. The design of all buildings shall employ textured surfaces, projections, recesses, shadow lines, color, window patterns, overhangs, reveals, changes
in parapet heights and similar architectural devices to avoid monolithic shapes and surfaces and to emphasize building entries. Designs shall avoid
long, unbroken, flat walls of forty feet (40') or greater.
2. Each building shall be designed so that the facade of the building presents a clear base, middle and top. The base or ground floor shall be
appropriately articulated to provide human scale.
3. Buildings having single walls exceeding forty feet (40') in length shall incorporate four (4) or more of the following for every forty feet (40') in length:
a. Changes in color, graphical patterning, changes in texture, or changes in material;
b. Arcades or pergolas;
c. Towers;
d. Gable projections or hip roof elements;
e. Horizontal/vertical breaks of at least one foot (1');
f. Decorative storefront or articulated window patterns;
g. Other similar techniques.
B. Materials:
FIGURE 1
FIGURE 2
FIGURE 3
FIGURE 4
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 424/525
1. Buildings shall be constructed with a predominance of quality materials that may include face brick, glass, native stone or cultured stone. Precast
with stamped brick shall be permitted for commercial buildings in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. Other than an accent
material, the use of CMU block shall be prohibited as a facade exterior material.
2. Masonry units and brick should employ natural colors. Clay fired red brick, sandstone and other natural finishes are required.
3. EIFS, fiber cement or smart board shall be permitted to be used as accent materials and for sign bands above the storefront windows within the
facade.
4. Use of heavier materials such as natural or cultured stone and masonry materials is encouraged to be incorporated on the lower three (3) to four feet
(4') of buildings to help visually anchor the building and provide architectural articulation.
5. Commercial buildings that mirror a historic vernacular design may be constructed with cedar clapboard, cedar shake or one hundred percent (100%)
fiber cement board. (See Freeport, Maine, figures 1 through 4 of this section as an example.)
6. Painted metal, painted concrete, plain unfinished concrete block or large expanses of unarticulated stucco are not acceptable materials.
C. Entrance Design:
1. Buildings shall incorporate prominent entrances that may include the following: overhangs, fabric awnings, recesses, colonnades, building projection,
arcades and steel canopies.
2. Building entrances shall contrast with the surrounding wall plane.
3. Building entrances shall be framed around doorways by changing materials from the primary facade material.
4. Design primary entrances to be accessible to handicapped users without complex ramp systems.
5. All building entrances shall be well lit. Decorative lighting shall be required.
6. Incorporating raised landscaping beds to a building's entrance is encouraged.
7. Consider using terraces or porticoes to define entrances.
D. Colors:
1. All buildings shall incorporate earth tone colors including design accents. Corporate signage is exempt from this standard.
2. Bright or primary color shall be limited to corporate signage, canopies and awnings or other architectural detail.
E. Rooflines: In order to preserve the unique character of the village of Antioch and acknowledge its previous rural character, the following standards shall
be followed with respect to roofline design:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 425/525
1. With the exception of large big-box stores or junior boxes (stores ranging from 25,000 to 200,000 square feet), all users are encouraged to
incorporate a multiplaned, pitch roof which would provide roof overhangs and arcades and incorporate the additional items listed below on a
minimum of three (3) elevations.
2. When sloping roofs are used, at least one of the following elements shall be incorporated into the design for each forty (40) linear feet of roof:
a. Projecting gables,
b. Hips,
c. Horizontal/vertical breaks,
d. Dormers, or
e. Other similar techniques.
3. Any flat roof shall incorporate a raised parapet, a prominent cornice line and variations within the roofline every fifty (50) linear feet of frontage.
Towers, gables, architectural projections or other architectural design elements can be used to break up a flat roofline.
4. Where flat roofs are used, the design or height of the parapet shall include at least one change in setback and height of at least three feet (3') along
each fifty feet (50') of facade.
5. Roof materials should be high quality, durable and consistent with local architectural themes. Concrete tile, architectural asphalt dimensional
shingles and wood shake are appropriate.
F. Drive-Through Facilities:
1. Any drive-through shall be located on the side or rear of a commercial building. Drive-throughs adjacent to residential areas shall be a minimum of
one hundred fifty feet (150') to the closest residential structure and incorporate a minimum forty foot (40') landscaped buffer on the subject property.
2. Any drive-through shall incorporate a bypass lane with a minimum width of twelve feet (12').
3. All drive-through facilities shall require a special use.
G. Trash Enclosures, Utility Meters And Dock Doors:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 426/525
1. All trash receptacles shall be fully enclosed and any enclosure shall be constructed with the same material as used on the main structure. All
enclosures shall incorporate wood slotted doors or metal doors. Chainlink doors shall not be permitted. Additionally, trash enclosures shall be located
in the rear of the property and every effort should be made to ensure that they are not located adjacent to main access points into the development.
2. All meters shall be fully recessed, enclosed or painted with an earth tone color so they blend in with the face brick or stone.
3. Loading docks, on site storage yards and all other service areas shall be fully screened from view from all public and private rights of way by a
combination of landscaping and walls. These areas shall comply with this code relating to outdoor storage and display. Such screens shall be
masonry and of a color matching or compatible with the dominant colors found on the facades of the primary building. The screen height shall be of
sufficient height to hide the equipment, vehicles, materials or trash being screened from public view, but in no case shall exceed a height of ten feet
(10'). Chainlink fences, with or without slats, shall not be used to satisfy this screening requirement. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-8-2: MULTI-FAMILY (APARTMENTS):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 427/525
A. Materials:
1. Multi-family buildings shall incorporate one hundred percent (100%) face brick, stone or fiber cement board on all four (4) elevations.
B. Configuration:
1. Multi-family buildings shall be oriented around courts, greens or linear green spaces. In addition, no elevation shall exceed forty feet (40') in linear
length without a projection or recess along the facade. Exterior entrances for each unit are required unless located within the downtown (as
highlighted in form based code).
C. Height:
1. Multi-family buildings shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
D. Pedestrian Access:
1. All multi-family units shall incorporate sidewalks on all four (4) sides of a building with a minimum width of five feet (5').
E. Landscaping:
1. Each first floor unit shall incorporate a planting area adjacent to the entrance area with a minimum of one understory tree and six (6) shrubs in
addition to ground cover.
2. All linear walkways within a multi-family campus shall incorporate a minimum green space of ten feet (10') in width and shall plant one shade tree
and five (5) shrubs for every thirty feet (30') of linear length of sidewalk.
3. Landscape buffers along collector or arterial streets shall require a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and the planting of one shade/ornamental tree
and ten (10) shrubs for every thirty feet (30') of frontage.
4. All entrance areas shall incorporate an entrance boulevard with a minimum depth of ten feet (10') and planting of a shade or ornamental tree every
twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-8-3: INDUSTRIAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 428/525
A. Materials:
1. Industrial buildings shall be constructed with masonry materials, including, but not limited to, precast concrete panels. Where precast panels are
used, the use of colors, patterns or other forms of other architectural relief within the panels shall be required. Any building facade facing a public
street and with a facade length that exceeds one hundred feet (100') shall incorporate recesses or projections in order to provide architectural
variation. Construction of industrial buildings with one hundred percent (100%) CMU block shall be prohibited.
B. Bay Doors:
1. Bay doors shall not be located in the front of any industrial building or abutting a public street unless fully screened.
C. Screening:
1. All mechanical systems shall be fully screened with a parapet or roof enclosure. Any security fence around an industrial site shall incorporate one
hundred percent (100%) opacity and barbed wire or razor wire is prohibited.
D. Trash Enclosures And Utility Meters:
1. All trash receptacles shall be fully enclosed and constructed out of the same material that predominates on the main structure. All utility meters shall
be enclosed, recessed or painted with a neutral color in order to blend in with the existing building.
E. Landscape Buffer And Screening:
1. Industrial sites shall incorporate a twenty foot (20') landscape buffer adjacent to any street or internal access drive into a business park.
2. Any property zoned for industrial shall fully screen any outdoor storage with an eight foot (8') fence with one hundred percent (100%) opacity. Either
a wood board on board or a chainlink/slat fence shall be permitted for the industrial zone. Any use of chainlink shall require the planting of one
evergreen for every thirty (30) linear feet of chainlink fence. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-8-4: TOWNHOMES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 429/525
A. Materials:
1. All townhomes shall be constructed out of a combination of face brick or stone and vinyl. Fiber cement shall also be permitted.
B. Buildings:
1. A maximum of six (6) units per building shall be permitted. Any townhome in excess of two (2) stories shall be categorized as a row house and any
garage within a row house shall be located in the rear.
2. Any townhome development should locate one-third (1/3) of the total number of units within a project around one of the following configurations:
park, square, linear greenway, loop lane, green street, crescent, boulevard, square or open space.
3. Townhomes should be located in a manner to provide enclosure around public spaces and streets.
4. Townhomes should incorporate prominent front entrances into their design and incorporate balanced window placement that provides symmetry and
balance to the architectural elevations.
C. Garages:
1. Garages should be either located in the rear of townhome units or if located in front, should be recessed. Garages that project more than five feet
(5') from the front elevation shall be prohibited.
2. All garage doors should incorporate windows. Single bay doors are encouraged to provide more architectural design interest to front elevations.
D. Mechanicals:
1. All mechanical systems, including air conditioning units and utility boxes, shall be visually screened by natural vegetation. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-
2016)
10-13-9: LANDSCAPING:
All site plan review applications will require the submittal of a landscape plan which is prepared and stamped by a licensed landscape architect. All
landscape plans shall include a list of plants (including botanical and common name), size and installed condition. General quantities of plantings and
location shall be shown.
All landscape plans shall also include topographical information and proposed grades, proposed structures and pavement, location, type and size of
planting materials and planting conditions (balled or burlapped or within a container), along with standard notes including mulch, site lines, plant locations
and planting depth.
A. Commercial, Office, Industrial Or Institutional Landscaping:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 430/525
1. A twenty five foot (25') landscape buffer adjacent to arterials or collectors shall be maintained along with the planting of one shade or ornamental
tree and fifteen (15) shrubs for every thirty (30) linear feet of frontage. Shrubs should be planted in a manner to create a minimum four foot (4')
hedge along portions of the landscape buffer. In addition, undulating berms should be constructed within the landscape buffer with a minimum height
of two feet (2'). (Shade trees shall incorporate a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches at time of planting.) Every effort should be made that mature
landscape does not obstruct signage or future sight lines toward the commercial development.
2. Any landscape buffer adjacent to an arterial or collector shall incorporate a five foot (5') sidewalk with an internal connection to the development's
pedestrian sidewalk system. Any sidewalk within a twenty five foot (25') landscape buffer should meander in order to provide visual opportunities for
landscape plantings.
3. Landscaping buffers along the side and rear property lines and adjacent to internal access drives shall be maintained with a minimum of ten feet
(10') and planted with one shade or ornamental tree and fifteen (15) shrubs for every thirty feet (30') of linear length.
4. Parking lots shall incorporate one shade tree for every twelve (12) parking spaces with a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches. All landscape islands shall
be planted with live plant material. Landscape island shall incorporate a minimum depth of ten feet (10').
5. Vehicular access points should incorporate clear sight lines and the planting of trees should be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from any access and
set back sufficiently from any street to maintain clear sight lines.
6. Commercial buildings in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet shall incorporate raised planting beds with landscaping along the entrance
areas and in front of the store area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 431/525
Landscaping Summary:
*25 foot landscape buffers along arterials and major arterials.
*10 foot landscape buffers along side and rear perimeter of subject site when not abutting an arterial or major collector.
*1 shade/ornamental tree for every 30 linear feet of landscape buffer.
*15 shrubs for every 30 linear feet of landscape buffer.
*1 landscape island shall be installed for every 12 parking spaces with a minimum width of 8 feet.
*All access points will maintain unobstructed sight lines and any planting of a tree has to be a minimum of 20 feet away from an access point.
*Undulating berms shall be incorporated in landscape buffers adjacent to arterials.
B. Commercial, Office, Industrial Or Institutional Foundation Plantings:
1. Foundation landscaping shall be provided around buildings with the exception of where driveways or sidewalks lead directly into a building. Planting
beds will have a minimum width of five feet (5') and fifteen (15) shrubs shall be planted for every thirty feet (30') of linear facade. Flowers, ornamental
grasses and ground cover may also be used. At the discretion of the community development director, foundation landscaping can be incorporated in
containers if it is not possible to add along the foundation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 432/525
C. Landscape Buffers:
1. Any commercial, office or industrial use adjacent to a residential area shall incorporate a minimum buffer of forty feet (40') in width and a one
hundred percent (100%) opacity of natural landscaping. Natural landscaping should combine a combination of shade trees, conifers and shrubs.
Privacy fences shall not be permitted in lieu of landscaping.
2. Existing woodlands that provide one hundred percent (100%) opacity may be used as buffering.
3. The area not planted with shade or ornamental trees, conifers and shrubs may be planted with sod, live ground cover, flowers, ornamental grasses
or a combination thereof.
D. Ground Cover Or Flowers:
1. All landscape buffers shall incorporate the addition of perennials or ground cover in addition to the required combination of shade trees, ornamental
trees, conifers or shrubs. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-10: PHOTOMETRICS:
A. Lighting Levels: All lighting fixtures shall be designed and placed as to limit light spillage onto adjacent lots. Light levels at the lot lines, with the
exception of ingress and egress points, shall be a maximum of 0.5 foot-candle.
B. Lighting Fixtures: All lighting fixtures, except as hereby allowed, shall be fully shielded, directed down at a ninety degree (90°) angle, and otherwise
designed so as to avoid any glare onto neighboring residential properties. "Shielded" means that all bulb/light sources and cover portion of a fixture that
transmit light shall not extend beyond/below the opaque portion of such fixtures so the bulb/light source is not visible from general side view.
C. Height: In general, the height of exterior lighting features shall not exceed the predominant height of the principal building to which it relates.
D. Neon Or Glass Tube Illumination: Neon around windows or glass tube illumination around windows is prohibited.
E. LED Lighting: The use of LED lighting is encouraged in lieu of the more conventional exterior lighting. LED lighting is required to be used for any lighting
of a fuel station canopy in order to minimize light overspill on adjoining properties and light pollution.
F. Lights Off: Except for building entrances, loading docks, advertising signage, or security lighting as identified by the community development director, all
lights shall be turned off at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. local time and remain off until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. local time. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-11: COMMERCIAL ORIENTATION AND VISIBILITY:
A. The visibility of in line retail space or any stand alone stores should not have their visibility blocked along arterials by outlots or other commercial
development. Outlots are encouraged to be located along internal entrances creating a commercial gateway into the centers.
B. Orient buildings that promote views through and into the commercial center. Sight lines of large major tenants within the development shall be
maintained.
C. If required, outlots along arterials should be sacrificed in order to maintain open sight lines of the major tenants and in line retail space attached to the
major tenants.
D. Orient single freestanding buildings and their primary facades and primary pedestrian entrances toward streets.
E. Position pedestrian entrances to buildings so they are easily identifiable from interior drives and parking lots. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
10-13-12: PARKING AND VEHICLE STACKING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 433/525
A. Standards And Guidelines:
1. Design parking lots to avoid dead end aisles.
2. Where a dead end aisle is necessary, adequate space for unimpeded turnaround must be provided.
3. Separate parking areas from buildings by a combination of a raised concrete walkway, pedestrian plaza or landscaping.
4. Design parking areas that incorporate pedestrian walkways in a manner that links buildings to the street sidewalk system. Crosswalk pavers or
decorative stamped concrete is encouraged along main entrances and access points.
5. Divide parking areas which accommodate more than one hundred twenty five (125) vehicles into a series of smaller connected lots.
6. Landscape and offset portions of the lot to reduce the visual impact of large parking areas.
7. Avoid aligning all travel lanes in parking lots in long straight configurations.
8. Provide cross access easements between adjacent lots to facilitate the flow of traffic between complementary users.
9. All parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete. Recycled asphalt or crushed aggregate are not allowed.
10. Parking stalls shall incorporate a dimension of nine (9) by eighteen feet (18').
11. Two-way drive aisles shall incorporate a minimum width of twenty four feet (24').
12. All drive-through lanes shall incorporate a minimum stacking area for five (5) vehicles.
13. All parking areas shall be bordered and bounded by vertical concrete curbing.
14. No vehicle parking or storage area shall encroach into any mandatory landscape buffers.
B. Parking Ratios: Except for uses in the area designated in the downtown overlay district, the minimum number of parking spaces required per parcel/use
is based on the following ratios:
Fast food/casual dining 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Hotel/motel/extended stay lodging/bed and breakfast 1 space per guestroom plus 1 space per 2 employees
Medical/dental offices 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Professional offices 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Restaurants 8 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Retail uses 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Theaters 1 space per 3 seats
Warehouse 1 per 1,000 square feet or based upon a demand analysis performed by applicant
C. Landscape Islands; Shared Parking:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 434/525
1. Natural ground cover versus turf grass is encouraged for landscape islands.
2. When opportunities exist for shared parking between different uses with staggered peak parking demand, make every effort to take advantage of this
opportunity to reduce the total number of parking spaces within the development.
3. Provide landscaped islands at the ends of all rows of parking.
4. One landscape island for every twelve (12) parking spaces and all islands shall be planted with plantings. Best management practices incorporating
rain gardens within landscaped islands are encouraged.
5. Parking bumpers in surface lots are prohibited.
6. Where parking spaces abut landscaped islands, medians or perimeter curbs or sidewalks, the length of spaces may be shortened by 1.5 feet to
account for the car overhang, and the width of the sidewalk or landscape strip increased by that same amount. (Ord. 16-10-27, 10-3-2016)
Chapter 14
SIGNS
10-14-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
A. This chapter is intended to create the legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system to regulate signage that will preserve free speech and
promotion of commerce. Furthermore, this chapter is intended to minimize any visual clutter that is harmful to the Village's appearance and to promote
safety by limiting signage that could potentially have a negative impact on traffic and pedestrian safety. With these purposes in mind, it is the intent of
this chapter to authorize the use of signage to:
1. Promote the free flow of traffic along the Village's arterials and collectors and to protect pedestrians and motorists from injury and property damage
which may be fully or partially attributable to cluttered, distracting, or illegible signage.
2. Promote the use of signage that is aesthetically pleasing and of appropriate scale that sensitively integrates into the surrounding context and
landscape. This chapter recognizes the difference in context between a commercial arterial and the Village's downtown.
3. Provide for functional flexibility, encourage variety and to create an incentive to relate signage to basic principles of good design.
4. Assure that public benefits derive from expenditures of public funds for the improvement and beautification of streets and other public structures and
spaces are protected by exercising reasonable controls over the character and design of graphic structures.
5. Provide for an improved visual environment and to protect prominent corridors within the community by authorizing the use of street signage that is:
a. Compatible with surroundings;
b. Appropriate to the activity that displays them;
c. Expressive of the identity of the individual activities and the community as a whole; and
d. Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Sign Area Calculations:
1. Ground Signs: Ground signs shall be calculated by determining the net rectangular area enclosing the sign including the outer edges of the lettering,
characters or delineations. Architectural treatments surrounding the signage will not be included as the sign area, provided it does not exceed one
hundred percent (100%) of the total sign face. For double-sided signs, only one face shall be considered in determining the sign area.
2. Wall, Window, Awning And Canopy Signs: The sign face area shall be calculated by determining the area of the sign face including the frame, if any.
The sign face area of wall, window, awning or canopy signs consisting of individually-mounted letters shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest
rectangular figure which can encompass all letters and graphics.
B. Setbacks:
1. All signs shall be set back not less than ten feet (10') or five feet (5') within Downtown Sign District.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 435/525
2. All such signs located on a corner lot shall not be located within the vision triangle as defined in this chapter.
3. Ground signs on adjoining lots must have a minimum separation distance of thirty feet (30'). Lots that develop before their bordering lots shall locate
their ground sign(s) in such a way as to provide an opportunity for adjacent lots to erect a ground sign that meets this requirement.
C. Vision Triangle: No building or structure shall be erected or maintained, nor any landscaping exceeding thirty six inches (36") in height shall be grown or
maintained within a triangular area determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points measured along the property lines of the abutting streets
twenty five feet (25') equidistant from the intersection of those property lines, so as to obstruct or obscure the vision of drivers of motor vehicles on
either or both streets. This provision shall apply on all collectors and arterials within the Village. However, an exemption to this provision shall be
allowed in downtown as defined by the Antioch Downtown Signage District when a building location would promote context sensitive design.
D. Traffic Safety: No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere
with the view of or be confused with any traffic control sign, signal or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. The decision on
the determination of a traffic hazard shall rest with the Community Development Director with consultation with the Village's Emergency Services. (Ord.
17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-3: EXEMPT SIGNS:
A. The following signs are exempt from permit requirements. While the following signs do not require permits, such signs shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter concerning installation, maintenance, size, style, location and illumination.
1. Street signs.
2. Address numerals. Street address numerals in conformity with Village regulations.
3. Civic event signs:
a. Community Events: Temporary signs advertising a community event.
b. Permanent Civic Signs: May be located in any zoning district and shall be no taller than ten feet (10') from grade to the top of the sign or no larger
than forty eight (48) square feet and fabricated with a sand blasted wood face.
c. Approvals: All civic event signs shall require approval by the Community Development Director.
4. Construction identification signs. Signs identifying the architect, engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with construction, or
the purpose for which the building is intended, up to a maximum of thirty two (32) square feet. Only one sign is allowed per frontage per
development. The sign shall be confined to the site of construction and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the Certificate of Occupancy for
the subject premises.
5. Informational signs. Not exceeding three (3) square feet per sign face, displayed on private property for the convenience of the public, including
signs identifying rest rooms, freight entrances, parking areas, parking lot directional and the like.
6. Flags. Governmental, political, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organizational flags and corporate flags are permitted subject to the
following provisions:
a. Flags should not be larger than fifty (50) square feet per face.
b. Flags mounted on light standards or other poles not expressly made as flag poles shall be prohibited.
c. No more than five (5) flags shall be permitted per site.
7. Garage sale and open house signs. Garage sale and open house signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
a. Signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet per face.
b. All signs shall not be put up more than twenty four (24) hours prior to the event and must be removed upon the close of the event.
c. Signs may be placed off-site on private property with the consent of the owner of property on which the sign is placed.
8. Building marker. Building markers shall be cut into masonry or made of bronze or other permanent material. There shall be a maximum of one
building marker for each building on a zoning lot. No building marker shall exceed four (4) square feet.
9. Political signs. The following rules apply to signs identifying a political candidate, party or issue subject to an upcoming election.
a. Political signs shall not be attached to fences, trees, utility poles or light poles, similar structures or placed within public right-of-way. Such signs
shall not be erected within sight vision triangle areas where safety concerns exist.
b. Political signs shall not be erected until forty five (45) days prior to the subject elections.
c. Political signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the election.
10. Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be regulated as follows:
a. No more than one sign identifying property for sale, rent or lease shall be installed per street frontage.
b. Real estate signs shall not be illuminated.
c. Real estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after a closing, sale, rental or lease.
11. Traffic, Municipal or emergency signs. Traffic or Municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and such temporary emergency or
non-advertising signs designed for public safety or convenience that are either installed by the Village of Antioch or the Illinois Department of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 436/525
Transportation or a designated agent or approved by the Village Administrator or Community Development Director.
12. Window signs. Window signs posted in public view shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of each window or surface area through which or on
which they are seen. Window signs shall not require a temporary permit.
13. Signs posted on the sides of vehicles, either permanently or temporarily. The vehicle shall be licensed, insured and operational and shall be used
for the regular operation of the occupant's activity at the premises where the vehicle is located. A vehicle shall not be used as temporary or
permanent sign at a business and the parking of a vehicle with commercial signage should be limited in duration and oriented away from the public
right-of-way. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-4: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
A. The following signs or specific locations are expressly prohibited:
1. Attention getting devices - other than temporary flutter flags (maximum 3) which have been approved by the Community Development Director for
special promotional events. Attention getting signs include inflatables, balloons, snipe signs, pennants, streamers.
2. Inflatable signs located in the Antioch Downtown Sign District.
3. Billboards or other large outdoor advertising devices.
4. Illustrated window signs that exceed thirty five percent (35%) of window, such as sale, or going out business signs.
5. Off-site directional signs, other than residential marketing for developments in excess of fifty (50) homes.
6. Sidewalk signs located outside the Antioch Downtown Sign District.
7. Signs that advertise home occupations.
8. Signs which move or assume a non-stationary position by mechanical means except as otherwise permitted under these regulations or authorized
by Village, or under normal wind current, except flags and banners as regulated herein.
9. Snipe signs.
10. A-frame signs, except for sandwich boards as permitted in the Antioch Downtown Sign District.
11. Portable trailer signs.
12. Parking of advertising vehicles. No person shall park any non-operational vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way or public property or on private
property so as to be visible from public right-of-way which has attached thereto or located therein any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose
of providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property or any other premises.
13. Signs that incorporate animation.
14. Back lit awnings/canopies.
15. Painted wall graphics (other than approved murals or artwork).
16. Neon tube lighting or LED lighting outlining a building, structure or window.
17. Pylon signs.
18. Flashing open signs or scrolling message signs located within interior windows.
19. Any sign that is not professionally fabricated.
20. Flutter flags located on public sidewalks or public right-of-way. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-5: REMOVAL/ENFORCEMENT:
A. All prohibited signs and illegal signs must be removed within ten (10) days after notification from the Community Development Department.
B. All non-conforming signs that constitute a safety issue or are otherwise in general violation of Village ordinance are subject to removal by Public Works,
Code Enforcement or the Police Department.
C. All non-conforming signs legally existing on the date of this chapter shall be required to be removed or modified to conform to this chapter only when:
1. The building or store becomes vacant, non-conforming signage shall be removed or brought into conformance with these regulations within thirty
(30) days of the vacancy of the subject site or tenant space.
2. The use of the property or store space within building changes.
3. The sign is damaged or remodeled for over fifty percent (50%) of its costs value; or
4. The sign was not legally in compliance with the previous ordinance.
D. Non-conforming signs may not be enlarged or replaced in their entirety but may be modified to more closely meet current sign regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 437/525
E. Signs placed within public right-of-way without approval shall be subject to immediate removal without prior notice to owner. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-6: PERMANENT SIGNAGE:
A. Residential Subdivision Signs: Subdivision developments shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:
1. Locations: Subdivision signs are permitted in easements or landscape outlots specifically designed for signage. No more than one structure per
corner at the entrance shall be permitted. No sign shall be permitted within the vision triangle.
2. Size: Subdivision signs are limited to a maximum sign face of twenty (20) square feet. The sign face shall only contain the name of the subdivision
and the sign structure shall not incorporate a height higher than six feet (6') measured from grade.
3. Materials: The structure may be only constructed of the following materials: brick, stone or other masonry materials, redwood, cedar or other quality
hardwoods as deemed appropriate by Village staff. Lettering, ornaments or other graphics on the structure shall be constructed with stone, wrought
iron, anodized aluminum or engraved into a quality hardwood like redwood or cedar.
4. Landscaping: The area around any subdivision sign shall incorporate extensive landscaping that provides seasonal color all year around. Any plan
shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Department.
5. Declaration Of Covenants/Easements: There shall be prepared, enacted and recorded a declaration of covenants/easements. There shall be
prepared, enacted and recorded a declaration to run with the land of the subdivision of which the easement is a part, which will minimally state:
a. Homeowners' Association: Provide for the organization of a homeowner's association which shall assess sufficient dues to provide for
maintenance of the easement and structure.
b. Maintenance: Provide for the continued maintenance of the easement and structure.
c. Demolition: The covenants shall provide that the Village has the right, but not the obligation, to enter upon the easement from an adjoining public
street and demolish the structure if in the sole determination of the Village the structure is not properly maintained.
d. Name Duplication: Signage proposed for any residential subdivision shall not duplicate or mimic any existing subdivision name within the Village of
Antioch planning boundaries. Similar sounding or similarly spelled names may be denied by the Community Development Department.
e. Illumination: All subdivision signs shall incorporate external illumination or backlit lighting.
B. Ground Signs: Permanent ground signs shall be regulated as follows unless indicated:
1. Number:
a. Only one monument sign shall be permitted per lot and monument signs shall not be located within thirty feet (30') of another monument sign.
b. Commercial lots shall be permitted one menu board per drive-thru. Menu boards shall be limited to thirty (30) square feet using the same materials
as the main monument sign on the subject commercial lot.
2. Size And Style:
a. Permanent ground signs shall be designed in a monument style and shall incorporate a height that does not exceed eight feet (8') in height and a
maximum square footage of forty (40) square feet. In no case shall a monument sign encroach within ten feet (10') of the right-of-way outside the
Downtown Sign District.
3. Design:
a. All monument signs shall incorporate opaque background cabinets and only the lettering and business logo shall be permitted to be illuminated.
Copy area shall be comprised of routed or raised individual channel copy (face lit or halo lit) affixed to opaque background, or sandblasted
signage. No internally illuminated cabinets shall be allowed unless approved as part of site plan review approval.
b. All monument signs shall incorporate uniform opaque background cabinets with business lettering and logo. Internally lighted cabinets are
prohibited and backlit lighting or raised lettering is required.
c. Permanent monument signs shall incorporate bases with a minimum height of three feet (3') and decorative columns and caps are required to be
incorporated into the design of the monument sign.
d. Commercial planned developments that incorporate more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall be permitted one monument
sign with a maximum height of ten feet (10') and a maximum of forty eight (48) square feet.
4. Landscaping: All monument signs shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) square feet of landscaping for each square foot of graphic area. The
landscaping shall contain living landscaping including shrubs, perennial groundcover or any combination thereof. Trees that have any potential of
obstructing the sign should be avoided.
C. Wall Signs: The following regulations pertain to the design, location and size for all commercial wall signs located on any building elevation:
1. Number: Only one permanent wall sign per building or retail unit of a building will be permitted except for a corner location or locations adjoining a
private street where one wall sign for each wall facing the public or private street will be permitted. Any retail unit located on a corner shall have a
maximum of three (3) wall signs including the sign on the rear facade.
2. Rear: One rear sign per building or per unit shall be permitted on any commercial building that backs up to an internal commercial street. However,
rear signage on the rear of a commercial building that backs up to a residential development shall be prohibited. Rear signs shall be limited to a
maximum of twenty (20) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 438/525
3. Maximum Surface Area: Where allowed, the maximum surface area for all wall graphics on each building face or occupant space for each different
street frontage shall not exceed one square foot of signage for each linear foot of building facade or occupant space on which the wall graphics and
integral roof graphics are maintained, nor the following maximums for surface area, whichever is less:
Permanent wall signage for buildings or units that do not exceed forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall not exceed one square foot sign area for
each one foot (1') of facade frontage and no wall sign shall come closer than five feet (5') from the edge of the facade. Wall signs shall not exceed
eighty (80) square feet.
Permanent wall signage for buildings or retail units between forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall not exceed
one and a half (11/2) square feet for every one foot (1') of frontage, in no case shall any wall sign exceed four hundred (400) square feet in area.
Permanent wall signage for buildings or retail units over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet shall not exceed two (2) square feet for every
one foot (1') of frontage, in no case shall any wall sign exceed six hundred (600) square feet in area.
4. Illumination: Internal, external or backlit illumination shall be permitted.
5. Box Signs: Box signs shall be prohibited.
D. Window Signs:
1. Non-residential zoning districts, outside Downtown Antioch Sign District: The total square footage of all window signs permanently affixed to a
window shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the total window area on any street frontage. Permanently affixed window signage in excess of
thirty five percent (35%) shall be considered wall signs and be subject to all requirements applicable to wall signage. Window signs shall not require
a temporary permit. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-7: WINDOW PROMOTIONAL SIGNAGE:
Non-residential zoning districts, outside the Downtown Antioch Sign District: The total square footage of any temporary promotional window signage shall
be limited to thirty five percent (35%) of the total window area on any street frontage. Promotional window signage in excess of thirty five percent (35%) of
the total window signage shall be prohibited. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-8: ANTIOCH'S DOWNTOWN SIGN DISTRICT:
In view of the unique character of Downtown Antioch, a special sign district has been created and shall be known as the "Antioch Downtown Sign District".
The subject area corresponds with the Village's Form Based Code for the downtown (VC, TC, MT Zoning Districts only) and is made up of development
that reflects a more traditional development pattern. The area further promotes good pedestrian traffic and any signage within this district should be
sensitive to this factor.
A. Requirements:
1. All signs must be reviewed by the Community Development Department and receive approval by the department.
2. All signs within this district must be designed to integrate into the character of the district. The size, color and placement of each sign must be
compatible with the character of the downtown and shall not obscure or interfere with any distinctive architectural elements of the building or
elements of the streetscape.
3. Either one ground sign or one wall sign along with one projecting sign per building or store front shall be permitted.
4. External illumination or backlit lighting of individual lettering shall be permitted only. Any internal illumination, raceway, and box signs shall be
prohibited. All illumination shall be designed to be unobtrusive and discrete.
B. Ground Signs:
1. The Downtown Sign District shall limit ground signs to a maximum height of four feet (4') and twenty (20) square feet. Wood pole hanging signs can
incorporate a maximum height of six feet (6'). All ground signs shall be sand blasted wood, HDU (high density urethane) board signs or face brick
and any internal illumination of ground signage shall be prohibited. Backlit lighting shall be permitted.
C. Wall Signage: Wall signs shall be limited to one square foot for each linear foot of store frontage. All wall signs shall be fabricated out of wood
sandblasted signs with projecting or indented lettering or alternatively HDU board with projecting letter. All exterior wall signage shall incorporate
exterior lighting and any internal cabinets, box signs, raceway, or internally illuminated signage shall be prohibited. Rear signage in the Downtown
District shall be permitted and regulated to one square foot per linear store frontage in the rear.
D. Projecting Signs:
1. Projecting signs shall not be larger than twelve (12) square feet in area and not more than four feet (4') along any exterior dimensions.
2. Any projecting sign shall not project more than six feet (6') from the building.
3. No part of any projecting sign shall be lower than nine feet (9') or higher than thirteen feet (13') from the ground level, as measured from its lowest
point.
All projecting signs shall be sandblasted wood, HDU board, or fabricated metal. They shall not be internally illuminated and any external lighting
(goose neck lighting) shall be discrete.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 439/525
E. Awnings And Canopies: All awnings or canopies in the Antioch Downtown Sign District shall be fabric and any backlit lighting shall be prohibited. The
only signage that will be permitted on an awning in the Antioch Downtown District shall be limited to a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the
awning face or flap. Any signage incorporated on the vertical flap shall be included in the overall wall signage limit within the Antioch Downtown Sign
District.
F. Window Signage: The following regulations shall regulate the incorporation of window signage in the Antioch Downtown Sign District:
1. Grand opening and store closing signage shall be limited to a period of ninety (90) days and shall not take up more than thirty five percent (35%) of
the storefront windows.
2. Special event, seasonal or special sales signage shall be permitted as long as they do not take up more than fifty percent (50%) of the store front
windows. Seasonal window signage should be changed every sixty (60) days and signage for sales should be changed every thirty (30) days.
Seasonal or special sales signage should be professionally fabricated.
3. Window signage or lettering in store front windows shall be permitted and shall not be considered wall signage as long as the signage or lettering is
twenty five percent (25%) or below of the total of the store front glass display. Individual illuminated signs advertising individual products or
advertising store hours shall be permitted. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-9: AWNING/CANOPIES:
Outside the Antioch Downtown Sign District, awnings or canopies shall be permitted in addition to wall signage. A maximum of one sign per awning or
canopy shall be allowed on each vertical awning/canopy surface. Awning/canopy signage shall be limited to awnings on windows and doors of businesses
located on the first floor. Any awning/canopy signage shall be located entirely within the vertical marquee surface. The surface area of an awning sign shall
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the awning face or flap on which it is located. An awning graphic shall only be allowed in business and
manufacturing districts. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-10: MULTI-FAMILY SIGNAGE:
A. Multi-family development that incorporate less than fifty (50) units shall be permitted one sign incorporating a maximum height of ten feet (10') and thirty
two (32) square feet. All multi-family signs shall be constructed in a monument style and should be constructed out of brick, stone or wood. All multifamily
signage shall incorporate foundation planting providing all year seasonal color.
B. Multi-family developments that exceed fifty (50) units shall be permitted one sign with a maximum height of ten feet (10') and forty eight (48) square
feet. All multi-family signs shall be constructed in monument style and constructed out of brick, stone or wood. All multi-family signage shall incorporate
foundation plantings providing all year seasonal color. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-11: INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS PARK:
A. Industrial uses shall be allowed one sign per lot with a maximum height of eight feet (8') and thirty four (34) square feet sign face. All industrial signs
shall be monument style and incorporate brick or stone bases. Columns and sign caps are encouraged. Foundation plantings providing all year
seasonal color shall be required for all industrial signs.
B. Industrial/business parks shall be permitted an entrance sign at the main entrance into the development with a maximum height of ten feet (10') and a
maximum sign face of forty eight (48) square feet. All signs shall be designed in a monument style with a brick or stone base. Extensive foundation
plantings shall be incorporated providing all year seasonal color. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-12: INSTITUTIONAL USES (GOVERNMENT, SCHOOLS, PARKS AND CHURCHES):
A. Institutional uses shall be permitted one sign that shall incorporate a maximum height of six feet (6') and maximum square footage of twenty four (24)
square feet. All institutional signs shall incorporate a monument sign design and shall incorporate a brick or stone base. Additionally, in lieu of
monument signs, sand blasted wood signs shall also be permitted for institutional uses with a maximum height of six feet (6') and a sign face of twenty
(20) square feet. Only external illumination shall be permitted. Parks shall be permitted to use an all sandblasted wood design. All institutional signage
shall incorporate extensive foundation plantings that incorporate seasonal color all year around. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-13: RESTRICTIONS OF SIGNAGE:
Permanent ground signs in residential districts are prohibited in all instances except for subdivision signs, multi-family signs, real estate signs, garage sale
signs and other uses such as churches, schools, governmental facilities, permitted business uses and any other signage allowed under a special use.
Home occupation signage shall be prohibited. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-14: ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARDS:
A. The following signs shall be permitted in commercial districts only, excluding the Antioch Downtown Sign District (VC, TC, MT Zoning Districts only).
Civic EMB shall be permitted in the Downtown Sign District.
1. Special Use Permit: The following sign types may be permitted subject to the issuance of a special use permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 440/525
a. Electronic message board signs (EMB).
2. Number Permitted: One electronic message board (EMB) sign may be permitted for zoning lots within the identified overlay districts meeting the
following criteria:
a. Minimum Width: The property to which an EMB may be permitted must have a minimum of one hundred (100) linear feet of property fronting
Route 173; Route 83, south of 173; and Route 59, south of Route 173.
b. Minimum Area: The property to which an EMB may be permitted must have a minimum of one acre of total lot area.
3. Maximum Gross Surface Area: The maximum gross surface area of any EMB shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of any sign face.
4. Minimum Required Setback: The EMB sign shall meet the minimum setback required for business signs based on the underlying zoning districts to
which the property is located.
5. Minimum Design Standards: The EMB sign shall meet all of the following design conditions:
a. The EMB unit must be equipped with both a programmed dimming sequence as well as an additional overriding mechanical photocell that adjusts
the brightness of the display to the ambient light at all times of the day. Such programming and mechanical equipment shall be set so that the
EMB, at night or in overcast conditions, will be no more than forty percent (40%) of the daytime brightness level.
b. All EMB must incorporate a solid black background at all times and only white or red lettering shall be permitted. No moving graphics, other than
text, shall be permitted and no color advertising or color pictures shall be permitted on the sign.
c. The EMB unit must be extinguished at the close of business to which the EMB relates, or for any business to which the business hours extend
beyond, the EMB unit must be extinguished by two o'clock (2:00) A.M. This restriction shall apply regardless of the location of the EMB on the
property.
d. The EMB unit must have the "flash" feature disabled and messages shall have a ten (10) second "hold" time except for time and temperature
messaging which may have a shorter duration, but no less than four (4) seconds. No single message may be repeated more than once every forty
(40) seconds.
e. The images and/or messages displayed on the EMB may only transition from one message and/or image to another by either fading or dissolving
to another message or image appearing immediately thereafter, without movement or other transitions effects between images and/or messages.
f. Except as otherwise provided herein, all images and/or messages displayed on the EMB must be static and may not reflect movement, flashing,
scrolling or changes in shape or size of images or portions of images. Streaming and/or live time video may not be displayed and this function of
the EMB must be disabled.
g. No sign shall have more than one sign face except only a freestanding sign or a marquee sign, which may have not more than two (2) sign faces.
Freestanding signs with more than one sign face must be designed to have sign faces attached back to back to the support structure. No V-shape
freestanding signs shall be permitted in the Village of Antioch.
h. The EMB unit shall otherwise comply with all other provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to the prohibition against off-premises
advertising signs.
i. All EMB signs shall comply with the Village's monument sign requirements and shall be constructed in a monument style design and incorporate a
brick or stone base, side columns of brick or stone on both sides of the sign along with a cap on top of the sign. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-15: TEMPORARY SIGNAGE:
Temporary signage must satisfy all other sign ordinance requirements in addition to the following:
A. Temporary signs, other than window signage, shall require a temporary sign permit.
B. Only one per lot at any one time unless otherwise allowed or indicated.
C. Any temporary sign must be safely anchored to the ground or building.
D. Electrical illumination is prohibited in residential districts (except for temporary subdivision project signs).
E. All temporary signs, other than window signage, shall be limited to thirty (30) days and limited to a maximum of four (4) such periods per year or a total
of one hundred twenty (120) days.
F. Temporary signage must be located on the premises of the permit holder unless otherwise indicated or allowed pursuant to this chapter or to the permit
application.
G. All temporary signs are limited to a maximum square footage of twenty four (24) square feet or if a window sign a maximum of thirty five percent (35%)
of the total window.
H. All temporary signs must be professionally fabricated by a sign maker and shall incorporate a vinyl or metal sign face with a metal frame. The use of
plywood, sheets and cardboard is prohibited. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 441/525
10-14-16: GRAND OPENING SIGNAGE, CLOSING SIGNS AND SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS:
A. Grand opening signage shall be regulated as follows:
1. The grand opening period shall mean the forty five (45) day period immediately after the opening of a new business or the reopening of a business
which has been closed for a period of forty five (45) consecutive days.
2. Grand opening signs shall be permitted for a maximum of thirty (30) days and the thirty (30) days shall be consecutive. Closing signs shall be limited
to forty eight (48) square feet and to a maximum period of sixty (60) days from date of issuance of sign permit.
3. The following grand opening signs shall be permitted:
a. One temporary ground sign not to exceed forty eight (48) square feet, or
b. One banner not to exceed forty eight (48) square feet.
c. Pennant flags or streamers.
Only temporary window banners shall be permitted in the Antioch Downtown Sign District.
B. Special event signs shall be erected and maintained for a period of time as approved by the Village and shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours
of the end of the event. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-17: SIDEWALK SIGNS:
A. Sidewalk signs (sandwich board style) shall only be allowed in the Antioch Downtown Sign District.
B. The sign shall be limited to a height of four feet (4') and a maximum of twelve (12) square feet.
C. A sidewalk sign may be located partially or entirely on a sidewalk within a public right-of-way adjacent to the building or occupant space. A minimum of
a five foot (5') section of the public right-of-way shall remain unobstructed at all times.
D. All sidewalk signs shall be professionally fabricated and maintained in good condition. Sign graphics shall be of an A-frame (sandwich board) design,
comprised of a finished wood or metal frame and properly weighted so as not to create a windblown hazard.
E. Sidewalk signs shall not be illuminated.
F. Sidewalk signs shall be limited from the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to end of business hours unless otherwise approved by the Community
Development Department.
G. Sidewalk signs shall be removed by the owners during times of inclement weather. During a snow event, no signs shall be placed on the sidewalk or
placed on snow piles. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-18: NON-CONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Change And Modification: A nonconforming sign or street sign shall be brought into conformity with this chapter if it is altered, reconstructed, replaced
or relocated. A change in copy is not an alteration or replacement for the purposes of this subsection.
B. Maintenance: Nonconforming signs must be maintained in good condition in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Maintenance required by this
subsection shall include replacing or repairing of worn or damaged parts of street signs or sign structures in order to return it to its original state.
C. Removal: Removal of a nonconforming street graphic or replacement of a nonconforming street graphic with a conforming street graphic is required
when:
1. Destruction, Removal, Or Alteration: A nonconforming street sign is destroyed or for any other reason taken down or altered. As used in this section,
substantial means fifty percent (50%) or more of entire street structure, or
2. Development Permit: Any development permit or site plan review related to a building expansion of twenty five percent (25%) or more, shall require
all nonconforming street signs on the premises for which the development permit or site plan review is required to be brought into conformity with
provisions of this chapter.
D. Loss Of Non-Conforming Status: A designated nonconforming street sign shall immediately lose its nonconformity if:
1. The existing structure of the street sign is altered in any way, including, but not limited to its height, width, surface area, illumination or sign face.
2. The designated nonconforming street sign is relocated or repositioned to a location other than that which it was identified or originally approved for.
3. The designated nonconforming street sign is replaced, including sign face or any re-imaging.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 442/525
E. Designated Nonconforming Street Sign Maintenance: Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner of any designated nonconforming street sign with
the obligation to maintain and repair the nonconforming sign. The replacement of existing panels or cleaning of panels shall not modify the designated
nonconforming sign status. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-19: SIGN APPLICATIONS:
A. Application Contents: Any person proposing to erect or display a sign as identified in this chapter shall file an application for a permit with the
Community Development Department. The application shall include the following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the sign contractor and the owner and occupant of the premises where the street sign is to be erected
or displayed; the date that it will be erected; along with the zoning district and the area of special restrictions, if any, in which it is located; and any
variance that has been approved.
2. A drawing to scale that shows:
a. The location, height and size of any proposed street graphics including property boundaries and any easement that may be over the property.
b. The electrical and illumination plans if the proposed sign will be illuminated.
c. A landscape plan for monument signs showing the plantings, and number of plants, ground cover and names of any seasonal perennials or
flowers.
B. Approval Or Denial: The Community Development Director shall approve a permit for the street graphic if it complies with the Building, Electrical or
other adopted codes of the Village and with:
1. The regulation for street signs contained in this chapter and any other variance that has been granted from these regulations; and
2. Any special regulations that have been adopted for an area of special character; and
3. Any program for graphics that has been approved under this chapter. If the Community Development Director does not approve a permit for a street
sign, the Community Development Director will state the reasons for the denial, if requested, by the applicant in writing. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
10-14-20: DEFINITIONS:
A-FRAMED GRAPHIC: A temporary graphic that is placed upon, but not generally mounted to, the ground. It is a double sided graphic connected at the
top and separated at the bottom.
ACTIVITY: An individual tenant, business, or other establishment.
ANIMATION OR ANIMATED: (See also definition of changeable copy.) The movement or the optical illusion of movement of any part of the street graphic
structure, design, or pictorial segment, including the movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity; the automatic changing of all
or any part of the facing of a street graphic.
ARCHITECTURAL DETAIL: Any projection, relief, cornice, column, change of building material, window, or door opening on any building.
AWNING: A cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that either is permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position
against the building when not in use.
BANNER: A graphic composed of a logo or design on a lightweight material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted to
allow motion caused by the atmosphere.
BARE BULB ILLUMINATION: Exposed or uncovered lighting elements found on a graphic, for example, light bulbs without cover.
BUILDING: A structure designed and intended to shelter persons or personal property, and where the interior areas of such a structure are accessible to
persons.
CANOPY GRAPHIC: A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal, or other material with frames affixed to a building.
CHANGEABLE COPY: Copy within a street graphic that is designed and intended to be manually changed.
COMMERCIAL GRAPHIC: A street graphic which identifies, advertises, or directs attention to a commercial or institutional structure or business, or is
intended to induce the purchase of goods, property, or service; including, but not limited to, a graphic naming a brand of goods or service and real estate
graphics.
DIRECTIONAL GRAPHIC: A street graphic located in such a manner as to direct the flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and does not contain
commercial message.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE GRAPHIC: A street graphic capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, or images that can be electronically changed by
remote or automatic means. The following terms for such electronic message graphics shall be defined as follows:
Dissolve: Graphics where static messages are changed by means of varying light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to
dissipate and lose legibility simultaneous to the gradual appearance and legibility of the subsequent message.
Fade: Graphics where static messages are changed by means of varying light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the
point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 443/525
Scrolling: Graphics where the message is changed by the apparent vertical movement of letters or graphic elements of the message.
Static: Graphics having no motion.
Text: Graphics consisting of letters or words only that do not include any animation, effects simulating animation or video.
Travel: Graphics where the message is changed by the apparent horizontal movement of the letters or graphic elements of the message.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Illumination of a graphic that is affected by an artificial source of light not contained within the graphic itself.
FLAG: A piece of cloth or similar material, typically oblong or square, attachable by one edge to a pole or rope.
FLASHING GRAPHIC: A graphic which contains an intermittent or flashing light source or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by
means of animation or an externally mounted light source.
FLASHING ILLUMINATION: Illumination in which the artificial source of light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when
a street graphic is illuminated, including illuminated lighting.
FORM BASED OVERLAY: An area that contains unique architectural, historic, or scenic characteristics that require special regulations to ensure that
street graphics displayed within the area enhance its visual character and are compatible with it.
GRAPHIC: A "street graphic", as defined by this chapter. The terms "graphic" and "sign" are used interchangeably in this chapter and this title.
GROUND GRAPHIC: A street graphic supported by one or more uprights or bases placed upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to any part of a
building. The term "ground graphic" includes a "monument graphic".
HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from grade at the edge of the adjacent right-of-way to the highest point of the street graphic.
ILLUMINATION OR ILLUMINATED: A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly from a source of light incorporated in, or indirectly from an
artificial source, so shielded that no direct illumination from it is visible elsewhere than on and in the immediate vicinity of the street graphic.
INDIRECT ILLUMINATION: A source of external illumination, located away from the graphic, that lights the graphic, but which is itself not visible to
persons viewing the graphic from any street, sidewalk or adjacent property.
INFLATABLE GRAPHIC: A sign or advertising device designed to be airborne and tethered to the ground or any other structure and shall include balloons
and any other inflatable attention getting device.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION: A light source that is concealed or contained within the street graphic and becomes visible in darkness through a translucent
surface.
MARQUEE: A permanent structure other than a roof attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building and providing protection from the elements.
MARQUEE GRAPHIC: A street graphic that is a part of or attached to a marquee. A marquee graphic shall be considered a "wall graphic".
MONUMENT GRAPHIC: A graphic which is completely or principally supported by a short wall typically constructed of masonry material which is a
minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the width of the graphic, and is not attached to the principal building on the property, and is permanently anchored in
or upon the ground.
NEON: A source of light for externally lit street graphics supplied by a neon tube that is bent to form letters, symbols, or other shapes.
NONCOMMERCIAL STREET GRAPHIC: A street graphic not identifying, advertising or directing attention to a commercial or institutional structure or
business, or not intended to induce the purchase of goods, property, or service.
NONCONFORMING STREET GRAPHIC: A street graphic that was lawfully constructed or installed prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter and
was in compliance with all of the provisions and other applicable requirements of law then in effect, but which does not presently comply with this chapter
and other applicable requirements of law.
OFF PREMISES STREET GRAPHICS: A street graphic that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or
offered at a location other than the premises on which the street graphic is located, including, but not limited to, graphics commonly referred to as
billboards.
PAINTED WALL GRAPHIC: A graphic which is painted directly upon a wall or building and which includes no other attachments or appurtenances to such
building.
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
POLE GRAPHIC: A freestanding street graphic that is permanently supported in a fixed location by a structure of poles, uprights, or braces from the
ground and not supported by a building or a base structure.
PORTABLE STREET GRAPHIC: A street graphic not permanently attached to the ground or a building or designed to be permanently attached to the
ground or a building. The term "portable street graphic" shall not include an "A-frame graphic".
PREMISES: The lot or lots, plots, portions, or parcels of land considered as a unit for a single use or development, whether owned or leased.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A detached and enclosed structure, occupied or constructed for occupancy, which by virtue of its size or use, is the primary user
of a zone lot. There shall be one principal use per zone lot.
PROJECTING GRAPHIC: A wall graphic affixed to a building and that extends beyond the line of such building wall or beyond the surface of that portion of
the building wall to which it is affixed by more than twelve inches (12").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 444/525
ROOF GRAPHIC: Any street graphic erected or constructed in whole or in part on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, or
extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF GRAPHIC, INTEGRAL: See definition of integral roof graphic.
SHOPPING CENTER: A commercial development under unified control consisting of four (4) or more separate commercial establishments sharing a
common building, or which are in separate buildings that share a common entranceway and parking area.
STREET FRONTAGE: That portion of a zoning lot or premises that is coterminous with a public right-of-way or a private street.
STREET GRAPHIC: A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display designed to identify, announce, direct, or inform that is visible
from a public or private right-of-way. The term "street graphic" includes, but is not limited to, banners, pennants, streamers, moving mechanisms, and
lights. The terms "street graphic" and "sign" are used interchangeably in this chapter and this title.
STRUCTURE: Anything manufactured, constructed, or composed of parts joined in some definite manner that requires a location on the ground or that is
attached to something that has a location on the ground. Structures shall include, but shall not be limited to, buildings, antennas, signs, street graphics,
and fences.
SUBDIVISION ENTRANCE GRAPHIC: A permanently mounted street graphic located at the major entrances of a subdivision or planned development.
SUSPENDED GRAPHIC: A graphic suspended from the underside of the horizontal plane surface of a canopy, cantilever, or marquee, and that is
supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY STREET GRAPHIC: A street graphic attached to the ground or a building for a limited period of time.
TEMPORARY WINDOW GRAPHIC: A window graphic displayed for a limited period of time.
WALL GRAPHIC: A graphic attached directly to an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a building for support, with the exposed face of the
graphic located in a place substantially parallel to the exterior building wall to which the graphic is attached or which supports the graphic.
WINDOW GRAPHIC: A street graphic applied, painted or affixed to or in the window of a building. A window graphic may be temporary or permanent.
ZONING LOT: A plot of ground made up of one or more parcels which is, or may be, occupied by a use, building or buildings, including the open spaces
required by this title. (Ord. 17-06-20, 6-12-2017)
Chapter 15
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10-15-1: ENFORCING OFFICER:
The director of planning, building and zoning is designated as the zoning administration to be responsible for enforcing this title. The director of planning,
building and zoning shall have the power and shall see that the provisions of this title are properly enforced. (1976 Code § 150.015; amd. Ord. 09-12-44,
12-21-2009)
10-15-2: PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES:
A. Compliance With Zoning Required: No application for a building permit or other permit or license or for a certificate of occupancy shall be approved by
the administrative officer of this title, and no permit or license shall be issued by any other village department which would authorize the use or change
in use of any land or building contrary to the provisions of this title or the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any building
designed or intended to be used for a purpose, or in a manner contrary to, the provisions of this title. (1976 Code § 150.005; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-
21-2009)
B. Building Permits:
1. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered until a building permit shall be issued by the director of planning, building
and zoning, stating that the building or structure, and use of land, complies with the regulations of this title and all building and health laws and
ordinances of the village.
2. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot or lots to be
built upon, the size of the building or structure to be erected or structurally altered, its location on the lot or lots, and such other information as may be
necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A careful record of these applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the
director of planning, building and zoning.
C. Certificate Of Compliance:
1. No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied and used until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the
director of planning, building and zoning. The certificate of compliance shall be issued only after the director makes a finding that the building or
structure has been erected or structurally altered in conformance with the provisions of this title and other health and building laws and in accordance
with the building permit.
2. Certificates of compliance shall be applied for coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after
the erection and alteration of the building has been satisfactorily completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the director
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 445/525
of planning, building and zoning and copies shall be furnished on request to any persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
affected.
3. Certificates for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses existing at the time of the passage of this title shall be issued by the director of
planning, building and zoning and the certificate shall state that the use is a nonconforming one and does not conform with the provisions of this title.
The director of planning, building and zoning shall notify the owners of property being used as nonconforming use and shall furnish said owner with a
certificate of occupancy for the nonconforming use.
D. Change In Use: No change shall be made in the use of a building or part thereof now or hereafter erected or structurally altered or in the use of land
now or hereafter occupied, without a use permit having first been issued by the director of planning, building and zoning. No use permit shall be issued
to make such change unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this title and amendments hereto hereafter duly enacted.
E. Continuance Of Existing Uses: Nothing in this section shall prevent the continuance of the present occupancy or lawful use of any existing building or
zoning lot except as may be necessary for the safety of life and property, and except as provided in section 10-1-3 of this title. (1976 Code § 150.016;
amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
10-15-3: FEES:
See section 13-1-8 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
10-15-4: AMENDMENTS:
A. Petition For Amendment: The village board of trustees, the plan commission, the zoning board of appeals, other governmental boards and any private
petitioner may apply for an amendment in the text of this title, and in the accompanying zoning district map made a part of this title. Application for
amendment shall be made upon forms provided by the zoning board of appeals. Any petition for an amendment by a private party shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee as established by the village board of trustees1, which fee shall be deposited with the village clerk a
minimum of twenty eight (28) days prior to a public hearing on the amendment proposal.
1. Required Submittals: All petitions for amending the zoning on a specific parcel shall be accompanied by twenty five (25) copies of the following
documentation, all but statutory requirements may be waived for specified just cause by the village administrator or the director of planning, building
and zoning. The petition and all supporting documentation shall be prepared in English. Landscaping plans shall include both the scientific Latin
names as well as the common English names of plant species. (Ord. 06-05-16, 5-15-2006; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
a. Certified plat of survey, of recent vintage which accurately depicts any existing improvements on the site.
b. Economic impact study, indicating the impacts on the tax base; local government service demands, for commercial and industrial developments;
and valuation of the subject property and those properties situated within two hundred feet (200') of the subject property.
c. Illustrative site plan, prepared by a registered architect or engineer, at a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), with one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') being preferable. The name, address, phone number, fax number and professional affiliation of the person preparing
the plan shall be clearly indicated on the plan.
d. Typical architectural elevations, prepared at a minimum scale of one-sixteenth inch equals one foot (1/16" = 1') for all proposed buildings. The
name, address, phone number, fax number and professional affiliation of the person preparing the elevations shall be clearly indicated on the
drawing.
e. Reports, or at a minimum applications for reports, from those agencies required by state statute to review local zoning petitions and development
requests. These agencies include, but are not necessarily limited to, the Illinois department of natural resources, pursuant to the endangered
species act2 and the Lake County soil and water conservation district3.
f. For proposed uses that would, in the opinion of the village engineer, generate traffic in excess of one hundred (100) vehicles per day, average daily
traffic or ADT, a traffic impact report shall be required. Such report shall include an analysis and recommendations from a registered professional
engineer or civil engineer who is a member of the institute of traffic engineers.
2. Site Visit: Executed petitions for amendment, special use and special use planned development, grant the village staff and officials and their
consultants with permission to enter onto the property to make a physical inspection. The purpose of the site visit shall be to further understand the
proposed layout of the roads, public utility easements, public buildings, entryways and other public improvements and to further understand the
topography of the property for the purpose of preserving the natural setting of the development, including trees, waterways, ponds, sloughs and the
like. (Ord. 00-06-12, 6-5-2000; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
B. Petition Process:
1. Filing And Processing Of Petitions: An application and supporting documentation for any relief requested under this title, including, but not limited to,
amendments, special uses, variations, planned unit developments, etc., shall be filed with the village clerk a minimum of twenty eight (28) days prior
to a public hearing on the amendment proposal. The village clerk shall transmit the application to the director of planning, building and zoning, who
shall forward the application to the combined plan commission and zoning board for their review, findings and recommendation at a public hearing
pursuant to state law and this title.
2. Successive Petitions:
a. Second Petitions Without New Grounds Barred: Whenever any petition filed pursuant to this chapter has been finally denied on its merits, a
second petition essentially seeking the same relief, whether or not in the same form or on the same theory, shall not be scheduled for public
hearing within twelve (12) months from the date of village board denial, unless, in the opinion of a majority of the village board, there is substantial
new evidence available or there is a mistake of law or fact having significantly affected the prior denial.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 446/525
b. New Grounds Stated: Any second petition filed prior to the time period indicated in subsection B2a of this section shall include a detailed
statement of the grounds justifying reconsideration of such application.
c. Summary Denial With Or Without Hearing: Any second petition filed prior to the time period indicated in subsection B2a of this section may be
denied by the village board summarily, and without hearing, on a finding that no grounds appear that warrant a new hearing. In any case where
such application is set for hearing, the applicant shall be required to establish grounds warranting reconsideration of the merits of its petition prior
to being allowed to offer any evidence on the merits. Unless such grounds are established, the application may be summarily dismissed for such
failure.
d. Complete Petition: Any second petition shall require concept plan review pursuant to section 10-9-3-1 of this title, unless specifically waived by the
village board of trustees. The petitioner shall be required to place in the record all evidence available, and the planning and zoning board shall
review the petition at a public hearing, as though no prior petition had been filed. (Ord. 02-06-15, 6-17-2002; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
3. Petitioner Responsibilities:
a. The applicant shall provide all the information required on the petition for amendment as well as any additional information that may be required by
the board to aid it in reaching a decision and making a recommendation to the village board of trustees.
b. Petitions and supporting documentation shall be submitted in the original plus as many copies as required by the zoning ordinance. The original
and copies shall be organized and fully collated in a manner such that the proposals are readily available for distribution.
c. The filing deadline for complete, organized and collated petitions with supporting documentation as required shall be four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on
the weekday which is a minimum of twenty eight (28) days prior to a regular planning and zoning board meeting date. Petitioners are encouraged
to file completed petitions and supporting documentation at the earliest possible date; due to caseload, the village staff may schedule a hearing for
a later date than that desired by the petitioner.
d. Receipt of filing fee and escrow account deposit alone does not in any way reserve a hearing date for a petitioner. Document or file numbers may
be assigned only after village staff has determined that the petition is complete and ready for public hearing.
e. The primary purpose of a public hearing is for the petitioner to formally present his proposal and be heard. Therefore, attendance by the petitioner,
and his representatives as may be required, is mandatory. Failure to appear may result in dismissal or denial of the case.
4. Staff Authority: Village staff, using their best professional discretion, has the authority to:
a. Return to the applicant, incomplete or unorganized, uncollated petitions and proposals;
b. Return to the applicant, a petition where any of the materials are unreadable;
c. Return to the petitioner any supporting documentation or technical report which bears a date or revision date which is more than twenty four (24)
months old as measured from the date of petition filing;
d. Require applicants to organize and collate their proposal materials; or schedule a hearing beyond the twenty eight (28) day period, based upon
caseload and best professional judgment and estimate that such additional agenda item would not likely begin before ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
(Ord. 06-05-16, 5-15-2006; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
C. Notice Of Public Hearings: The zoning board of appeals shall cause notice of public hearings of petitioner's application to be given in the following
manner:
1. By publishing notice of the time and place of such hearing in a paper of general circulation in the village at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing;
2. By causing said notice to contain the particular location for which the amendment is requested as well as a brief statement describing the proposed
amendment; and
3. By notifying such property owners, groups or organizations as it deems desirable of the proposal.
All applicants for a zoning amendment, zoning change, zoning variation, special use permit, planned unit development and the like shall pay an
additional fifty dollars ($50.00) to be used for the erection of a sign two feet by three feet (2' x 3') to be conspicuously displayed on the front portion of
the property being rezoned. This sign shall state in effect that the property is being rezoned, and further state that for further information parties are
to call 847-395-1000. (1976 Code § 150.097; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
D. Written Protest: In the event of written protest against the proposed amendment signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across the alley or rear line
therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to such regulations or
zoning district, filed with the village clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the members of
the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 150.098; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
E. Final Decision: The village board of trustees, without further public hearing, may adopt or deny the report of the zoning board of appeals for any
proposed amendment, or may refer the petition back to the zoning board of appeals for further consideration. Any proposed amendment which fails to
receive the approval of a majority of the zoning board of appeals members and is so reported shall not be passed by the village board of trustees
except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all elected members of the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 150.099; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-
21-2009)
10-15-5: SPECIAL USES:
The principal objective of this title is to provide for an orderly arrangement of compatible buildings and land uses, and for the proper location of all types of
uses required for the social and economic welfare of the village. To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use is classified as permitted in one or
more of the various districts established by this title. However, in addition to those uses specifically classified and permitted in each district, there are
certain additional uses which it may be necessary to allow because of their unusual characteristics or the service they provide the public. These special
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 447/525
uses require particular consideration as to their proper location in relation to adjacent established or intended uses, or to the planned development of the
community. The conditions controlling the location and operation of special uses are established by the following provisions:
A. Conditions Of Approval: The zoning board of appeals may recommend, and the village board of trustees may impose, such restrictions on the height,
bulk and area of occupancy of any structure so approved for special use as may be reasonable under the particular circumstances. Off street parking
facilities as well as off street loading and unloading spaces may also be stipulated in the order permitting the special use, and all other codes and
ordinances of the village must be complied with.
B. Procedures: The procedure to be followed in considering applications for special uses, except for planned developments, shall be as follows:
1. Application: An application verified by the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the property involved shall be filed with the village clerk for the
attention of the zoning board of appeals, upon a form therefor, which shall contain or be accompanied by all required information.
2. Review Of Petition: An application for special uses shall be filed with the village clerk and thereafter processed in the manner prescribed for
amendments.
3. Determination: The zoning board of appeals, or in the case of a planned development, the plan commission, shall then make its findings and
recommendations to the village board of trustees within thirty (30) days following the date of the public hearing on each application. The village board
of trustees may then authorize a "special use" as defined herein by specific ordinance, provided the evidence presented is such as to establish
beyond reasonable doubt:
a. That the proposed use at the particular location requested is necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the interest of
public convenience, and will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or community; and
b. That the use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property values or improvements in the vicinity; and
c. That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions specified in this title for the use, and with the stipulations and conditions
made a part of the authorization granted by the village board of trustees. (1976 Code § 150.100; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
4. Criteria For Approval Of Special Uses: The following criteria shall be applied in reviewing each application:
a. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and planned uses on abutting properties;
b. Any increase in density or intensity of the proposed use that will affect the compatibility of the use with existing and planned uses in the
surrounding area;
c. The proposed use will not change the predominant character of the surrounding area;
d. The ability to mitigate adverse and undesirable impacts to the surrounding area, including, but not limited to, visual impacts, air emissions, noise,
vibrations, glare, heat, odors, water pollution, electromagnetic interference, and other nuisance effects;
e. Amount of traffic generated and capacity and design of roadways and available parking facilities to handle anticipated traffic;
f. The effect on infrastructure including water, wastewater, stormwater, utilities, and streets;
g. The incorporation and integration of architectural and landscape features to mitigate impacts from the proposed use;
h. The village board, planning and zoning board, or planning director are authorized to consider the past performance of an applicant in their
consideration of any special use. The village board, planning and zoning board, or planning director may use as a basis for denial whether the
applicant or developer is determined to be in violation of any requirements, conditions, or representations on a prior development. (Ord. 11-09-14,
9-6-2011)
C. Required Submittals:
1. Proposed Construction: Where the special use request involves site development, new construction or substantial remodeling of an existing
structure, the special use petition shall be accompanied by twenty five (25) copies of the following documentation: (Ord. 06-05-16, 5-15-2006; amd.
Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009; Ord. 11-09-14, 9-6-2011)
a. All of the documents required for a zoning amendment, pursuant to section 10-15-4 of this chapter.
b. The proposed site plan shall include, either as an overlay or separate drawings, the graphic depiction of pertinent features of the natural
landscape. Such features include, but are not necessarily limited to: topography, floodway, floodplain, wetlands, wet soils, grouping of mature
trees, etc. The name, address, phone number, fax number and professional affiliation of the person preparing the plan shall be clearly indicated on
the plan. (Ord. 00-06-12, 6-5-2000; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009; Ord. 11-09-14, 9-6-2011)
10-15-6: VARIANCES:
A. Purpose And Intent: It is the intent of this section to use the variation only to modify the application of this title to achieve a parity among properties
similarly located and classified. Specifically, it is to be used to overcome some exceptional physical condition which poses practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship in such a way as to prevent an owner from using his property as intended by this title. (1976 Code § 150.017(D); amd. Ord. 09-
12-44, 12-21-2009)
B. Procedures:
1. Application: An application for a variation of the regulations of this title may be made by a property owner or his agent to the zoning board of appeals.
The application shall be made in writing on forms provided by the zoning board of appeals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 448/525
2. Public Hearing: The zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the public hearing and shall give notice of the time and place
of the public hearing, published at least once and not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing in one or more
newspapers with a general circulation within the village.
3. Standards For Variations: A request for a zoning variation shall be considered only upon the filing of a request for variation application with the
village clerk and the planning and zoning board. The applicant must present evidence that:
a. The proposed variation will not:
(1) Impair adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property;
(2) Unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets;
(3) Increase the danger of fire or endanger public safety;
(4) Unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area; and
(5) Merely serve as a convenience to the applicant; there is a demonstrated practical design difficulty involved in this project.
b. The requested variation does not permit a use otherwise excluded from the zoning district in which the property is located.
c. The conditions or circumstances upon which the request is based apply to the land for which the variation is sought, and is not generally
applicable in the zoning district.
d. The condition or circumstance is not the result of any action on the part of the applicant.
e. The strict application of the zoning requirement would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of his land.
f. The variation requested is the minimum adjustment needed for the reasonable use of the land.
g. The granting of the requested variation is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the zoning ordinance, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare, or in conflict with the village's comprehensive plan.
4. Petitioner Responsibilities:
a. The applicant shall provide all the information required on the request for variation application as well as any additional information that may be
required by the board to aid it in reaching a decision and making a recommendation to the village board of trustees.
b. Petitions and supporting documentation shall be submitted in the original plus as many copies as required by the zoning ordinance. The petition
and all supporting documentation shall be prepared in English. Landscaping plans shall include both the scientific Latin names as well as the
common English names of plant species. The original and copies shall be organized and fully collated in a manner such that the proposals are
readily available for distribution.
c. The filing deadline for complete, organized and collated, petitions with supporting documentation as required shall be four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on
the weekday which is a minimum of twenty eight (28) days prior to a regular planning and zoning board meeting date. Petitioners are encouraged
to file completed petitions and supporting documentation at the earliest possible date; due to caseload, the village staff may schedule a hearing for
a later date than that desired by the petitioner.
d. Receipt of filing fee and escrow account deposit alone does not in any way reserve a hearing date for a petitioner. Document or file numbers may
be assigned only after village staff has determined that the petition is complete and ready for public hearing.
e. The primary purpose of a public hearing is for the petitioner to formally present his proposal and be heard. Therefore, attendance by the petitioner,
and his representatives as may be required, is mandatory. Failure to appear may result in dismissal or denial of the case.
5. Village Staff Authority: Village staff, using their best professional discretion, has the authority to:
a. Return to the applicant, incomplete or unorganized, uncollated petitions and proposals;
b. Return to the applicant, a petition where any of the materials are unreadable;
c. Return to the petitioner any supporting documentation or technical report which bears a date or revision date which is more than twenty four (24)
months old as measured from the date of petition filing;
d. Require applicants to organize and collate their proposal materials; or schedule a hearing beyond the twenty eight (28) day period, based upon
caseload and best professional judgment and estimate that such additional agenda item would not likely begin before ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
6. Report Of Findings: The zoning board of appeals shall report its findings and recommendations to the village board of trustees within thirty (30) days
after the public hearing. (Ord. 06-05-16, 5-15-2006; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
C. Village Board Action:
1. Upon receipt of the report and recommendations from the zoning board of appeals to grant or deny the variation, the village board of trustees, by
ordinance, without further public hearing, may adopt the proposed variation or may refer it back to the zoning board of appeals for further
consideration; and any proposed variation which fails to receive the approval of the zoning board of appeals shall not be passed except by a
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the members of the village board of trustees. In making any variation, the village board of trustees shall be
governed by the same considerations and restrictions as set forth above.
2. No variation in any case shall be made by the village board of trustees without a hearing by the zoning board of appeals as required herein nor
without a report thereof having been made by the zoning board to the village board of trustees, and every report shall be accompanied by a finding of
fact specifying the reasons for the report.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 449/525
D. Change Of Zoning: Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the zoning board of appeals the power or authority to alter or change
the zoning ordinance or any use district made a part of the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the village board of trustees, and
the zoning board shall not have any power or authority with respect to any alterations or change of the zoning ordinance except to make
recommendations to the village board of trustees in specific cases as may properly come before the zoning board of appeals.
E. Expiration: Approval of any variation is subject to a time frame within which the use allowed by variation must be established. Where a new zoning lot is
created by variation, establishment of the use shall consist of transfer of title to the applicant or to subsequent purchasers. Proof of said transfer must
be submitted to the village building department within the time frames outlined below. For other variations, establishment of the use may consist of a
completed construction permit application accompanied by all required documentation. However, if a construction permit is issued, and the permit is
allowed to expire, the terms and conditions of the zoning ordinance also expire. No variation shall be given more than twenty four (24) months to take
effect from the date of village board approval by ordinance. If a specific variation ordinance does not indicate an expiration date or time, the twenty four
(24) month rule shall apply. The twenty four (24) month rule can be extended by village board action upon good cause shown. (1976 Code
§ 150.017(D); amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
10-15-7: APPEALS AND REVIEW:
A. Procedures:
1. Any person aggrieved by a ruling of the director of planning, building and zoning charged with the enforcement of this title, or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the village concerning the interpretation of this title, may take an appeal to the zoning board of appeals.
2. The zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing of appeals and shall give notice thereof to the persons appealing
and to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. It shall hear the appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearings, parties of interest may appear in
person or by agent or attorney.
3. Appeals shall be taken within thirty (30) days by the zoning board of appeals and shall be taken by filing with the village clerk and with the zoning
board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, together with such plats and exhibits as are reasonably necessary. Appeals shall
be taken upon forms provided by the zoning board of appeals. The village clerk shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed was taken.
4. The zoning board of appeals may hear appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director of planning,
building and zoning charged with enforcement of this title.
5. The zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify or amend the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from to the extent and in the manner that the board may decide to be fitting and proper in the premises, and to that end the board shall also
have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
6. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the director of planning, building and zoning or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this title
to render decisions. (1976 Code § 150.017(C); amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
B. Stay Of Proceedings: The appeal shall stay all proceedings and furtherance of the action appealed from unless the director of planning, building and
zoning certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the zoning board of appeals or by a court of record on application, with notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken,
and all due causes shown. (1976 Code § 150.018; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
10-15-8: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A. Compliance With Statute: All final administrative decisions of the zoning board of appeals under this chapter shall be subject to judicial review pursuant
to the provisions of the administrative review act of the state of Illinois4, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. The term "administrative decision" is
as defined in section 1 of the administrative review act. (1976 Code § 150.019; amd. Ord. 09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
B. Recommendations Of Planning And Zoning Board: All recommendations and findings of the planning and zoning board shall be forwarded to the village
board of trustees in a timely manner, as dictated by the appropriate procedural sections of this title and of the subdivision code and planning
commission ordinance. Such recommendations are advisory only and are not binding upon the corporate authorities. (1976 Code § 150.021; amd. Ord.
09-12-44, 12-21-2009)
10-15-9: PENALTY:
Refer to subsection 1-3-1A of this code for a schedule of fines applicable to specifically identified offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter that is not listed on the schedule set forth in subsection 1-3-1A of this code may be fined pursuant to the general penalty set forth in section 1-3-1
of this code. Each day that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10-04-07, 4-5-2010)
Chapter 16
SINGLE-FAMILY DESIGN STANDARDS
10-16-1: INTRODUCTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 450/525
10-16-1-1: INTENT:
A. The following single-family design standards are intended to ensure that the village's sense of place and character is maintained in the future. As the
village continues to grow, there continues to be a threat that the special features that have defined the village's sense of place for generations will be
lost. In order to maintain the village's character and property values, staff has created the following set of single-family design standards which will be
required of all residential builders in the future.
B. The village of Antioch will continue to be predominantly a community of single-family homes. Based on this fact, it is critical that future single-family
developments conform with the development patterns that are reflected in the village's most distinct neighborhoods. The following design standards will
require all builders to focus on incorporating certain design elements into their standard home designs. As outlined throughout this chapter, these
design elements are relatively simple and generally a small portion of the total costs of construction. They can, however, have a dramatic impact on the
overall quality of design.
C. Simple design elements as outlined below should be incorporated:
1. Front elevation wall plane should be broken up with a porch, projections, bay window, recessed garage or some other architectural design element.
2. Rooflines should be broken up with projections, recesses, dormers, varying rooflines, deep eaves along the roofline.
3. Garages should be recessed and garage doors should incorporate architectural detail and articulation. A percentage of the garages should
incorporate windows and single bays are encouraged. A maximum of one-third (1/3) of any front elevation can be a garage.
4. Projecting usable porches with a minimum of eight feet (8') in depth are encouraged on front elevations and wraparound porches are encouraged on
corner lots.
5. Balanced window placement along with good window fenestration is a design element that is required on all four (4) elevations.
6. The proper use of materials on an elevation is important. The use of too many materials or "wallpaper" application of materials should be avoided.
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-1-2: COMMUNITY CHARACTER:
A. One of the biggest challenges for community development is the need to encourage residential development and growth, while attempting to preserve
the best qualities of the village's character. Antioch for generations was defined by a vibrant downtown and a series of unique neighborhoods adjacent
to the downtown. Like most communities in the Chicago metro area, the community started to change rapidly when new subdivisions were constructed
by regional and national builders. Today, large tracts of previous farmland have been transformed into residential subdivisions.
B. With its rolling terrain, lakes, wetlands and surrounding Lake County forest preserves, Antioch has the opportunity to guide future growth in a manner
that is consistent with its moniker "authentic by nature". Through careful planning and the management of future growth, Antioch can become one of
the premier communities in northern Lake County. Based on this goal, the village is committed in establishing a series of minimum standards for all
future single-family homes in the village.
1. To avoid the potential of monotony and the creation of cookie cutter subdivisions, all builders shall incorporate the following architectural design
elements into new single-family construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 451/525
2. All future developments shall be required to submit "architectural design guidelines" or a "pattern book" showing how their proposed product
complies with the design standards.
3. Additionally, all future land plans shall comply with the standards incorporated into this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 452/525
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-1-3: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE REALM:
A. Public Realm: Recently, the importance of the public realm has often been lost in community design. The public realm is defined by what one can
observe from the street. The architectural style of the homes, tree canopy, sidewalk, width of the parkway along with the width of the street all help
define the public realm of a neighborhood.
Too often the contemporary public realm is defined by streets which are too wide, poor tree canopies and streets dominated by garages. These
standards call for new attention toward the public realm in designing a single-family neighborhood. The key to creating a great public realm is creating
an intimate outdoor room or creating what has been defined by "enclosure". Streets that are too wide make it impossible to create an attractive public
realm.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 453/525
B. Private Realm: The private realm is defined by the area within the four (4) walls of the private home. Today, regional and national builders have become
experts in creating "great" private realms for the homeowner. As reflected in the illustrations below, great emphasis has been focused on creating great
master bedrooms, bathrooms, kitchens, home theater rooms and family rooms. The design emphasis is on the interior and finishes of the interior of the
home, versus the creation of a great "public realm".
Communities are challenged with the fundamental that home purchasers' budgets are finite and the exterior elevations of a home are often short
changed for improvements in the house that are not seen within the public realm. But it is the public realm that defines the quality of a neighborhood
and ultimately the quality of the community.
Based on this fact, these design standards attempt to establish a minimum investment that builders will have to invest in the exterior elevations facing
the street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 454/525
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-1-4: CURRENT HOUSING TRENDS AND MARKETS:
A. Current Housing Trends: The nation and the region are seeing a recovery from the housing downturn of 2008 and the great recession. As housing
values recover, the village of Antioch is in a great position to see new housing starts. Antioch is one of the few communities in Lake County that have
existing "lots" which are available for building. In addition, the village of Antioch still has vacant land that will attract new residential development in the
future.
The goal of these standards is to encourage new housing and new growth in the village and to promote "attainable price points" for young families.
However, these standards also attempt to maintain the village's character by establishing a minimum number of standards that the building community
will have to comply with in the future. These standards should have a minimal impact on costs, but can have a real impact on the design success of
each home.
The current trend with many builders is to draw on the history of different historic vernacular styles of the great "American" home and to base new
contemporary designs on these historic patterns. While these do not require builders to follow these vernacular styles, a good place to start is to look at
some of the vernacular styles that can be found in the village of Antioch and the Chicago metro region. The following standards have outlined some of
these historic vernacular styles as follows:
AMERICAN FOUR SQUARE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 455/525
MIDWESTERN FARM HOUSE
AMERICAN COLONIAL
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 456/525
CRAFTSMAN HOUSE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 457/525
CHARLESTON HOUSE
EUROPEAN HOUSE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 458/525
TUDOR HOMES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 459/525
SHINGLE STYLE HOMES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 460/525
B. Markets:
1. Entry: The entry market has been identified for homes between two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) and two hundred seventy five thousand
dollars ($275,000.00). These homes generally incorporate simple floor plans and there is an emphasis on providing a maximum of square footage
with a minimum amount of architectural articulation. Simple rooflines and all vinyl elevations are generally predominant in these types of homes.
Incorporating a sufficient number of entry homes for young families and public service employees (police, teachers, firefighters, etc.) is an important
part in creating an economically diverse and vibrant community.
2. Move Up: The move up market will be critically important to the village of Antioch. Staff continues to foresee that the majority of new homes
constructed in the village will provide new opportunities to families who are looking for their second or third homes. Generally defined by price points
between two hundred seventy five thousand dollars ($275,000.00) to three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00), these homes will attract
new residents who may reside in Lake County, but who are looking for more value. Antioch will continue to provide better value compared to markets
to the south based on land values and reasonable impact fees from the village.
3. Estate: This higher end market defined by price points in excess of three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00) will continue to be in demand
based on the long term trends in the village. Currently, Antioch has several neighborhoods that are large lot, semicustom home neighborhoods. The
area's natural beauty along with the existing lakes, horse farms and large estate lots will continue to create a demand for custom homes. While staff
does not foresee the whole village becoming a semicustom home market, we believe that between twenty five percent (25%) to thirty three percent
(33%) of the future home demand in the village could attract this market.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 461/525
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-2: BUILDING DESIGN:
10-16-2-1: MASSING:
Any good single-family design must consider the importance of massing, scale, proportion and the scale of the building design. The simple placement of
dormers, or how the garage is located, or the incorporation of a well balanced porch can have a dramatic impact on the success of a single-family home
design. The use of first floor bays, porches and well designed entrances can all have a positive impact on breaking up the massing of the front elevation.
A. One approach in breaking up a home massing is simply moving the front elevation plane forward or backwards and incorporating multiple planes within
the front elevation. If the house incorporates a three (3) car garage, setting back the third bay will have a positive impact on the design of the garage.
B. Incorporating a prominent and well proportioned entrance on the front elevation can help break up the massing of a house.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 462/525
C. Well proportioned windows and balanced window placement should be incorporated on all four (4) elevations.
D. Gables should be well proportioned and placed in a balanced manner. Gables within gables are discouraged.
E. Avoid low pitched gables or anything below an eight to twelve (8/12) pitch.
F. Incorporation of a projecting porch can assist in breaking up the front elevation and minimizing the impact that a two (2) or three (3) car garage can have
on the front elevation.
G. Overly complicated rooflines with multiple pitches and hips are discouraged.
H. Projecting elements of any house design should be completed with balance and symmetry.
Poor massing
Overcomplicated roofline
Lack of symmetry and balance
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-2-2: MATERIALS:
The use of exterior materials is critically important in the overall design of any single-family home. Historically, the following exterior materials used in
Antioch include vinyl, face brick, cedar clapboard and stucco. While some communities in the Chicago metro area require a minimum percentage of brick
on all single-family homes, brick does not always create a better design. In lieu of a minimum brick requirement, staff is proposing a series of standards
that regulate how exterior materials should be applied.
A. Architectural grade vinyl shall be required when vinyl is used and all corners shall incorporate corner trim.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 463/525
B. When face brick is used on front elevation, brick returns shall be required with a minimum depth of one foot (1').
C. The use of vinyl shake or other materials is encouraged to be incorporated under gables on the second floors to provide additional architectural interest
to front elevations.
D. Brick or stone wainscot is encouraged to be incorporated on the front elevation of single-family homes, specifically key lots or homes located at corner
locations.
E. No more than two (2) materials in addition to wood trim should be used on a single-family elevation. Incorporating too many varying materials on an
elevation can create a wallpaper effect.
F. Appropriate materials should be used appropriately based on the architectural style of the house. As an example, a craftsman home should incorporate
vinyl clapboard and shake, while a federal style should incorporate a predominance of face brick. Stucco should only be used as an accent material on
elevations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 464/525
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-2-3: WINDOW TRIM, CORNER BOARDS AND BAND BOARDS:
Simple incorporation of wood trim around windows, corner boards and band boards can have a dramatically positive impact on the design of an elevation
and provide architectural articulation and texture to a simple design. Too often builders simply ignore these small details. The following design elements
shall be required on all new single-family homes within the village:
A. Eaves: All houses shall incorporate eaves with a minimum depth of one foot (1') on all four (4) sides.
B. Window Trim: All exterior windows shall incorporate wood trim around the window with a minimum width of six inches (6").
C. Returns: All front brick elevations shall incorporate brick returns with a minimum width of one foot (1').
D. Corner Boards: All houses shall incorporate corner boards that use vinyl or cedar clapboard.
E. Band Boards: Band boards located between the first and second floors are encouraged to be incorporated on all four (4) elevations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 465/525
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 466/525
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-2-4: ROOFLINES:
A good streetscape can be impacted by the rooflines of individual homes. Too often, a street will look like a series of "barracks" with a uniform line of
monotonous homes with a uniform roof style, lined up like soldiers with no variation or architectural interest. To avoid this scenario, the following standards
should be complied with:
A. No more than one-third (1/3) of any development can incorporate a single type of roofline, including gables, hips, clipped gables, mansards or gambrel
roofs.
B. Multiple roof planes, or the incorporation of usable dormers or eyebrows are encouraged as an architectural design element.
C. Architectural grade shingles are required on all new construction.
D. A roof pitch of thirty (30) to forty five degrees (45°) is recommended for new construction.
E. Gable pitches on front elevations should incorporate a 10/12 angle.
F. All rooflines should incorporate a minimum eave line of one foot (1') which will create a shadow line along the roofline.
G. Clipped gables above garages or the main entrance of a home are encouraged.
Gable Roofline
Clipped Gable Roofline
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 467/525
Hip Roofline
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-2-5: GARAGES:
The location and configuration of the garage is critically important in the overall design of a single-family home and the character of the streetscape. A
poorly placed garage can destroy the front elevation of a home and often defines the character of a house facing the street. The following design
standards attempt to soften the impact that the garage has on the front elevation by incorporating a simple number of changes to garage design:
A. Garage doors shall be either recessed or project no more than five feet (5') from the front entrance or front entrance porch.
B. Garages located on the front elevation facing the street should not incorporate more than one-third (1/3) of the linear length of the front house elevation.
C. Windows should be located in a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the total number of garages located within a development.
D. Corner lots should incorporate side loaded garages.
E. Garage doors should incorporate architectural elements and blank garage doors should be avoided.
F. Overhangs, arbors, pergolas, keystones or other architectural elements should be incorporated above garages to provide architectural variation and
texture.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 468/525
G. Side loaded garages are encouraged to be used mid block. This is an effective way of breaking up garage door monotony.
H. Varying setbacks of homes can also help minimize the impact of the garage on a streetscape.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 469/525
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-2-6: ENTRY LEVEL HOMES:
A. Design: One of the biggest design challenges today is constructing an attractive "entry level" home product in the Chicago market. The national
builders' "entry level" product is generally forty foot (40') wide homes with a dominant garage, which often takes up fifty percent (50%) of the front
elevation. The proliferation of this product in the past ten (10) years throughout the metro area can be explained by the fact that they are relatively
simple and inexpensive to construct, but they provide the homeowners with large rooms and an open floor plan.
This product offers the first time homeowners with the opportunity to purchase a single-family home and every community needs an entry level product.
The policy question is whether the village of Antioch needs more entry level homes in the market or whether the new home market is more of a move
up market? This is more of a policy question that these standards do not attempt to address. Instead, staff is attempting to establish a series of design
criteria for all future single-family home construction that would make sure a minimum design standard is created. A well designed home should not
depend on the price point. Instead there are a number of simple changes to any elevation which can have a dramatic impact on the success of a
design.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 470/525
Discourage
Discourage
B. Discouraged: The following homes reflect the current trends in the Chicago market for entry level homes. As the following illustrations reflect, simple
floor plans can produce a monotonous design which can have long term negative impacts on property values within a neighborhood and community.
Figures 1 and 2 of this section show the results of creating affordable housing with no design sensitivity. Large blank areas of vinyl create a really
negative impact on the streetscape. Simply following the design standards within this chapter can have a positive impact on the overall quality of
design.
FIGURE 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 471/525
FIGURE 2
Corner boards help break up the front elevation
Band board provides architectural variation and movement
Windows in garage create interest
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 472/525
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 473/525
Alternative Design Approach
C. Encouraged: Figures 3 and 4 of this section show how a simple elevation or entry level home can be improved by simply incorporating a number of
design elements as highlighted below:
FIGURE 3
Good example of national home production
FIGURE 4
Good example of national home production
1. The balanced and appropriate use of face brick below a projecting gable can provide relief to the front elevation and soften the overall design of the
front elevation.
2. Breaking the front plane and providing architectural relief is critical to the success of the design, unless it is a traditional elevation (federal style, salt
box, etc.).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 474/525
3. Incorporation of a higher pitched gable with a frieze board and a minimum eave line of one foot (1') can provide architectural articulation and a
shadow line along the roofline. This is critically important to the overall success of the design of a house.
4. A projecting porch or overhang over the main entrance can provide architectural relief and break up the plane of the front elevation.
5. Balanced window placement and traditional window fenestration can provide interest and movement to an elevation.
6. Garages should either be offset from the front elevation or incorporate a number of design elements in order to minimize their impact on a front
elevation. Design elements can vary from individual bay doors, windows, projections or overhangs over the garage, or recessed garage plane from
the front porch.
7. Incorporation of brick soldier courses and keystones above windows or garage can provide additional architectural variation to a front elevation.
8. Substantial foundation landscaping and an ornamental tree in the front yard can also soften an elevation over time and provide the streetscape with
visual interest. (Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-2-7: EXTERIOR UPGRADES:
The starter house or entry level market often ends up creating cookie cutter subdivisions as national or regional builders come into a community, quickly
build a subdivision and leave town. Often, the results end up as being a problem subdivision or neighborhood with declining property values and numerous
maintenance issues. To avoid this possibility, these design standards are intended to ensure that builders incorporate a minimum number of exterior
upgrades to single-family elevations:
A. Builders shall be required to submit a "pattern book" outlining their proposed models and elevations of their proposed single-family homes as part of any
planned unit development (PUD) or annexation into the village of Antioch.
B. The design standards related to massing, window fenestration/trim, garage design, rooflines, eaves, trim and band boards, corner boards and the use
of brick returns as outlined in this chapter shall be standards and shall be required to be incorporated into PUD agreements and future annexation
agreements.
C. Developers shall be required to comply with the following residential subdivision design guidelines and incorporate ten percent (10%) of their lots as key
lots and designate any lot adjacent to a collector, major collector or arterial as a through lot.
D. All builders shall be required to submit a landscape plan for each lot with one parkway tree, an ornament tree in the front yard, a minimum of six (6)
foundation shrubs and a shade tree in the rear yard.
Discourage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 475/525
Discourage
Discourage
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-3: SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
Taking an existing subdivision which has already been developed and incorporating a number of small modifications to the plan will help the development
community obtain a sense of what the village is looking for in future residential development:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 476/525
A. Incorporating a well connected street plan with good interconnection is critical in future residential developments within the village. The exception to this
guideline is conservation developments or developments located on unique topography.
B. Subdivision designers should make every effort to minimize cul-de-sacs in future plans.
C. If a park is necessary, it should be centrally located and every effort should be made to create terminal vistas of the park.
D. Future residential development should incorporate through lots (any single-family home backing up to a collector street) and key lots (homes located at
important locations within the development). (Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-3-1: CONSERVATION DESIGN:
Unique parcels of land with extensive woodlands, wetlands or terrain should incorporate elements of conservation design as highlighted in figures 1A and
1B of this section.
FIGURE 1A
FIGURE 1B
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 477/525
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-4: DESIGN STANDARDS:
10-16-4-1: RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Street Designs:
1. The following guidelines should be followed when new residential developments are being proposed in the village of Antioch. Extensive efforts
should be made to integrate single-family neighborhoods into the unique terrain of the village. Specifically, efforts should be made to preserve mature
groves of trees and unique view sheds of open space.
2. Conservation design, as section 10-16-3-1, figures 1A and 1B of this chapter demonstrate, should be used on property which incorporates mature
groves of trees or unique terrain that should be preserved as open space. Instead of cutting mature tree groves down or destroying unique rolling
terrain, development should be clustered and open space preserved whenever possible.
3. Standard development patterns should incorporate the following design standards:
a. Residential subdivision plans should integrate a street network and cul-de-sacs should be minimized within any plan.
b. Outside the downtown, subdivision plans should incorporate some curvilinear aspect and long unbroken straight streets should be avoided if
possible.
c. In the downtown, any infill project should incorporate short, straight street segments, connected by ninety degree (90°) turns, thus creating a more
formal or traditional neighborhood.
d. If a park is required, it should be centrally located if possible and streets should terminate into the park, thus creating a terminal vista of open
space within the development.
e. Single loaded streets facing open space or green areas are encouraged.
f. The incorporation of terminal vistas of open space should be incorporated into any land plan whenever possible. The best terminal vistas are "T"
intersections that line up with a view of open space, a village green, some water feature or other design parameter that provides additional
character to the overall quality of design.
Discourage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 478/525
Loop lane design in lieu of cul-de-sac design
Terminal vistas
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-4-2: SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
A. Street interconnection is critical to any successfully designed subdivision. All developers should incorporate a minimum of one stub street to any
adjacent development or vacant undeveloped parcel. The following design guidelines generally recommend a minimum of two (2) stub streets into any
adjacent parcel if possible:
1. All future subdivisions should be designed as stand alone neighborhoods and will consist of a local street network that provides adjoining links to
other adjacent neighborhoods through both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
2. Multiple street entrances in and out of each neighborhood are strongly encouraged.
3. Each neighborhood, if at all possible, should incorporate a neighborhood park, or alternatively a series of pocket parks which help break up the
development and provide vistas of open space throughout the development.
4. Collector streets that run through any neighborhood should incorporate traffic calming design elements and should be designed as a "complete
street".
5. Boulevards at entrances and adjacent to parks are encouraged as a way of traffic calming and slowing traffic down. In addition, boulevards bring
beauty to a neighborhood.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 479/525
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 480/525
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
10-16-4-3: LOTS:
A. Through Lots: Single-family lots that back up to arterials or collectors should incorporate additional architectural elements on the rear of homes and are
identified as "through lots". These homes have a large impact on the visual character of a village and every effort should be made to avoid blank vinyl
walls with a minimum number of windows. The following design elements should be considered:
1. Balanced windows and window shutters.
2. Projections, breakfast rooms or the use of different materials on the elevations.
3. Brick chimney chase.
4. Extensive landscape and a unified fence design.
B. Key Lots: A "key lot" should be a home within a neighborhood that incorporates additional architectural or landscaping elements. Approximately ten
percent (10%) of the homes within any new subdivision should be a "key lot". Key lots should be located at important intersections, at a "T intersection"
or along parks or open space. The following design elements should be considered:
1. Higher percentage of face brick on the front and side elevation.
2. Prominent porches or wrap around porches.
3. Wainscot of brick or stone on the front and corner side elevations.
4. Extensive foundation landscaping on the front and corner side elevations.
(Ord. 16-10-26, 10-3-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 481/525
Title 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS for the village and is hereby made a part of the official
comprehensive plan of the village. (1976 Code §§ 152.001, 152.002)
11-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community growth, and to safeguard the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, the
investor and the village.
B. To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the village.
C. To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and prevent excessive development costs.
D. To assure the development of land for the highest possible use with all the necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence.
E. To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working relationship between the village and the developer. (1976 Code § 152.003)
11-1-3: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
A. Application Of Regulations:
1. No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located within the village or in any unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part within
one and one-half (11/2) miles of the nearest limits of the village except in conformity with the provisions of this title.
2. The subdivision plans and plats, proposed improvements to be installed, and all procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance
with these regulations. (1976 Code § 152.004)
B. Interpretation:
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements. If or wherever this title is silent on
technical definitions and standards, reference should be made to appropriate sections of the building code, zoning code or manuals depicting
standard professional engineering practice.
2. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title upon the use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
3. This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this title are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
title shall govern.
4. If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this title is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and the holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions. (1976 Code § 152.005(F))
11-1-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. No proposed concept, preliminary, or final plan of subdivision will be considered until such time as all filing fees and escrow account deposits are
completed pursuant to section 13-1-9 of this code.
B. Wherever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out within the incorporated limits of the village or within contiguous territory not more than one
and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the village, the subdivider or his agent shall submit both a preliminary and a final
subdivision plat to the plan commission for their approval. The subdivision plats and all procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full
compliance with these regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 482/525
C. Until plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
1. No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any improvements made to the natural land.
2. No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be offered for sale nor shall any sale, contract for sale or option be made or given.
3. No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electrical service, lighting,
grading, paving or surfacing of streets shall be made by any owner or owners or his or their agent, or by any public service corporation at the request
of the owner or owners or his or their agent.
D. All offerings or dedications of land to the village for use as streets, highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses shall be referred
to the plan commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the village board of trustees or by any other governing authority of
the village having jurisdiction over the proposed use.
E. Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the village as a whole, the plan commission may,
before approval, cause to be prepared a plan for the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be used by the plan commission as an aid in judging the
proposed plat. The village engineer shall cooperate with the plan commission in the preparation of this plan and shall furnish such surveys and data as
may be necessary.
F. Whenever an area is subdivided into lots of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more and there are indications that such lots will eventually be
resubdivided into smaller building lots, consideration shall be given to the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so that additional minor
streets can be located which will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
11-1-5: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the interpretation of this title, the rules contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "piece" and "parcel".
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for". (1976 Code
§ 152.006)
11-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ALLEY: A public right of way primarily for vehicular traffic along the side or in the rear of properties which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting properties.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the village.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons or animals. Any structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain elevators,
coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, salt barns and other similar structures, are not considered buildings.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street and within a lot or other parcel of land, so designated by the front yard requirements of the zoning
district within which the lot is located, and so depicted on the plats of proposed or existing subdivision.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way located across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent streets or areas.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
ENGINEER'S ESTIMATE OF PROBABLE COST: An estimate of the construction costs of proposed improvements, as prepared by the project engineer.
HIGHWAY: A right of way for vehicular traffic which traverses a nonurban area, usually a state or federal numbered route.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, or other facility for which the village of Antioch shall
ultimately assume the ownership by way of right of way dedication or conveyance of land by deed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 483/525
IMPROVEMENT, QUASI-PUBLIC: Any storm water management facility, drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree, lawn, or other
facility for which the local homeowners' association or some other private entity is ultimately going to assume ownership and/or responsibility for
maintenance and operation.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership or which is or may be occupied by a use, building or buildings,
including the open spaces required by this title.
OUTLOT: A parcel of property which is specifically dedicated to a public or quasi-public purpose. Such purpose may include, but is not necessarily limited
to: open space - passive recreation; storm water retention or detention; wetlands preservation; etc. In any case, such outlot use does not include the
construction of any habitable structure. As an unbuildable lot, an outlot is not required to abut a publicly dedicated street, but may be accessible for
maintenance and emergency vehicles.
PARKWAY: A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and whose right of way is or is intended to be developed in a park like character.
PLAN COMMISSION: The plan commission of the village1.
PLAN, SUBDIVISION: A series of maps, plans, and data, including, but not necessarily limited to, subdivision plat, engineering drawings, drainage
calculations, landscaping drawings, restrictive covenants and the like.
PLAT, SUBDIVISION: A specific map or drawing prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor which describes and sets forth all public streets, alleys,
ways for public service facilities, ways for utility services and community antenna television systems, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or other public
grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots or blocks, and numbering all such lots, blocks or parcels by progressive numbers, giving their precise dimensions.
PRELIMINARY: The preparatory step prior to final.
ROADWAY: The paved area within a street right of way intended for vehicular traffic, including all curb and gutter facilities.
STREET: A public right of way or private easement, which primarily serves or is intended to serve as a vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands
or to other such rights of way or easements.
STREET, APPROVED: Any street, whether public or private, meeting standards and specifications of the village.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to highways and primary thoroughfares and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the highway and primary thoroughfares.
STREET, MINOR: A street intended primarily as access to abutting properties.
STREET, PRIVATE: Any street which is under the jurisdiction of an individual, corporation or trustee, or any street which is privately owned or established.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any primary or secondary thoroughfare or minor street which is shown on the subdivision plat and is, or is to be, dedicated for public
use.
SUBDIVIDER: The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the plats of the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements
relating thereto as outlined in this title.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more parts, any of which is less than five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or building development, including all public streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or
other public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lots or blocks, and numbering all such lots, blocks or parcels, by progressive numbers, giving their precise
dimensions. However, the following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the requirements of this title:
A. The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
B. The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
C. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and contiguous land;
D. The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not involve any
new streets or easements of access;
E. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does not involve any new streets or easement of access;
F. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or conveyance relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
G. Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
H. The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land existing on July 17, 1959, into no more than two (2) parts and not involving any new streets or
easements of access.
THOROUGHFARE, PRIMARY: A street of considerable continuity which serves, or is intended to serve, as a principal traffic artery between the various
sections of the Antioch area and is so designated as a primary thoroughfare of the official map and standards ordinance.
THOROUGHFARE, SECONDARY: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the primary thoroughfare system, or between primary thoroughfares,
and is so designated as a secondary thoroughfare on the official map and standards ordinance.
VILLAGE BOARD: The board of trustees of the village.
WOODLAND, MATURE: An area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy covers an area of one acre or more and at least fifty percent (50%) of
which is composed of canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height (dbh) of at least ten inches (10"), or any grove consisting of eight (8) or more
individual trees having a dbh of at least twelve inches (12") whose combined canopies cover at least fifty percent (50%) of the area encompassed by the
grove. Provided, however, that no trees kept or grown for commercial purposes shall be considered a mature woodland.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 484/525
WOODLAND, YOUNG: An area or stand of trees whose total combined canopy covers an area of one-half (1/2) acre or more and at least fifty percent
(50%) of which is composed of canopies of trees having a diameter at breast height of at least three inches (3"). Provided, however, that no trees kept or
grown for commercial purposes shall be considered young woodland. (1976 Code § 152.007; amd. Ord. 00-06-09, 6-5-2000; Ord. 06-06-24, 6-19-2006)
Chapter 2
PLATTING PROCEDURES
11-2-1: CONCEPT PLAN PROCEDURES:
A. Prior to the preparation for filing of a preliminary plan of subdivision, the applicant shall file a concept plan and supporting documentation which at
minimum shall contain the plans and data specified in section 11-2-2 of this chapter. The plan and ten (10) copies shall be filed with the department of
planning, building and zoning, which shall arrange for a meeting of the administrative development review committee at the earliest possible
convenience, but within fifteen (15) calendar days from the completed concept plan submittal. (1976 Code § 152.010)
B. (Rep. by Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
C. The administrative development review committee consists of the following personnel:
1. Village administrator and/or director of planning, zoning and building, one of whom shall chair the committee meeting;
2. Superintendent of water and sewer, or his designee;
3. Superintendent of streets, or his designee;
4. Public safety inspector; and
5. Consultant village engineer.
D. Visual site inspection may be required by the administrative development review committee.
E. The administrative development review committee meeting shall be attended by the petitioner and/or his representatives. No formal vote will be taken,
but a consensus opinion will be arrived at and documented in writing. Such written documentation shall be transmitted to the petitioner normally within
seven (7) calendar days of the committee meeting.
F. The applicant shall have the option to update the concept plan in accordance with the administrative development review committee's recommendations
or proceed directly to the preliminary plan.
G. No plan will be recommended for a subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains poor drainage facilities and which would make
adequate drainage of the lots and streets impossible or impractical.
H. The developer shall provide a letter from the school district as to whether or not the school district shall require land or monetary donations, or a
combination thereof, in order for the developer to conform with the school donation ordinance1.
I. A traffic study may be required. In addition, the administrative development review committee may require a study from the Lake County soil and water
conservation district. (1976 Code § 152.010)
11-2-2: PREAPPLICATION CONCEPT PLAN AND DATA:
A concept plan and supporting documentation at minimum shall contain the following:
A. Names, addresses and phone numbers of:
1. Current owner of the subject property;
2. Petitioner; and
3. Land planner, or person preparing the sketch plan;
B. Location map or aerial photo at a minimum scale of one inch equals four hundred feet (1" = 400') which shows the site in relationship to adjacent
properties within two hundred feet (200') of the subject site;
C. Sketch plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), with one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or a larger scale,
being preferred. The scale shall be clearly indicated on the plan;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 485/525
D. Photostatic enlargements of the following, with sketch plan overlay of sketch plan superimposed:
1. The USGS flood hazard map; and
2. The USDA soil conservation service soil map. (1976 Code § 152.045)
11-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
A. Twenty five (25) readable copies of the proposed preliminary plat, engineering, and related documentation shall be submitted along with fees and
escrow deposit as required by title 13 of this code a minimum of twenty one (21) days prior to a regularly scheduled planning and zoning board
meeting. A complete submittal shall include at minimum:
1. Plat and engineering drawings shall be drawn at a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or if the area of the subdivision is more than two
hundred (200) acres, the scale shall be one inch to two hundred feet (1" = 200'); including scale, north point and location map.
2. Accurate dimensioned boundaries of property to be developed with bearings and distances.
3. Section lines and location of property by section, township and range and legal description of property being subdivided.
4. Existing topography with contour intervals not greater than two feet (2'), drainage channels, wetlands, streams, lakes, swamps, flood zones, rock
outcrops, buildings, young and mature woodlands and other features likely to affect the plan. The source and accuracy of the topographic information
shall be based on the Antioch datum plane. If wetlands are present, the developer must submit wetlands delineation report prepared by a certified
ecologist.
5. Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the plan commission, location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and
ground water conditions. If individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, submit a soil map prepared by a certified soil scientist at a minimum
scale of one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), as well as results of soil borings and percolation tests.
6. Names and locations of adjacent subdivisions and proposed name of planned subdivision.
7. Owner names and locations of adjacent unplatted land.
8. The location of public street rights of way, existing improved streets, alleys, easements, utilities and any other features that may affect the plan on
site or adjacent thereto.
9. Zoning classification and proposed use of land being platted and adjacent land.
10. Layout, numbers and dimensions of proposed lots.
11. Layout of existing and proposed building setback lines on site or adjacent thereto. If septic systems are to be used for sewage disposal, indicate the
size and boundary of the proposed filter field. Such septic plan shall be submitted with supporting data as may be required to the Lake County
department of health for their review and written comment prior to preliminary plan approval.
12. Locations, dimensions and proposed names of all proposed streets, alleys and grounds reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or
other public uses.
13. Name, address and phone number of the planner and/or engineer.
14. Name, phone number and address of developer.
15. Title, scale, north arrow and date.
B. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by plans showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a not less
than one hundred foot (100') distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; typical cross sections of the proposed grading, roadway and
sidewalks; preliminary plan of proposed sanitary and storm sewers with grades and sizes indicated; and preliminary plan of water main and sizes. All
elevations shall be based on the Antioch datum plane.
C. If proposed by the subdivider, or required due to essential extensive protection and continuing stewardship of environmentally sensitive land, a draft of
private covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCRs) shall be submitted. The CCRs shall regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the
proposed development with restrictions which may exceed the codes and ordinances of the village. The CCRs shall include language which clearly
indicates that the village of Antioch assumes responsibility only for the enforcement of those codes, ordinances, rules and regulations which have been
adopted within this code, and that any provision of the CCRs that is more restrictive than that within this code is the responsibility of the homeowners'
association or some other private entity(ies).
D. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by written statements, executed by authorized representatives of the respective private utility companies
(natural gas, electric, and telephone), acknowledging that service capacity is currently available, or can be made available within a specified time
frame, to serve the proposed development (commonly known as "will serve" letters). The developer shall also provide, along with the preliminary plat,
information regarding the location of existing and proposed service lines or mains, as well as available service capacity.
E. The topographical and profile studies shall have on their face the certification of an engineer, to the effect that to the best of their knowledge and belief
the drainage of surface waters for the entire subdivision, as well as each individual phase, shall comply in all respects with the watershed development
ordinance, title 12 of this code. (Ord. 06-06-24, 6-19-2006)
F. A preliminary plan summary shall include the following information:
1. Total acreage of subdivision; total acreage of lots; total acreage of proposed public rights of way; and total acreage of public and/or private open
space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 486/525
2. Minimum and maximum lot sizes and average lot size.
3. Number of lots.
G. A preliminary plan submittal shall include copies of the Lake County soil and water conservation district report regarding this subdivision proposal.
H. Prior to the approval of the preliminary plan or any part thereof, the developer, along with the plan commission, the village board of trustees and any
employee of or consultant to the village, may make a physical inspection of the property to be subdivided. The purpose of the site visit shall be to
further understand the proposed layout of the roads, public utility easements, public buildings, entryways and other public improvements and to further
understand the topography of the property for the purpose of preserving the natural setting of the development, including waterways, ponds, sloughs
and the like. (1976 Code § 152.046)
11-2-4: FINAL PLAN:
A. Guidelines: The proposed final plat and engineering must be in substantial conformance to the preliminary plat as approved by the village board. Such
preliminary approval shall have occurred within twelve (12) months prior to the final plat submittal. Four (4) copies of the final, engineering, and related
documentation plus the filing fee and escrow deposit as required by title 13 of this code shall be submitted to the village engineer. The village engineer
or his designee shall provide the developer with comments within thirty (30) days of the complete submittal. Following the developer's plan revisions,
twenty five (25) copies of the final plat and related documentation shall be submitted a minimum of twenty one (21) days prior to a regularly scheduled
plan commission meeting. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on a reproducible medium consisting of sheets not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty
six inches (24" x 36") and shall be at a scale of fifty (50) or one hundred feet (100') to one inch (1"). In addition to the following, the final plat shall
conform to the current "Plat Guidelines" as published and provided by the Lake County recorder of deeds. Where necessary, the plat may be on
several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. The final plat shall show the following:
1. Primary control points, approved by the village engineer, or descriptions and ties to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings
and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
2. Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements and other rights of way and property lines of residential lots and other sites, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves.
3. Name, with both post office and fire department approval, and right of way width of each street or other rights of way.
4. Location, dimension, and purpose of any easement.
5. Number to identify each lot or site and block.
6. Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved.
7. Proposed building setback lines, front, side and rear, on all lots and other sites. Developments other than single-family residential shall also include
parking setback lines where required.
8. Location and description of monuments.
9. Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
10. Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to accuracy of survey and plat.
11. Certification of title showing that applicant is landowner.
12. Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights of way, and any sites for public use.
13. Certification of approval by the plan commission.
14. Name of subdivision.
15. Legal description including location by section, township and range.
16. Title, scale, north arrow and date.
17. Certifications of approvals.
18. If applicable, a note that covenants, agreements and restrictions exist.
19. A note which indicates that the plat is being presented to the Lake County recorder for recording by the village attorney.
B. Plan Requirements: The final plat shall be accompanied by plans showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for
not less than one hundred feet (100') in distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision; indicate existing tree cover over ten inches (10") in
diameter and indicate which existing trees are to remain on the site; typical cross sections of the proposed grading, roadway and sidewalks; final plan
of proposed sanitary and storm sewers with grades and sizes indicated; and final plan of water main and sizes. All elevations shall be based on the
Antioch datum plane.
C. Public And Quasi-Public Improvement Estimate: The final plat shall also be accompanied by the developer's engineer's estimate of probable cost of
public and quasi-public improvements. Such estimate shall include sufficient detail for the village engineer to review for his approval. The estimate shall
be prepared within the following general format or outline and shall contain at minimum the following categories:
Street and sidewalk construction
Sanitary sewer construction
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 487/525
Water main construction
Stormwater facilities
Erosion and sedimentation control
Subtotal
Contingencies (20 percent of subtotal)
The contingency line item shall equal a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the subtotal of the major categories. In the event that a site development
permit is not issued within twelve (12) months of the approval date by the village engineer of the engineer's estimate of cost, the developer shall submit
a revised estimate. (Ord. 06-06-24, 6-19-2006)
D. Security: An irrevocable letter of credit or performance bond shall be posted with the village prior to and as a condition of the village recording of the plat
of subdivision. The security shall be:
1. In the amount of one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the approved engineer's estimate as determined by the village engineer pursuant to
subsection C of this section. (Ord. 09-04-09, 4-20-2009)
2. In a form acceptable to the village and issued from a viable financial institution.
3. Filed prior to the issuance of any building permit or construction permit, including site development permit. (Ord. 06-06-24, 6-19-2006)
4. The irrevocable letter of credit may have periodic drawdowns, when requested from the financial institution in writing and backed by lien waivers or
proof of payment satisfactory to the village. The drawdown related to the final payment to contractors shall be presented to the mayor and village
board of trustees, along with:
a. A written request that the village formally accepts the subdivision's public improvements;
b. An indication that, following the final payment to contractors, the balance remaining within the letter of credit equals at least fifteen percent (15%)
of the original approved engineer's estimate. Such balance shall remain as a maintenance guarantee, in the letter of credit, which shall remain in
force for two (2) years from the date of the village board's formal acceptance of the subdivision's public improvements. (Ord. 09-04-09, 4-20-2009)
5. The security shall be between the village and the financial institution only, and the developer, owner, etc., shall have no interest in the proceeds set
out in the security.
E. Recapture Agreements: Where the village is requiring the developer to oversize a water main or sanitary sewer in anticipation of further development,
the subdivider shall prepare a draft recapture agreement. The proposed final plat of subdivision shall be accompanied by the draft recapture
agreement.
F. CCRs: If private covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCRs) are proposed by the developer, the final version in recordable form shall be submitted
along with the proposed final plat.
The CCRs shall include language which clearly indicates that the village of Antioch assumes responsibility only for the enforcement of those codes,
ordinances, rules and regulations which have been adopted within this code, and that any provision of the CCRs that is more restrictive than that within
this code is the responsibility of the homeowners' association or some other private entity(ies).
Should the developer, owner or his successor in interest develop the subdivision in separate phases, the original declarations of covenants, conditions
and restrictions of record shall state that when any subsequent phase in the subdivision is finalized by the recording of a final plat for that particular
phase, the owner or his successors shall prepare an instrument legally sufficient to subject the new phase to the original declarations of covenants,
conditions and restrictions of record and the existing homeowners' association.
A phased development is one where only a portion of the entire approved subdivision will be developed at any one time.
Any modification to this requirement that all phases of a subdivision must be in one homeowners' association and subject to one set of covenants,
conditions and restrictions of record must be approved by ordinance passed by the village board of trustees.
G. Landscaping: Show proposed landscaping of any entryways, local parks, buffer zones or other areas required by the plan commission including
location and type of plant materials to be used.
H. School Districts; Park Board: Final letters or agreements from the school district and park board in regards to monetary, land, or a combination of both
pursuant to sections 11-3-8 and 11-3-9 of this title. All school board and park board agreements shall be made exhibits to any approving ordinance.
I. Additional Regulations: Other data such as certificates, affidavits, endorsements, notations or dedications as may be required by the plan commission in
the enforcement of these regulations. (Ord. 06-06-24, 6-19-2006)
11-2-5: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN:
A. On reaching conclusions, informally, as recommended in section 11-2-1 of this chapter, regarding his general program and objectives, the subdivider
shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in section 11-2-3 of this
chapter. (1976 Code § 152.011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 488/525
B. Twenty five (25) copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified shall be submitted to the plan commission with written application
for approval at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. (1976 Code § 152.011; amd. Ord. 06-06-24, 6-19-2006)
C. The application fee for conditional approval of the preliminary plat for a subdivision or minor subdivision shall be accompanied by a certified check or
money order payable to the village in the amount set forth in subsection 13-1-9B of this code. Said fee is a nonrefundable application fee to be used for
administrative expenses. (1976 Code § 152.011; amd. Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
D. Following review of the preliminary plat and other data submitted in compliance with these regulations, and following negotiations with the subdivider on
changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the plan commission shall, within thirty (30) days, act on the
plat and data as submitted or modified, and, if approved, the plan commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the
conditions of the approval, if any, or, if disapproved, the plan commission shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
E. The action of the plan commission shall be noted on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the plan commission.
F. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout
submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the plan commission and for
recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the conditions of the conditional approval, if any.
G. Prior to the acceptance of any final plan for a subdivision, the owners, developers and the like, must comply, where applicable, with the endangered
species protection act2. (1976 Code § 152.011)
11-2-6: APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAN:
A. Conformity: The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposed to record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms to all requirements
of these regulations. (1976 Code § 152.012)
B. Improvement Agreement: No final plat shall be approved unless an improvement agreement has been duly executed by the owner and subdivider. The
improvement agreement shall require the owner and subdivider to make and install the improvements provided for in chapter 4 of this title in
accordance with the plans and specifications accompanying the final plat. (Ord. 09-04-09, 4-20-2009)
C. Application: Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the plan commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting at
which it is to be considered. Accompanying the application shall be twenty five (25) copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval and
prepared as specified in section 11-2-4 of this chapter.
D. Submission: Twenty five (25) copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be submitted to the plan commission within twelve
(12) months after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise the approval shall become null and void unless application for an extension of time is
made to and granted by the plan commission prior to the twelve (12) months having elapsed. (1976 Code § 152.012; amd. Ord. 06-06-24, 6-19-2006;
Ord. 09-04-09, 4-20-2009)
E. Notice: The final plat submitted to the plan commission for approval shall be accompanied by a notice from the village board of trustees stating that
there has been filed with and approved by the village board one of the following:
1. A certificate by the village engineer that all improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval have been made or installed in
accordance with the specifications; or
2. A bond or letter of credit shall be submitted after approval of the final plat by the plan commission; however, no construction shall commence until
the filing of the bond or letter of credit. This bond or letter of credit shall:
a. Run to the mayor and village board of trustees;
b. Be in an amount determined by the mayor and village board of trustees to be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in
compliance with this chapter, but no less than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the proposed costs of the improvements;
c. Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; and
d. Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and installations.
F. Approval Or Disapproval: Within thirty (30) days after application for approval of the final plat, the plan commission shall approve or disapprove it. If the
plan commission approves, it shall affix its seal upon the plat together with the certifying signature of its president and secretary. If it disapproves, it
shall set forth its reasons in its own records and provide the applicant with a copy.
G. Filing:
1. After approval of the final plat by the plan commission, and the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, one or more tracings of the final
plat of the subdivision, drawn in ink on Mylar, not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") in size, shall be submitted to the village
board of trustees for approval.
2. Action must be taken by the village board within thirty (30) days after the final plat has been submitted for approval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 489/525
3. Upon approval by the village board, the developer shall record the plat with the county recorder within four (4) months. If not recorded within this
time, the approval shall be null and void. Immediately after recording, the original or a duly certified copy shall be filed with the village clerk. (1976
Code § 152.012; amd. Ord. 09-04-09, 4-20-2009)
11-2-7: PRECONDITIONS TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit for the construction of homes in a subdivision covered by this title shall be issued until water and sanitary sewer lines into the
subdivision or unit have been constructed, in completed form ready for hookup to the homes for which the building permits are sought, and these water
and sewer lines have been inspected and approved by the department of planning, building and zoning. In addition, no building permit for the construction
of homes in a subdivision covered by this title shall be issued until curbs, gutters, sidewalks and the first lift of asphalt for the streets in the subdivision or
unit have been completed, inspected and approved by the department of planning, building and zoning. However, nothing in this section shall be deemed
to preclude the use by the builder or developer during construction and/or preliminary sales of homes of temporary trailers as construction or sales offices,
provided that adequate supplies of potable water and adequate sanitary facilities are provided in conjunction therewith. (Ord. 01-12-35, 12-17-2001)
11-2-8: CERTIFICATION OF PLATS:
When the village board shall, upon motion and majority vote, approve the final plat, the mayor and village clerk shall be authorized to sign the original
tracing. Where the plat covers land in unincorporated areas, the certificates on the final plat shall include the signatures of the president of the Lake
County board and the county clerk. The certificates shall be in the form and as provided by and on file with the village. Including the above, such
certifications shall include:
Certificates signed by an Illinois registered land surveyor
Deed of dedication
Notary certificate
Owner's certificate
Surface water drainage certificate
Other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, notations or dedications may be required by the planning commission and zoning board or the village board of
trustees in the endorsement of these regulations. (1976 Code §§ 152.070, 152.071, 152.072, 152.073, 152.074, 152.075)
Chapter 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
11-3-1: CONFORMITY REQUIRED:
The subdivision of land, including the arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all highways, streets, alleys, crosswalks, easements,
sites for parks, playgrounds and schools, or other land to be dedicated for public use, shall conform to the official map and standards ordinance of the
village approved by the plan commission and adopted by the village board of trustees and other responsible governmental bodies of the village as a part of
the official comprehensive plan of the village. (1976 Code § 152.015)
11-3-2: STREETS:
A. All streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to soil conditions, to public convenience and
safety, and to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. All streets shall be constructed within publicly dedicated rights of way and in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, except where a variation has been applied for and granted.
B. Where such is not shown on the official map and standards ordinance the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
1. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or
2. Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or adopted by the plan commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
C. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
D. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed highway or primary thoroughfare, as shown on the official map and standards ordinance,
the plan commission may require marginal access streets; reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation, at least ten feet
(10') wide, along the rear property line; deep lots with rear service alleys; or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
E. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or highway, the plan commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side
of such railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
grades and future grade separations.
F. Reserve strips controlling access to streets or alleys shall be prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 490/525
G. All street intersections and confluences should encourage safe traffic flow.
H. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred sixty five feet (165') shall be prohibited.
I. Tangents shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets, in conformance with the table of minimum standards for street design in this section.
J. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees (10°), they shall be connected by a curve with a radius
adequate to ensure clear sight distances, in conformance with the table of minimum standards for street design in this section.
K. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees
(60°).
L. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius as specified in the table of minimum standards. The plan commission may permit
comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded corners.
M. Street right of way widths shall be as specified in the table of minimum standards for street design in this section.
N. Half width street rights of way are prohibited.
O. Dead end streets (cul-de-sacs), designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than five hundred feet (500') from the intersection of the origin
through the center of the circle to the end of the right of way, and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside pavement
diameter of at least eighty feet (80') and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred feet (100'). In nonresidential areas, the cul-de-sac shall
be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside pavement diameter of at least one hundred twenty feet (120') and a street property
line diameter of at least one hundred fifty feet (150').
P. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Existing street names shall be projected wherever
possible. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the plan commission.
Q. Street gradients and vertical curves shall be as specified in the table of minimum standards for street design in this section. Variations from this design
standard may be approved by the village engineer based upon the unique features of the site without the necessity of variation proceeding.
R. Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street and the first floor elevation of the houses or buildings and permit convenient and
economical access to and drainage of the lots. (1976 Code § 152.016) TABLE OF MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
Level Of
Service
Maximum
Gradient
(Percent)
Minimum
Gradient
(Percent)
Radius Of
Horizontal
Curves (Feet)
Length Of
Vertical
Curves (Feet)
Tangents
Between
Reverse
Curves (Feet)
Primary 5 0.50 750 200 200
Secondary 5 0.50 400 200 200
Collector 6 0.50 300 200 150
Minor 7 0.50 200 150 100
Level Of
Service
ROW
(Feet)
Pavement
Width To
Back Of
Curbs (Feet)
Crown
Inches
Clear
Sight
Distance
(Feet)
Tangent
Lines At
Street
Intersections (Feet)
Primary 100 671 7 500 25
Secondary 85 552 6 400 20
80 503 6 400 20
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 491/525
Collector 66 37 6 300 20
Minor 60 29 5 200 15
Level Of
Service3
Pavement Width
Edge To Edge
Without C And G
(RE Districts) (Feet)
Right Of Way
With
C And G (Feet)
Right Of Way
Without
C And G (Feet) Crown (Inches)
Primary 24 100 100 4
Secondary 24 80 80 4
Collector 22 66 66 3
Minor 22 60 66 3
Notes:
1. Includes 16 foot wide landscaped median except where left turn lanes are provided.
2. Includes 4 foot wide median only.
3. No median.
Subdivisions having lots 40,000 square feet or more in area and where ditch drainage is to be provided, aggregate base course shall have a width of
22 feet at the binder course of the pavement to 24 feet at the subgrade. Earth shoulders shall be provided and shall be 5 feet in width measured from
the edge of pavement. The slope of the shoulder shall be 1/2 inch per foot. The minimum distance from the edge of the shoulder to the edge of the 2
foot flat bottom ditch shall be 6 feet. The ditch bottom shall be a minimum of 2 feet below the edge of the shoulder. The maximum slope of the ditch
nearest the pavement shall be 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical. The maximum slope of the ditch nearest the property line shall be 4 feet horizontal
to 1 foot vertical. The design storm criteria for the ditch shall be based on a 10-year frequency storm, and approved by the village engineer. The
maximum ditch gradient without erosion protection shall be 2 percent. The minimum ditch gradient shall be such as to not deposit silt in the bottom of
the ditch for a 10-year storm frequency. A minimum of 3 inches of topsoil placement is required. The minimum culvert diameter shall be 12 inches, a
minimum cover of 6 inches shall be maintained between the top of the pipe and the edge of the finished pavement. All culverts shall be fitted with
end sections or headwalls and shall extend a sufficient distance beyond the roadway to fit the roadway side backslope. The binder course shall be
installed for a minimum of 1 winter season prior to the installation of the surface course. Prior to the approval of the engineering drawings, or the
issuance of any building permits, the developer shall furnish the village with an overall map of the subdivision showing the proper size culvert for
each lot driveway as determined from hydraulic calculations.
(1976 Code § 152.016; amd. Ord. 02-12-46, 12-2-2002)
11-3-3: ALLEYS:
A. Alleys shall be provided in commercial, business and industrial districts, except that the plan commission may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
B. Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except where deemed necessary and on the recommendation of the plan commission.
C. The width of an alley, where permitted, shall be twenty feet (20') in residential areas and thirty feet (30') in commercial, business and industrial districts.
D. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, corners may be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movements.
E. Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the plan commission. (1976 Code § 152.017)
11-3-4: EASEMENTS:
A. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet (10') wide.
B. Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 492/525
C. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right
of way conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and shall include such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for
the purpose and as determined by the plan commission. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. (1976 Code § 152.018)
11-3-5: BLOCKS:
A. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
2. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the corporate limits of the village.
3. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
4. Limitations and opportunities of topography. (1976 Code § 152.019)
B. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred feet (1,800'), nor be less than six hundred feet (600'). In planned unit developments greater
than two hundred (200) acres, in lieu of the standards in this subsection, site specific block lengths may be approved in connection with the approval of
the planned unit development. (Ord. 02-09-29, 9-9-2002)
C. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than ten feet (10') wide shall be required where deemed necessary by the plan commission to provide for pedestrian
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities.
D. Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show adequate off-street areas to
provide for parking, loading docks and other such facilities. (1976 Code § 152.019)
11-3-6: LOTS:
A. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
B. Lot dimensions and areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning code; however, the following rules shall also apply:
1. Minimum lot sizes for residential lots not served by public sanitary sewers and water supply shall be determined, using criteria listed in table entitled,
Limitations for Septic Tank Systems in subsection 11-4-3A of this title.
2. Where usual soil conditions or other physical factors exist which may impair the health and safety of the residents of the neighborhood in which a
subdivision may be located, upon recommendation of the state department of public health, the plan commission may increase lot area requirements
as may be necessary.
3. Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall have minimum width or depth as required to provide an adequate building site
and to afford the minimum usable area required in this chapter or the zoning code for front, rear and side yards.
4. Depths and widths of lots or properties reserved or laid out for commercial, business or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the offstreet
service and parking facilities required in the zoning code.
C. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets on which they abut.
D. Within the corporate limits of the village, all lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street.
E. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from highways or
primary thoroughfares or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet (10'), and
across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such highways and primary thoroughfares or other
disadvantageous use.
F. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
G. All lots shall front directly on and have access to an approved street. The plan commission may prohibit access where an alternate means of access is
available. A notation shall appear on the final plat where access is prohibited or restricted. (1976 Code § 152.020)
11-3-7: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
A. Building setback lines in residential areas of new subdivisions shall conform to the front yard provisions of the zoning code.
B. A corner lot shall maintain not less than the minimum building setback lines required on both streets on which the lot abuts. (1976 Code § 152.021)
11-3-8: PARKS AND PUBLIC AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 493/525
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for park and recreational purposes, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu
of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village in accordance with the following criteria and formula.
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof required by this section shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to
the village and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any preannexation agreement governing such land. (1976 Code § 152.022)
A. Park And Recreation Land Dedication Criteria:
1. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be thirteen (13) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the "Table
Of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit" located in section 11-3-10 of this chapter.
2. Location: The comprehensive plan of the village, as adopted by the village board of trustees, shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A park
site adjoining all elementary school sites of not less than five (5) acres shall be considered a requirement. A central location which will serve equally
the entire development is most desirable. In large developments these sites can be located throughout the development according to established
standards for park area distances.
3. Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas:
a. When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local
public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development a portion of the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit
developments may at the option of the village board of trustees be provided in the form of private open space in lieu of dedicated public open
space. The extent of same shall be determined by the village board of trustees, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in
conformance to the total park and recreation land for the general area.
b. In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of
facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer
must guarantee that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal
documents. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park land dedication that would
have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be given.
B. Contribution In Lieu Of Park Sites Criteria: Where the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical or when the available land
is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes, the village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land
dedication required. The cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation land dedication shall be held in trust by the village or other public body
designated by the village solely for the acquisition of park and recreation land as hereinbefore classified, which will be available to serve the immediate
or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the improvement of other existing local park and recreation land which already
serves such needs. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth herein
within seven (7) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded to the developer who made such contribution.
The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as specified herein, that
otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation sites. The developer shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such
improved land in the area of his development or other evidence thereof and final determination of the fair market value per acre of such improved land
shall be made by the village board of trustees based upon such information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which
may be submitted to the village board of trustees by the park board or others. (Ord. 08-07-16, 7-21-2008)
C. Dedication And Fee Criteria: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of land dedication and a
contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling within the
park location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land that would
have been required to be dedicated;
2. A major part of the local park or recreation site has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to
complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
D. Density Formula:
1. The tables set out in section 11-3-10 of this chapter are generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size for new
construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu thereof unless a
written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer.
2. In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the table of estimated ultimate population listed in section 11-3-10 of this chapter, he
shall submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit
development and in that event final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the village board of
trustees based upon such demographic information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the
village board by the park board or others. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and
the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if
necessary.
E. Reservation Of Additional Land: Where the comprehensive plan or the standards of the village call for a larger amount of park and recreational land in a
particular subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution
shall be reserved for subsequent purchase by the village or other public body designated by the village provided that such acquisition is made within
one year from the date of approval of the final plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 494/525
F. Combining With Adjoining Developments: Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, public open space which is to
be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas without
hardship on a particular developer.
G. Topography And Grading: The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land.
H. Improved Sites: All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and
curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included within the
definition of improved sites may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of any such school site and construction of school facilities
thereon. (1976 Code § 152.022)
11-3-9: SCHOOL SITES:
A. Purpose:
1. Since 1988, land developers have annexed more than two thousand (2,000) acres to the village. Within the village, tracts of land exist which have
been or may be subdivided or zoned planned unit development for residential use which are not subject to an annexation agreement or for which
annexation agreements could expire without land and cash donations having been met.
2. The residential development projected over the next several years will have a significant impact on the community, including the village. School
districts which provide education to the students residing in the village include the Antioch Community High School District No. 117, Antioch
Community Consolidated School District No. 34 and Emmons School District No. 33. This development will cause a greatly increased demand for
services and facilities provided by these entities.
3. The developers of new subdivisions and planned unit developments, and residents thereof, will require village and educational services prior to the
time that tax revenues are generated by said subdivisions and planned unit developments.
4. The development projected will result in the rapid disappearance of land available for schools and the price of the remaining land will in all probability
increase faster than the borrowing capacity of the various school taxing bodies responsible for providing school services.
5. It is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the village that:
a. Adequate land and facilities are available to provide village educational services.
b. School sites be provided within the village in accordance with the criteria hereinafter set forth, which are consistent with the minimum school site
recommendations heretofore issued by the various affected school districts and that funds be provided to the village to defray a portion of the cost
of new school construction.
c. The combining of school sites with park sites to provide the maximum in educational and recreational services and facilities should be encouraged.
B. Definitions:
DEVELOPER: The owner, lessor, lessee, trustee, heir, executor, assign and the like.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS: The same meaning that is attributable to this term in this code.
SCHOOL DISTRICTS: The same meaning that is attributable to this term in this code.
C. Donations Required: Unless otherwise provided for in an annexation agreement with the village, as a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision
or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to dedicate land and/or make cash contributions in lieu
of land for acquisition of school sites; and cash donations for school construction, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
subdivision or planned unit development as hereinafter set forth.
D. Donations Required From Properties Outside Village Limits: In the event that land which is subject to subdivision approval by the village is not within the
corporate limits of the village at the time of approval of a final plat of subdivision for the land, the governing body of any governmental entity which
would be entitled to land and/or cash donations pursuant to this section, may request that the village vary the terms of this section by allowing said
governmental entity to make its own agreement and/or waiver as to any or all of the donations and amounts thereof required in this section with the
subdivider, developer and/or owner of said land. Said request shall be made in writing by a resolution adopted by the governing board of said
governmental entity. In such an event, the village may, by motion, condition subdivision approval upon compliance with the provisions of this section as
the provisions of this section have been modified by said variation and/or waiver.
E. Donations Computed On Projected Population:
1. For purposes of computing the amount of land donations or cash contributions in lieu of land for school sites, and cash donations for school
construction that will be required of each subdivision or planned unit development to enable the village to provide facilities and services to meet the
needs of such subdivision or planned unit development, its projected population density shall be computed in accordance with table 1 in section 11-
3-10 of this chapter, which is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends in family size by age groups, number of bedrooms and
by type of residential development such as apartment, single-family detached housing and the like.
2. Table 1 in section 11-3-10 of this chapter shall be used for all population estimates unless a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the
village data, together with his own demographic study showing the estimated population to be generated by his subdivision or planned unit
development. In that event, the final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the corporate authorities
on the basis of the foregoing village data, data submitted by the subdivider or developer, and from other sources which may be submitted to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 495/525
corporate authorities by the school districts. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years and
that said table 1 is subject to periodic review and amendment, if necessary.
F. Land Contribution To School Districts: School sites shall be donated and conveyed to the village in accordance with the following criteria. The ultimate
number of students that will be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development shall be determined in accordance with the current
edition of table 1, as set forth in section 11-3-10 of this chapter, adjusted as set forth in subsection E of this section.
1. Land Donation To School: The amount of land required to be dedicated shall be determined by dividing the estimated number of children to each of
the school age brackets hereinafter set forth that will be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development by the maximum
recommended number of students that can be served in the type of school assigned to such age bracket, hereinafter set forth, and multiplying the
quotient times the minimum number of acres recommended for a school site, hereinafter set forth. The product thereof shall be the acres of land
deemed needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such school classification.
2. School Classification And Size Of School Site: School classifications and size of school sites shall be determined in accordance with the following
criteria1:
School Classification
By Grades
Maximum Number
Of Students For
Each Such School
Classification
Minimum Number
Of Acres Of Land
For Each School
Site Of Such
Classification
Elementary schools
Grades - Kindergarten
through 5th
600 students
11 acres
Middle schools
Grades 6_8
900 students
29 acres
High schools
Grades 9_12
2,300 students
53 acres
1 Village residents are served by 3 different school districts. In the event that an affected school district has a different school classification than as
shown in the table above, said school classifications, size of school sites and minimum acres of land shall be modified to meet the requirements of
the affected district.
3. Improved Sites: Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be prepared in accordance with this title and water retention/detention requirements. All sites
shall be conveyed in a condition ready for all service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as
applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included within the definition of
improved sites may be deferred due to the delay time between conveyance of any such school sites and construction of school facilities thereon.
4. School Land Conveyed To Village: School land conveyed to the village shall be held by it for transfer to the affected school district or other entity.
Any school land conveyed to the village or thereafter transferred to a school district or other entity pursuant to this division which is not used for
school purposes within twenty (20) years after it is conveyed to the village shall be reconveyed to the developer.
G. Cash Contribution To School District:
1. In addition to the land donation referred to in subsection F of this section, or a cash contribution in lieu of land referred to in subsection K of this
section, each subdivider or developer shall be required to make a cash contribution to aid in the provision of necessary funds for the construction,
expansion or rehabilitation of a school for the use of the children who will be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development.
Subdivision or planned unit developments shall mean any subdivision in the planning stage or in existence with plat recorded in the recorder's office.
A planned unit development shall mean any planned unit development in the planning stage or in existence with a plat recorded in the recorder's
office. This section shall also apply to any owners or owner of a tract of land which is not located in a subdivision or planned unit development.
2. The amount of cash donations for each developer is set out in table 2 in section 11-3-10 of this chapter. The funds and any accrued interest will be
apportioned among the school districts affected by a particular development based on the number of students estimated to be generated as set forth
in table 1 in section 11-3-10 of this chapter.
3. In order not to make this requirement over onerous and to assist developers in meeting this financial responsibility, the cash contributions required in
this section shall be payable upon the issuance of the building permit for each dwelling unit or upon the sale of an individual lot or a tract of land by
an owner in an arms length transaction. This provision shall not apply to transfers by way of gift or as a result of a court settlement in a domestic
relations case or in probate matters.
H. Distribution Of Plans And Plats: Copies of each subdivision plat or planned unit development plan shall be transmitted to the park district and the
affected school districts for their written recommendations at the same time that they are transmitted to the plan commission, but nothing herein
contained shall be construed as requiring receipt of a recommendation prior to action by the corporate authorities of the village.
I. Time Of Conveyance Of Donations: All land donations required pursuant to this section shall be conveyed no later than the earlier of the following to
occur:
1. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after a written demand by the village.
2. The fourth anniversary of the approval of the plat of subdivision or planned unit development by the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 496/525
J. Title Insurance, Survey And Assessment Plats: Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the village shall be accompanied by the following:
1. A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do business in the state to ensure that grantee has good merchantable title to such real
estate in an amount equal to its value computed pursuant to subsection K of this section, subject only to then current general real estate taxes as of
the date of transfer; covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not prohibit the use of the subject real estate for school or park use; utility
easements located within twenty feet (20') of the boundary lines of the subject real estate; drainage ditches, feeders, laterals and underground pipe
or other conduit.
2. A current boundary line survey, certified to the grantee by a state licensed land surveyor to be in compliance with the Illinois land survey standards.
3. Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a lot in a recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in form
acceptable to the appropriate county authorities so that the land to be conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for
exemption purposes.
K. Cash Contributions In Lieu Of Land: Criteria for requiring cash contributions in lieu of land donations:
1. Whenever, in the determination of the village, any subdivision or planned unit development is so small that the school site required under the
provisions of subsections E and F of this section will not be large enough for practical development and maintenance as school sites, or when the
available land cannot meet the standards set forth in subsections E and F of this section, or is otherwise inappropriate for a school site, the village
shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required.
2. The cash contribution to be paid in lieu of land donations for school sites shall be held in trust by the village or other public body designated by the
village, solely for use in the acquisition of a school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or planned unit
development, or for reimbursement to the school district for prior acquisition of a school site for which bonds or other financing obligations are
outstanding which will serve immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or planned unit development, or for the improvement of any
existing school site which predominantly serves such needs, including for the construction, repair or rehabilitation of any school building thereto, or
new construction of facilities.
3. All cash donations shall be apportioned among the affected school districts on a prorata basis determined by the estimated populations to be
generated in the subdivision or planned unit development as set forth in table 1 in section 11-3-10 of this chapter. Said cash contributions are set
forth in table 2 in section 11-3-10 of this chapter.
L. Updating Of Required Contributions And Fair Market Value: It is recognized that population density, age distribution, land values, the cost of providing
school services, construction costs and other local conditions change over the years. Therefore, the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the
payment of fees in lieu thereof, the required contribution for school construction, and the fair market value of land in and around the village shall be
reviewed at least every two (2) years and amended if necessary.
M. Review Agreements: School agreements previously executed between owner/ developer and the school district shall be reviewed as to the
contributions every two (2) years by the school district and/or the village. In addition, contributions shall be reviewed at any time that a developer of a
subdivision or a planned unit development is requesting a final approval of a new phase in a multiphased development.
N. Negotiation Authority: The school district shall have the right to prenegotiate with the developer and to enter into separate written agreements relative to
a lump sum, in advance, cash donation for part or all of the developer's obligation toward school donations. Said negotiation can have, as a result, a
reduction in the donations required pursuant to this chapter, provided the developer pays the entire sum agreed upon prior to the issuance of the first
building permit.
O. Use Of Contributions: The school district shall be allowed to use all of the developer's contributions for capital improvements on all existing school
buildings and for construction of new buildings and for purchase of land for school facilities.
Fees so collected shall not be used for operating expenses, but only capital expenditures as outlined in this section1. (1976 Code § 152.023)
11-3-10: POPULATION ESTIMATES:
TABLE 1
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Children Per Unit
Type Of Unit Preschool
0 _ 4
Elementary
Grades K_5
5_10 Years
Junior High
Grades 6_8
11_13 Years
Total
Grades K_8
5_13 Years
High School
Grades 9_12
14_17 Years
Adults
18 yrs+
Total Per
Dwelling
Unit
Detached single-family
2 bedroom 0.113 0.136 0.048 0.184 0.020 1.700 2.017
3 bedroom 0.292 0.369 0.173 0.542 0.184 1.881 2.899
4 bedroom 0.418 0.530 0.298 0.828 0.360 2.158 3.764
5 bedroom 0.283 0.345 0.248 0.593 0.300 2.594 3.770
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 497/525
Attached single-family
1 bedroom 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.193 1.193
2 bedroom 0.064 0.088 0.048 0.136 0.038 1.752 1.990
3 bedroom 0.212 0.234 0.058 0.292 0.059 1.829 2.392
4 bedroom 0.323 0.322 0.154 0.476 0.173 2.173 3.145
Apartments
Efficiency 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.294 1.294
1 bedroom 0.000 0.002 0.001 0.003 0.001 1.754 1.758
2 bedroom 0.047 0.086 0.042 0.128 0.046 1.693 1.914
3 bedroom 0.052 0.234 0.123 0.357 0.118 2.526 3.053
Note:There are only 3 significant categories provided in this chart. Because of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single-family dwelling units,
only 1 category is provided. The same is true with apartments; thus, only 1 category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of
detached and attached single-family units, individual evaluations may be necessary.
Copyright 1996
Illinois School Consulting Service/
Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.
Naperville, Illinois
(1976 Code § 152.023)
TABLE 2
Districts 33
And 34 District 117 Total
Apartments
2 bedroom $3,143.00 $1,127.00 $4,270.00
3 bedroom 4,530.00 1,970.00 6,500.00
Condos/townhouses
2 bedroom 1,175.00 325.00 1,500.00
3 bedroom 1,845.00 375.00 2,220.00
Detached single-family
3 bedroom 4,250.00 1,440.00 5,690.00
4 bedroom 4,531.00 1,969.00 6,500.00
5 bedroom 4,857.00 2,458.00 7,315.00
(Ord. 07-04-07, 4-2-2007)
11-3-11: OTHER DEVELOPER CASH CONTRIBUTIONS:
A. As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
submit to the village a cash contribution in accordance with the following criteria and formula:
For the police department $200.00 per person
For the fire department 200.00 per person
For the streets department 110.00 per person
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 498/525
Total payable to the village $510.00 per person
B. The population per dwelling unit shall be based upon the total number of persons per dwelling unit as indicated within table 1 in section 11-3-10 of this
chapter.
C. Payments to the village shall occur immediately prior to the issuance of an individual building permit.
D. The commitment to make such cash contributions shall also be required as a condition regarding the annexation of any land to the village and
provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any annexation agreement governing such land.
DEVELOPER CONTRIBUTIONS
(Other Than Schools, Parks And Libraries)
Type Of
Dwelling Unit
People/
Dwelling Unit
Police
Fire
Traffic/Roads
Total Amount
$200.00 $200.00 $110.00 $ 510.00
Detached single-family
2 bedroom 2.017 403.40 403.40 221.87 1,028.67
3 bedroom 2.899 579.80 579.80 318.89 1,478.49
4 bedroom 3.764 752.80 752.80 414.04 1,919.64
5 bedroom 3.77 754.00 754.00 414.70 1,922.70
Attached single-family
1 bedroom 1.193 238.60 238.60 131.23 608.43
2 bedroom 1.99 398.00 398.00 218.90 1,014.90
3 bedroom 2.392 478.40 478.40 263.12 1,219.92
4 bedroom 3.145 629.00 629.00 345.95 1,603.95
Apartments
Efficiency 1.294 258.80 258.80 142.34 659.94
1 bedroom 1.758 351.60 351.60 193.38 896.58
2 bedroom 1.914 382.80 382.80 210.54 976.14
3 bedroom 3.053 610.60 610.60 335.83 1,557.03
Commercial
Per square foot $0.10
(Ord. 04-06-22, 6-6-2004)
11-3-12: DEVELOPER CASH CONTRIBUTION TO PUBLIC LIBRARY DISTRICT:
A. As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
submit to the village a cash contribution in the amount of two hundred sixty six dollars ($266.00) per dwelling unit for the use and benefit of the Antioch
public library district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 499/525
B. "Dwelling unit" shall be defined as in section 10-2-1 of this code.
C. Payments to the village shall occur immediately prior to the issuance of an individual building permit.
D. The commitment to make such cash contribution shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the village and provisions
therefor shall be incorporated into any annexation or development agreement requiring residential subdivision of such land. (Ord. 06-08-30, 8-21-2006)
Footnote 1: Attached to ordinance 02-05-13 as exhibit 3 are the indemnification agreements indemnifying the village from all liability as a result of
passage of said ordinance. Said indemnification agreements are the same agreements approved by the various school districts and attached to the
previously passed ordinance relative to school donations, ordinance 95-09-29, and said indemnification agreements are incorporated into this
ordinance.
Attached as group exhibit 4 to ordinance 02-05-13 are current agreements to be signed on behalf of each of the school districts benefitted by this
ordinance: Antioch Community Consolidated School District 34, Antioch Community High School District 117 and Emmons School District 33, by their
authorized representatives. This ordinance shall not go into effect until said current agreements have been fully executed, at which time they shall be
incorporated into this ordinance.
Chapter 4
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
11-4-1: FINAL ENGINEERING; GENERAL CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTANCE:
A. No final plat shall be approved by the plan commission until the village engineer has certified that the plans and specifications for the proposed public
improvements meet the minimum requirements of the village, county, state and other authorities having jurisdiction, and that the improvements comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
At the time each unit of a subdivision is completed, each subdivider shall submit to the village as a record a drawing of all public improvements.
B. The village shall not accept any public improvements until:
1. All public improvements have been completed as required by this chapter; and
2. For residential subdivisions, at least seventy five percent (75%) of the residences in the subdivision have been granted a certificate of occupancy; or
3. For nonresidential subdivisions, at least seventy five percent (75%) of the gross floor area in the subdivision has been granted a certificate of
occupancy.
C. No public improvements shall be deemed to be impliedly accepted by reason of any village actions taken for the purpose of protecting the health,
safety, and welfare of the properties and owners affected by the condition of the applicable public improvements. The applicant shall indemnify the
village from, and reimburse it for, any costs arising from actions required to protect public health, safety and welfare as a result of the status or
condition of the unaccepted public improvements. (Ord. 09-04-09, 4-20-2009)
11-4-2: SEWERS:
A. Sanitary sewer lines, including sewer stub terminals to the property line of each lot, shall be constructed within the street rights of way or dedicated
easement to serve all properties in the subdivision, in accordance with standards of the state EPA, the official map of the village, design specifications
of appendix A and accepted professional engineering practices, and as approved by the village engineer.
B. Storm sewers shall be designed to adequately accept natural surface water drainage into and within the entire subdivision, and to carry off such water
from all inlets and catch basins, and be connected with an adequate outfall. The Rational method shall be used when computing stormwater runoff
utilizing a 10-year storm frequency for sizing storm sewers. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer
system. Storm sewer stubs shall be provided to the property lines of each lot in the subdivision. The sump pump discharge line of each house built in
the subdivision shall be connected to the storm sewer stub. The storm sewer shall be located in the parkway between the curb line and the public walk.
Storm sewer stubs shall not be provided to the property lines of each lot in a subdivision zoned for forty thousand (40,000) square foot lots or larger.
The sump pump discharge line of each house built in such a forty thousand (40,000) square foot lot subdivision shall be located within the lot in
question, but outside of the minimum setback and side yard restrictions of the zoning district.
C. Stormwater Management Facilities: Stormwater management facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Lake County
watershed development ordinance, as adopted by reference in title 12, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 99-11-23, 11-1-1999)
11-4-3: SEPTIC TANK SYSTEMS:
A. Limitations For Septic Tank Systems: The following criteria shall be used to determine the minimum lot size for on site septic filter field systems:
DEGREE OF LIMITATION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 500/525
Item Affectting
Use
Small Lot
Medium Lot
Large Lot
Prohibited
Slope 1% _ 8% 8% _ 15% 15% _ 20% Less than 1% or more than 20%
Depth to rock,
hard pan or other
impervious material
(distance below
drain field)
Over 25' 15' _ 25' 10' _ 25' Less than 10'
Depth to water
table (distance
below drain field)
Over 15' 10' _ 15' 6' _ 10' Less than 6'
Flooding None Rare -not
more than
once in 5
years
Occasional
not more
than one
per year
Frequent - in
floodplain
Map "Efficiency
of Soils for Septic
Filter Field Use"
Slight Moderate Severe Severe
Soil type
(USDA map)
Identify soil type from U.S. department of agriculture
map
Filled areas Maximum fill 5'. Filling does not change degree of limitation
Distance from
stream or lake
Over 200' 150' - 200' 100' - 150' Less than 100'
Minimum lot size 1 acre1 3 acres1 5 acres1 Not permitted1
1 Any lot having one or more factors under a more restrictive condition will be placed under the larger lot size requirement, even though other
criteria for that lot may be more favorable.
B. Subsurface Seepage Field, Dosage Rate:
Time Required
For Water To
Fall 6 inches
(minutes)
Effective Absorption
Area Required In
Bottom Of Seepage
Fields
(sq. ft./bedroom)
Maximum Rate Of
Sewage Application
(gallons per square
foot per day) For
Subsurface Seepage
Fields, Seepage Beds
30 130 2.2
60 165 1.6
90 210 1.3
120 235 1.1
150 265 1.0
180 290 0.9
240 320 0.8
300 350 0.7
360 385 0.6
1. Absorption area is figured as trench bottom area.
2. Over 180 unsuitable for seepage pits.
3. Over 360 unsuitable for absorption systems.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 501/525
(1976 Code § 152.027)
11-4-4: WATER:
Water distribution facilities, including supply mains of not less than eight inches (8"), fittings, valves, hydrants and water stub terminals to the property line
of each lot, shall be installed to serve all properties within the subdivision. The water supply system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements
of the state EPA and the village department of public works. The water system shall be constructed under the direction, control and with the approval of
the village engineer. All water mains shall be installed in the parkway opposite from the parkway containing the storm sewer or in easements. The
developer shall be responsible to circulate all proposed mains to existing mains. (1976 Code § 152.028)
11-4-5: HOUSE SERVICES:
A. House services shall be constructed to connect with the utility service mains constructed within any public street or easement to serve each adjoining
lot, tract or building site; such house services shall extend from the main to the property line.
B. All house services connected with utility mains constructed within any street or easement shall be located at the approximate centerline of each lot, and
no deviation shall be made from this requirement except upon prior approval of the village engineer.
C. Upon completion of construction of all house service connections, an accurate map or maps showing the exact location of all such mains, together with
manholes, shutoff valves, house service connections and other similar facilities being a part thereof, shall be filed by the subdivider with the village.
(1976 Code § 152.029)
11-4-6: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
A. All telephone, electric and gas service lines shall be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivision area; conduits or cables shall be placed
within easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground service. Aboveground structures identified with
the underground facilities shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
B. All drainage and utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements. (1976 Code § 152.034)
11-4-7: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
A. The full width of the public right of way shall be graded, including the subgrade of the areas to be paved. All stumps, trees that cannot be saved,
boulders, and similar items shall be removed.
B. All categories of streets shall be improved with pavements to an overall width in accordance with the minimum dimensions established by the design
standards within section 11-3-2 of this title and in accordance with "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition, Illinois
department of transportation. (1976 Code § 152.030)
C. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed along the outside pavement line in accordance with the village official map and standards ordinance
specifications for all categories of streets, curbs and gutters shall not be required where lot sizes are forty thousand (40,000) square feet and larger in
the RE zoning districts. (1976 Code § 152.030; amd. 2003 Code)
D. Storm water inlets in accordance with village specifications shall be provided within the street improvements at points as required by the village
engineer.
E. All curb corners shall have radii of not less than twenty five feet (25'). Where an angle of intersection of less than sixty degrees (60°) is permitted, curb
radii shall be increased as necessary for safety.
F. All parkways within the dedicated street area shall be graded and seeded according to the approved village standards.
G. Where major streets as shown on the official map are located in a proposed subdivision, the village shall require the subdivider to install the street.
(1976 Code § 152.030)
H. Where a future extension of a public street, such as is typically provided as a stub end street, is deemed appropriate by the village board, the developer
shall install a sign at his expense, measuring at least eighteen inches (18") wide by thirty inches (30") high, mounted on a pole such that the bottom of
the sign is a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2') above the ground line. The sign shall contain the following message (unless an alternative
message is approved in advance by the village engineer):
PUBLIC NOTICE STREET EXTENSION - THIS STUB-END STREET IS IN THE APPROVED PUD OR SUBDIVISION PLAN FOR FUTURE
EXTENSION.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 502/525
The letters in the sign shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches (11/2") in height and a minimum of one-fourth inch (1/4") stroke (thickness). (Ord.
06-06-24, 6-19-2006)
11-4-8: STREET LIGHTING:
A. Design Requirements: All new street lighting within the village, with the exception of streets lying within any RE or SE district, shall be designed to
conform with the requirements of the "American National Standard Practice For Roadway Lighting" approved July 11, 1972. The recommendation for
average maintained horizontal illumination shall be as shown in the following chart:
Type Of Street Zoning Classification Foot-Candle
Primary Residential 1.0
Secondary Residential 0.6
Collector Residential 0.6
Minor Residential 0.4
B. RE Or SE District: Streets lying within any RE or SE district shall not be subject to the average maintained horizontal illumination. These streets shall
have street lighting standards in conformance with these specifications installed at all street intersections, center of street curve and the end of a culde-
sac.
C. Installation: It is the intent of this standard to provide for the installation of a safe, attractive, coherent and easily maintained street lighting system
throughout the village. It is also the intent of this standard to provide for adequate lighting in off street areas accessible to the driving public to promote
the safe use of such areas and to promote more efficient public services such as police protection to the properties in and around such areas.
Lighting systems shall be installed in streets and parking areas in all developments. Developments abutting a street with substandard lighting shall be
required to provide a street lighting system for the abutting street that meets the requirements of this standard.
D. Design References:
1. All residential street lighting systems shall have a Commonwealth Edison designation for "street, highway and traffic signal lighting", commonly
referred to as "rate 25" as defined by the ComEd schedule of rates for electric service as filed with the Illinois commerce commission pursuant to
state law1.
2. All residential street lighting systems shall be as approved by the village. The street lighting shall be owned and maintained by the village of Antioch
following formal acceptance by the village board.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to coordinate the installation of streetlights with that of the other subdivision work.
4. Streetlights in residential subdivisions shall be placed at least at the following locations: all intersections, center of street curve and the end of a culde-
sac.
5. Commercial streets, parking, plaza and pedestrian lighting systems will be a designed system which should define the circulation hierarchy of the
commercial development, expose traffic conditions and provide visual orientation to help both pedestrians and drivers find their way at night. During
the daytime, the repetitive lighting standards should also contribute to this hierarchy and sense of order. The lighting plan will be designed by a
qualified engineer and approved by the village engineer.
E. Testing And Acceptance:
1. The village engineer shall test the luminaries for distribution. If necessary, the contractor shall adjust the luminaries to attain the design lighting
pattern.
2. After the foregoing has been completed, project record (as built) drawings shall be submitted. The street lighting system, and responsibility for the
energy costs, shall be considered accepted by the village only after the village board has adopted a resolution approving all of the subdivision
improvements. (Ord. 06-06-24, 6-19-2006)
11-4-9: STREET NAME SIGNS:
After the installation of the public improvements, the subdivider shall purchase from the village and install a post with double signs at every intersection
created by the subdivision. All signs shall be installed at a height of seven feet (7') above grade on a minimum two inch (2") ID galvanized steel post set in
a poured concrete foundation extending a minimum of three and one-half feet (31/2') below finished grade. (1976 Code § 152.038)
11-4-10: USE OF EXISTING STREETS:
The public works department shall designate the streets to be used for access to the subdivision by all equipment and trucks engaged in the construction
of all public improvements, utility services and buildings. (1976 Code § 152.035)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 503/525
11-4-11: SIDEWALKS; PEDESTRIANWAYS:
A. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of streets in residential subdivisions with lot sizes of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less, and in
commercial and industrial areas. Sidewalks shall be provided on peripheral streets of all subdivisions. In subdivisions with a residential density over
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet per dwelling unit, the village board of trustees, upon recommendation of the plan commission, may require
sidewalks only at selected locations.
B. The minimum width of sidewalks shall be four feet (4') along residential collector streets and residential minor streets where required, and five feet (5') in
commercial and industrial areas and along primary and secondary streets. All sidewalks shall be of Portland cement concrete construction in
accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition, Illinois department of transportation.
C. Pedestrianways within easements where required or proposed shall be a minimum of two feet (2') wide and constructed of asphalt a minimum of one
and one-half inches (11/2") thick over an aggregate base a minimum of three inches (3") thick. Within wetland areas, alternative pervious surfaces may
be substituted for asphalt, subject to the review and approval of the village engineer.
D. Bike trails where required or proposed shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the standards in "Guide For Development Of New
Bicycle Facilities", 1981, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. (1976 Code § 152.031)
E. In lieu of the standards set forth in subsections A and B of this section, sidewalks shall be provided in planned unit developments of greater than two
hundred (200) acres pursuant to the preliminary plan approved by the village board of trustees for the planned unit development. (Ord. 02-09-31, 9-9-
2002)
11-4-12: TREES AND VEGETATION:
A. All parkways within the dedicated rights of way shall be graded and seeded or sodded in a manner approved by the village engineer.
B. Existing trees and shrubs of substantial size and health shall be preserved or replanted within the subdivision, to the extent possible, in conformance
with title 8, chapter 6 of this code.
C. Street trees shall be planted, as homes are built, throughout the entire subdivision. Such trees are to be planted within the parkway area, where the
parkway is a minimum of eight feet (8') wide as measured from the sidewalk to the back of curb. Where parkways are less than eight feet (8') wide, a
landscape easement shall be provided, eight feet (8') in width, along the front property line for purposes of planting street trees. An average of one tree
shall be planted, or existing tree preserved, for every fifty feet (50') of frontage on each side of each street. Trees within the parkway must be
deciduous; those planted on private property may be of either deciduous or coniferous varieties. The new trees to be planted shall be species approved
by the mayor and village board of trustees. Trees shall not be of species specifically prohibited by title 8, chapter 6 of this code. Each new tree to be
planted shall have a minimum trunk diameter of not less than two inches (2") as measured at a point twelve inches (12") above the ground line. The
developer shall certify to the village that said trees are free from disease and shall guarantee said trees for a period of one year from the date of
planting. (1976 Code § 152.033)
11-4-13: MONUMENTS:
A. Permanent reference monuments shall be placed by the subdivider at each corner or angle on the peripheral boundary of the subdivision. Such
permanent reference monuments shall be stone or concrete at least three feet (3') in length and six inches (6") square, with suitable center point, and
shall be set flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be removed by frost.
B. Metal monuments three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter and two feet (2') in length shall be placed in the ground at all lot corners, intersections of streets
and alleys with platted boundary lines where there is a change in direction or curvature. All federal, state, county, local or other bench marks,
monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the development shall be presumed in precise position. All monuments shall be properly set in the
ground before the streets and alleys are accepted by the village. (1976 Code § 152.036)
11-4-14: INCREASED FACILITIES:
Where storm sewer, sanitary sewer or water facilities are made larger than is immediately required to serve the land described in the final plat, due to the
necessity of service to adjacent and/or presently vacant property as it shall be developed in the future by others, the subdivider shall be reimbursed for
such additional costs on the following terms and conditions:
A. The village engineer shall determine the cost of such storm sewer, sanitary sewer and/or water facilities as are required to serve only the immediate
needs of the property described in the plat. The village engineer will also determine the cost of such facilities actually required to serve the plat in
question and the adjacent land when developed.
B. The difference in cost in the above determinations shall be paid to the original developer by the developers of adjacent properties. At the time the
adjacent properties are submitted for subdivision, the village engineer shall apportion the benefit received by the adjacent property developer by reason
of the increased facilities. The adjacent property developer shall pay the sum of money equal to his proportionate share of the cost of the increased
facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 504/525
C. The village may, as determined by the village board of trustees, act as the collecting agent in regard to increased facility sharing. In such cases, an
administrative handling charge of five percent (5%) shall be applied to the adjacent developer's share and retained by the village. Upon receipt of such
proportionate share payment by the adjacent property developer, the village shall reimburse the developer who originally installed the increased
facilities. (1976 Code § 152.040)
Footnote 1: 220 ILCS 5/16-114.
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-5-1: BUILDING PERMITS:
A. Requirements: No building permit providing for the improvement of any lot in any subdivision shall be issued until the following has occurred:
1. A certified copy of the final plat of subdivision as recorded with the Lake County recorder of deeds has been filed with the director of planning, zoning
and building.
2. Improvement plans, signed and sealed by the design engineer have been submitted to and approved by the village engineer, and other agencies if
required. The plans shall be accompanied by a performance guarantee in the appropriate amount, following which the plan approval shall be
documented by the issuance of a site development-watershed development permit.
3. The completion and village engineer approval, or other agencies' approval as may be required, of the following elements of the required public and
quasi-public improvements:
a. Rough graded storm water detention basin (typically used as a silt basin during construction);
b. Erosion and sedimentation control measures;
c. Underground utilities, including gas, electric, telephone, and storm lines for sump pumps;
d. Curb and gutter, and road base, including private roads and emergency lanes;
e. Street name signs;
f. Stop signs and other traffic signs;
g. Lot number signs.
B. Exception: Partial permits authorizing foundation and utility constructions for commercial or industrial buildings, temporary sales offices, construction
trailers, and in residential developments a limited number of model homes may be permitted following compliance with the items in subsections A1, A2,
A3a, and A3b of this section, and all other applicable building code sections. (Ord. 06-10-35, 10-2-2006)
11-5-2: INSPECTIONS:
All public improvements proposed to be made under the provisions of this title shall be inspected during the course of construction by the village engineer,
or a duly designated deputy. All fees and costs connected with such inspection and with reviewing the plans and specifications for such improvements
shall be paid by the subdivider. (1976 Code § 152.060)
11-5-3: VARIANCES:
Where the plan commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may recommend a variance of
the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of the official comprehensive plan of the village or these regulations. The additional financial burden or time delay resulting from strict
compliance with these regulations shall not, in themselves, be considered grounds for recommending a variance. (1976 Code § 152.050)
11-5-4: PROCESSING DOCUMENTS:
The filing of all documents and the forms required for certification shall be those forms on file in the office of the village clerk. Other certificates, affidavits,
endorsements, notations or dedications may be required by the plan commission or the village board in the endorsement of these regulations. (1976 Code
§ 152.075)
11-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title for which no other penalty is provided, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (1976 Code § 152.999(A); amd. 2003 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 505/525
Title 12
FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 1
WATERSHED AND FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT
12-1-1: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
A. Stormwater Management Regulations: The Lake County watershed development ordinance, as most recently amended by the county of Lake on
October 13, 2015, is hereby adopted by reference and is in full force and effect within the village of Antioch and is found in its own compilation. (Ord.
16-01-01, 1-18-2016)
B. Erosion And Sedimentation Control: The erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained in chapter 2 of this title are adopted into this section
by reference hereto as if fully set forth herein. If any remaining portions of said chapter 2 of this title are in conflict with the amended Lake County
watershed development ordinance, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. (Ord. 99-11-23, 11-1-1999)
C. Floodplain Regulations: Floodplain regulations are contained within the Lake County watershed development ordinance adopted by reference in
subsection A of this section. Additionally, the regulations of the national flood insurance program, paragraph 60.3(d) and the local flood insurance rate
map panels attached as exhibit A thereto are hereby adopted by reference. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the foregoing adopted
sets of regulations, the more restrictive regulation shall be deemed to be applicable. (Ord. 13-08-17, 8-19-2013)
Chapter 2
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
12-2-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. Findings:
1. Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing development for certain nonagricultural uses, including, but not limited to, the
construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, the modification of stream channels
and drainageways and the creation of recreational facilities.
2. The washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof, by decreasing vision
and reducing traction of road vehicles.
3. Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gulleys, washed-out fills and embankments.
4. Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to pollute and silt river, streams, lakes, wetlands and reservoirs.
5. Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes, promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and
other desirable aquatic life, and is costly and difficult to remove.
6. Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways and the storage capacity of flood plains and natural depressions, resulting in increased
chances of flooding at risk to public health and safety.
B. Purpose: The village board of trustees, therefore, declares that the purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to
the environment and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any
development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the village. It is the
intent of this chapter that the delivery of sediment from sites affected by land disturbing activities be limited, as closely as practicable, to that which
would have occurred if the land had been left in its natural undisturbed state. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter certain terms used herein are defined as set forth below:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply
with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
CLEARING: Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the method of average end areas.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 506/525
FILL: Any act by which, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
any person to a new location, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction or killing by spraying.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing improvements.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the village for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of
erosion runoff and grading.
STREAM: Any river, creek, brook, brand, flowage, ravine, or natural or manmade drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into
which surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearing and storage or removal of topsoil.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The village of Antioch, Lake County, Illinois.
WETLANDS: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-3: STANDARDS AND GENERAL PRINCIPLES:
A. Standards Adopted By Reference1: The standards and specifications contained in Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
(the yellow book) and the Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (the green book) cited in section 12-2-4
of this chapter, are hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods
of operation under site development and erosion and sedimentation control plans approved under section 12-2-4 of this chapter. In the event of conflict
between provisions of said manuals and of this chapter, this chapter shall govern.
B. Principles: It is the objective of this chapter to control soil erosion and sedimentation caused by development activities, including clearing, grading,
stripping, excavating and filling of land in the village. Measures taken to control soil erosion and off site sediment runoff should be adequate to assure
that sediment is not transported form the site by a storm event of 10-year frequency or less. The following principles shall apply to all development
activities within the village and to the preparation of the submissions required under section 12-2-4 of this chapter:
1. Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create the least potential erosion. Areas of steep slopes where high
cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
2. Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds and
wetlands should be left undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary crossings of watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate stabilization
measures.
3. Special precautions should be taken to prevent damages resultant from any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake,
pond or wetland. Preventative measures should reflect the sensitivity of these areas to erosion and sedimentation.
4. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical time during development.
5. Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions and any other appropriate sediment or runoff control measures should be installed prior to site
clearing and grading and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development.
6. The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and benefits involved.
7. In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
8. Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities and rates of discharge will not create additional erosion on
site or downstream.
9. Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed and functional as soon as practical during development.
10. Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land uses should be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to
development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 507/525
11. All waste generated as a result of site development activity should be properly disposed of and should be prevented from being carried off the site
by either wind or water.
12. All construction sites should provide measures to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall commence or perform any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or
filling of land which meets the following provisions without having first obtained a site development permit from the building department of the village.
1. Any land disturbing activity (that is, clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an area in excess of five
thousand (5,000) square feet;
2. Any land disturbing activity that will affect an area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet if the activity is within twenty five feet (25') of a lake,
pond, stream or wetland; or
3. Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof, that will exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards.
B. Exceptions: A permit shall not be required for any of the following, provided that the person responsible for any such development shall implement
necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures to satisfy the principles set forth in subsection 12-2-3B of this chapter:
1. Excavation below final grade for the basement and footings of a single-family residence and appurtenant structures on a site in excess of two (2)
acres for which a building permit has been issued by the village;
2. Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the soil and water
conservation district, and including the construction of agricultural structures;
3. Installation, renovation or replacement of a septic system to serve an existing dwelling or structure. (1976 Code § 152.103)
C. Application For Permit: Application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the building
department on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of
any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by the
establishment of an escrow account, and filing fee as required by section 13-1-7 of this code. Each application shall include certification that any land
clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
D. Submissions: Each application for a site development permit shall be accompanied by the following information:
1. A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including the boundary line and
approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning and a legend and scale.
2. A development plan of the site showing:
a. Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than two
foot (2') contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage pattern of the area.
b. The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands and depressions, drainage facilities, vegetative cover,
paved areas and other significant natural or manmade features on the site and adjacent land within one hundred feet (100') of the boundary.
c. A general description of the predominant soil types on the site, their location and their limitations for the proposed use.
d. Proposed use of the site, including present development and planned utilization; areas of clearing, stripping, grading, excavation and filling;
proposed contours, finished grades and street profiles; provisions for storm drainage, including storm sewers, swales, detention basins and any
other measures to control the rate of runoff, with a drainage area map, indications of flow directions and computations; kinds and locations of
utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left undisturbed.
3. An erosion and sediment control plan showing all measures necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction
and permanently after completion of development of the site, including:
a. Location and description, including standard details, of all sediment control measures and design specifics of sediment basins and traps, including
outlet details.
b. Location and description of all soil stabilization and erosion control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures and types of nonvegetative stabilization measures.
c. Location and description of all runoff control measures, including diversions, waterways and outlets.
d. Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of sediment off site, including construction entrance details, as appropriate.
e. Description of dust and traffic control measures.
f. Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization methods.
g. Description of off site fill or borrow volumes, locations and methods of stabilization.
h. Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type and frequency of maintenance, easements and estimates of the cost of
maintenance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 508/525
i. Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s) or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of erosion control
structures and measures during development and after development is completed.
4. Phasing: The proposed phasing of development of the site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas and the
sequence of installation of temporary sediment control measures (including perimeter controls), clearing and grading, installation of temporary soil
stabilization measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas, final grading and the establishment of permanent vegetative
cover and the removal of temporary measures. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the building department of any significant
changes which occur in the site development schedule after the initial erosion and sediment control plan has been approved.
5. Compliance:
a. These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the standards and requirements contained in
Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosions and Sediment Control (the yellow book) published by the Illinois environmental protection agency
and the Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (the green book) prepared by the Northeastern Illinois
soil erosion and sedimentation control steering committee and adopted by the Lake County soil and water conservation district, which standards
and requirements are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference2.
b. The building department may waive specific requirements for the content of submission upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to
show that the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this chapter. (1976 Code § 152.103)
E. Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed by a date which shall be specified in the permit; except that the building
department may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed within
the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. The building
department may require modification of the erosion control plan to prevent any increase in erosion or off site sediment runoff resulting from any
extension. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-5: BONDS:
The applicant is required to file with the village a faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit or other improvement security satisfactory to the
village attorney in an amount deemed sufficient by the building department to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements
and landscaping, and soil erosion and sediment control measures for such period as specified by the village, and engineering and inspection costs to
cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-6: PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Each application for a site development permit shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
A. The planning, building and zoning department will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the
provisions of this chapter, The village may also refer any application to the Lake County soil and water conservation district and/or any other local
government or public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and comment. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application,
the building department shall in writing:
1. Approve the permit application if it is found to be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and issue the permit;
2. Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter, and
issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
3. Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
B. No site development permit shall be issued for an intended development site unless:
1. The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and planned unit developments, has been approved by the village where applicable; or
2. Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the village; or
3. The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall development program previously approved by the village for the area in which the site is
situated; and
4. All relevant federal and state permits (that is, for flood plains and wetlands) have been received for the portion of the site subject to soil disturbance.
C. Failure of the planning, building and zoning department to act on an original or revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt shall authorize the
applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the building department and the
applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions
established by the building department. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-7: APPEALS:
The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice of the filing of the application, may appeal the decision of the building department as
provided in section 12-2-6 of this chapter to the zoning board of appeals. Upon receipt of an appeal, the zoning board of appeals shall schedule and hold a
public hearing, after giving fifteen (15) days notice thereof. The village board of trustees shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing.
Factors to be considered on review shall include, but need not be limited to, the effects of the proposed development activities on the surface water flow to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 509/525
tributary and downstream lands, any comprehensive watershed management plans, or the use of any retention facilities; possible saturation of fill and
unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways; nature and type of soil or
rock which when disturbed by the proposed development activities may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and
excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-8: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained in original form or on microfilm by the building department. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-
2-1992)
12-2-9: APPLICABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Applicability: All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating and filling which is subject to the permit requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the
applicable standards and requirements set forth in this chapter.
B. Responsibility: The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, and the village or its
officers or agents will not be made liable for such damage, by the issuance of a permit under this chapter, compliance with the provisions of that permit
or with conditions attached to it by the building department, failure of village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions, failure
of village officials to recommend denial of or to deny a permit, or exemptions from the permit requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-10: SITE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A. On site sediment control measures, as specified by the following criteria, shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating clearing, grading,
stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site:
1. For disturbed areas draining less than one acre, filter barriers (including filter fences, straw bales or equivalent control measures) shall be
constructed to control all off site runoff as specified in referenced handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty five feet (25'),
may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is expected.
2. For disturbed areas draining more than one but less than five (5) acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the
downslope point of the disturbed area.
3. For disturbed areas draining more than five (5) acres, a sediment basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point of
the disturbed area.
4. Sediment basins and sediment traps designs shall provide for both detention storage and sediment storage. The detention storage shall be
composed of equal volumes of wet detention storage and dry detention storage and each shall be sized for the two (2) year, twenty four (24) hour
runoff from the site under maximum runoff conditions during construction. The release rate of the basin shall be that rate required to achieve
minimum detention times of at least ten (10) hours. The elevation of the outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention
storage.
5. The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with a
minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated in one year. For construction periods exceeding one year, the one year sediment
load and a sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
B. Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales and diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and constructed
to withstand the expected flow velocity from the 10-year frequency storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized within
forty eight (48) hours, consistent with the following standards:
1. For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with mulch, erosion blanket or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod or
erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel.
2. For grades of four to eight percent (8%), sod or an equivalent control measure shall be applied in the channel.
3. For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap or an equivalent control measure shall be applied, or the grade shall be effectively reduced
using drop structures.
C. Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent measure within seven (7) calendar days following the end of active disturbance or
redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria:
1. Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall include seeding, mulching, sodding and/or nonvegetative measures.
2. Areas having slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) shall be stabilized with sod, mat or blanket in combination with seeding or equivalent.
D. Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided, where possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following requirements
shall be met:
1. Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to the maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
2. The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept to a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be restabilized
within forty eight (48) hours after channel disturbance is completed, interrupted or stopped.
3. Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be constructed in the dry and fully stabilized before flow is diverted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 510/525
E. Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications.
F. Soil storage piles containing more than ten (10) cubic yards of material shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than twenty five
feet (25') to a roadway or drainage channel. Filter barriers, including straw bales, filter fence or equivalent, shall be installed immediately on the
downslope side of the piles.
G. If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through appropriately
designed sediment traps or basins or equivalent.
H. Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads, access drives and parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment disposal area.
I. All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective performance of
their intended function.
J. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed of within thirty (30) days after final site stabilization is achieved with permanent
soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soils resulting from the disposition of temporary measures should be permanently
stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-11: MAINTENANCE OF CONTROL MEASURES:
All soil erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained periodically by the applicant or
subsequent land owner during the period of land disturbance and development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance. (Ord.
92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-12: INSPECTIONS:
A. The building department shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan as approved. Plans for grading,
stripping, excavating and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the building department shall be maintained at the site during progress of the
work. In order to obtain inspections and to ensure compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, the grading or building permit, and
this chapter, the permittee shall notify the building department within two (2) working days of the completion of the construction stages specified below:
1. Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior to proceeding with any
other earth disturbance or grading;
2. After stripping and clearing;
3. After rough grading;
4. After final grading;
5. After seeding and landscaping deadlines; and
6. After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of sediment controls.
B. If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be phases or areas the permittee shall give notice and request inspection at the completion of
each of the above work stages in each phase or area. If an inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five (5) working days after
notice is received by the village from the permittee, the permittee may continue work at his own risk, without presuming acceptance by the village.
Notification of the results of the inspection shall be given in writing at the site. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-13: SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS:
A. If any stage of the gradIng of any development site the building department determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such that further work
authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland or drainage structure, the building department may
require, as a condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable special precaution to be taken as is considered advisable to avoid the
likelihood of such peril. Special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and recommendations of a registered soils
engineer and/or engineering geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
B. Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on any development site is not complete, work may be stopped the permittee
required to install temporary structures to take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the building department may specify the time or starting grading and time of completion or may
require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of
seasonal rains. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-14: AMENDMENT OF PLANS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 511/525
Major amendments of the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the building department and shall be
processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the building
department by written authorization to the permittee. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-15: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Exceptions: The zoning board of appeals may, in accordance with the following procedures, authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and
regulations set forth in this chapter:
1. Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant for a site development permit, stating fully the grounds of the
petition and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In order for the petition to
be granted, it shall be necessary that the zoning board of appeals find all of the following facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition:
a. That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record, that it is impossible
or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter;
b. That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
c. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property.
2. Each application for an exception shall be referred to the building department for review. The village board of trustees shall transmit is
recommendations to the zoning board of appeals, which shall review such recommendations prior to granting or denying the exception.
3. The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application for exception, within thirty (30) days after receiving application, in the
manner provided with respect to appeals. After public hearing, the village board of trustees may approve the site development permit application with
the exceptions and conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site development permit application and exception application or it may
take such other action as appropriate. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-16: STOP WORK ORDER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or carries on site development is such
a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the development site or so as
to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the building department may suspend or
revoke the site development permit.
A. Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work order issued by the building department and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person
performing the work. The stop work order shall be effective immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed. A stop work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the zoning board of appeals at
which the conditions of subsection B of this section can be met.
B. No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and shall state:
1. The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation, in clear and concise language; and
2. The time when and place where such hearing will be held.
C. Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the zoning board of appeals shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992)
12-2-17: PENALTY:
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any
terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such
violation, such person shall be punished by a fine as set out in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense. In addition to any other
penalty authorized by this section, any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to restore the site to the
condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense of such restoration. (Ord. 92-11-22, 11-2-1992; amd. 2003 Code)
Chapter 3
SHORELINE AND STREAM BANK ACTIVITIES
12-3-1: PERMITS AND PLANS:
A. Permit Required:
1. Prior to any person doing any work on a shoreline or stream bank, a village permit shall be obtained from the director of planning, zoning and
building. Said permit shall allow for the minor repair of shorelines and stream banks with the following materials:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 512/525
a. Stone or concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled
bags, geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation.
b. Any improvements to a shoreline which abuts a channel shall be with steel sheet piling only. (Ord. 88-12-39, 12-5-1988)
2. Any person requiring such a permit shall file an application in the form provided by the village engineer and shall pay the requisite permit fee as
established in section 13-1-7 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
B. Building Plan Required: The applicant shall supply a building plan for such alteration of the shoreline or stream bank prior to the issuance of the permit.
C. Nonexclusions: This chapter does not in any way excuse any person from obtaining the requisite United States army corps of engineers permit nor
does it excuse obtaining a state of Illinois permit in those cases not authorized or justified by statewide permit no. 911. (Ord. 88-12-39, 12-5-1988)
12-3-2: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
A. Any protection activities shall proceed in accordance with statewide permit no. 9 authorizing minor shoreline and stream bank protection activities,
issued by the state of Illinois department of transportation, office of water resources, dated October 1, 1986, which regulation is hereby adopted and
incorporated by this reference as a part of this code regulating the issuance of such permits.
B. The director of planning, zoning and building is authorized to adopt a special set of instructions and regulations which are consistent with the terms of
statewide permit no. 9. (Ord. 88-12-39, 12-5-1988)
12-3-3: PROHIBITED MATERIALS:
The following materials may not be used to protect shoreline and stream banks: auto bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing
materials, asphalt or other bituminous materials or any material which would cause water pollution. (Ord. 88-12-39, 12-5-1988)
12-3-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined as provided in the general penalty in section 1-3-1 of this code for each offense and
a violation shall be deemed to exist for each day during which violations of the chapter continue. (Ord. 88-12-39, 12-5-1988; amd. 2003 Code)
Chapter 4
REGULATIONS FOR DISCHARGES INTO STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM
12-4-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the village through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user;
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4; and
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord.
08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 502 of the clean water act, 40 CFR 122, and 35 Illinois
administrative code 309, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. For convenience, simplified explanations of some regulatory/statutory definitions
have been provided, but in the event of a conflict, the definition found in the statute or regulation takes precedence.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Any public body having jurisdiction under the clean water act to enforce the provisions of the clean water act
or this chapter, including, but not limited to, the United States environmental protection agency, Illinois environmental protection agency, Lake County
stormwater management commission, and the village.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any officer or employee of an authorized enforcement agency who administers or enforces any provision of
this chapter, code, or clean water act pursuant to this chapter. The term "authorized enforcement officer" shall include the village administrator; the director
of planning and zoning; the director of physical services; the code enforcement officer; the village engineer, the fire chief, or their designee. It is expressly
intended that those officials shall be, and are empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter including the initiating and signing of formal complaints
alleging violations of such provisions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 513/525
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention
and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly
to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: Formally referred to as the federal water pollution control act, means Pub. L. 92-500 (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction or Lake County watershed development permits. These include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property,
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drainage system, except as allowed under an NPDES permit or as
exempted in section 12-4-6 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following:
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drainage system including,
without limitation, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drainage system; and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, paths, roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the village and designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by an authorized
enforcement agency that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or
general area wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the
owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, without limitation, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, without limitation, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade
or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document that describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, lakes, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
swale, wash, or natural or humanmade drainageway, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-
2-2008)
12-4-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 514/525
the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of, under contract to or in the employ of the agency. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-5: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-6: PROHIBITIONS ON DISCHARGES:
A. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainage system is prohibited
except as follows:
1. Water line and fire hydrant flushing or other potable water sources, storm sewer cleaning water, residual street wash water, landscape irrigation or
lawn watering (except of wastewater irrigation), diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated
pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less
than 1 PPM chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
2. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
3. Dye testing, but only with prior oral notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
4. Nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the United States environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm
drainage system.
B. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
1. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.
4. Improper connections in violation of this subsection must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on site wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
5. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall
be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the authorized enforcement agency requiring that
such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be
determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to
the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and
provided to the authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-7: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The authorized enforcement agency may suspend, without prior notice, MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply
with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to the public.
B. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have MS4 access terminated
if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense and is in violation of this chapter if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section
without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION DISCHARGES:
A. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
B. The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall
submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the village at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the EPA as applicable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 515/525
C. The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the village either in person or by mailing it to:
Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
Village of Antioch
874 Main Street
Antioch, IL 60069
D. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having submitted
a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the village. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-9: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
A. Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system or associated with industrial activity,
including construction activity.
B. Access To Facilities:
1. The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, then the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency.
2. Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The authorized enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
4. The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used
to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.
6. Unreasonable delay in allowing the authorized enforcement agency access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and
of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this chapter.
7. If the authorized enforcement agency has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he or she is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of
a routine inspection and sampling programs designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-10: BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIRED:
The authorized enforcement agency will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial
or industrial establishment will provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural
and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this
section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials that are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, or water of the United States said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 516/525
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within two (2) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record
of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-13: ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
A. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
B. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
C. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist (including compliance with a general stop work order);
D. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
E. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
F. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or
restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-
2008)
12-4-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement officer to the corporate authorities of the village.
The notice of appeal must be received within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate
authority or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the corporate
authorities shall be final. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven (7) days of
the decision of the corporate authorities upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, whichever is later, then representatives of the
authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-16: COST OF ABATEMENT:
Within fifteen (15) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs.
The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment, which protest shall be processed in the same manner as an
appeal of a notice of violation.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not
more than twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the thirtieth day
following the assessment of the fine. All partial payments shall first be allocated to accrued interest and then to the outstanding principal amount then due.
(Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-17: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for a preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining the person from activities that would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-18: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 517/525
In lieu of or in addition to enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose
upon a violator the performance of community service requirements, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup,
etc. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-19: VIOLATIONS DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
12-4-20: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 08-06-13, 6-2-2008)
Title 13
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION FEES
Chapter 1
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION FEES ENUMERATED
13-1-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the intent and purpose of providing a comprehensive list of fees related to various stages of development and construction, as
regulated by titles 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 of this code. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
13-1-2: WATER AND/OR SEWER TAP-ON/INSPECTION FEES:
A. Each application for tap-on to a water main shall be accompanied by a tap-on/inspection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each application for a
tap-on to a sewer main shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00). These fees are established to defray the cost to
the village for the employment of qualified personnel to carry out the inspection of the water or sewer tap-on and shall not be part of the connection fee
authorized by statute.
B. The inspection will determine that the construction thereof is in accordance with specifications established by the village for the regulation for these
systems. The water and/or sewer inspection fee shall be uniform with regard to each physical connection into either system without regard to the size
of connection or the number or type of units which the single connection shall serve. Each applicant shall provide and pay the cost of construction, both
labor and material, of the service and fittings from the main to the premises to be served. The construction work in connection with the installation of
said service shall be performed by a licensed plumber who has a properly executed bond on file in the office of the village clerk. Applicants shall
purchase water meters and fittings from the village. The fee to the applicant shall be the village's cost plus a fifteen percent (15%) administrative and
handling fee.
C. The aforementioned water and sewer service from the building to the curb stop and the sewer to the building from the sewer main are the full
responsibility of the property owner or occupant. Should any maintenance be required on either the water service or sewer service, it shall be the sole
responsibility of the owner or occupant. Should it be necessary for the village to repair the system due to the refusal by the owner or occupant, any and
all costs, including attorney fees, shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant. The village shall have the option to collect the money directly or
to place a lien on the property. In addition to the aforementioned remedies by the village, the penalty provision of title 1, chapter 3 of this code shall also
control. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
13-1-3: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES AND SUBCLASSES:
A. Connection Fees: Pursuant to authority granted in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-150-1 and on authority contained in other provisions of the state
statutes, there is established within the village a fee for connecting into the waterworks system or sewerage system of the village. This fee is to be
assessed against new or additional users of the sewage collection and treatment system or the water system of the village and shall be known as a
connection fee. The fee shall be payable at the time a building or connection permit is issued. The amount of the connection fee shall be comprised of
several component fees. The basic component fee shall be a sum fixed within this section to be designated as the water connection fee, or sewer
connection fee. If the building plans do not indicate an accurate estimate of the volume and/or strength of the usage, the applicant shall pay an
additional fee based on the most accurate estimate which can be made upon the plans submitted. At the time that the sewer and/or water connection is
in full use, a reevaluation of the volume and/or strength of the usage shall be made and if necessary an adjustment of the fees shall be made. This
reevaluation shall be made within one year of the date at which the operation, in the opinion of the superintendent of the waterworks and sewerage
system, shall have reached its full use.
B. Water Connection Fee: The connection fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per population equivalent plus an additional fee determined by adding
together the basic component fees which are applicable to each new or additional user of the system, the sum of which shall constitute the total
connection fee. The several component fees are established as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 518/525
1. Fee According To Size Of Tap: The water connection fee shall be based on the size of the water tap. This fee shall reimburse the village for a portion
of the waterworks system previously constructed by the village which the applicant now seeks to utilize. The schedule of taps and fees shall be as
follows:
Size Of Tap
(In Inches)
Fee
1 or less $2,000.00
11/2 2,250.00
2 3,750.00
3 4,000.00
4 4,750.00
6 6,750.00
8 9,250.00
Over 8 9,250.00 plus $3,750.00 per inch in
excess of 8 inches
2. Separate Water Service Required: Each dwelling unit, commercial, industrial or other unit dedicated to a specific use or occupant shall have a
separate water service. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
3. Clublands Subdivision Special Rates: Pursuant to the provisions of an order of the United States bankruptcy court, northern district of Illinois, eastern
division in the case of In Re: Neumann Homes, Inc., causes number 07-21412 through 07-20417 and 07-21468 through 07-21470 by Judge Eugene
B. Wedoff on July 23, 2008, and pursuant to the agreements memorialized therein, a special tap fee in the amount of four thousand dollars
($4,000.00) per residence is hereby imposed on all residential properties located within the Clublands Subdivision for the privilege of tapping into the
village's existing water system, which special tap fee is imposed in lieu of any and all other water tap fees imposed by the village pursuant to law.
This special tap fee shall apply to all building permits for houses constructed on lots in the Clublands Subdivision applied for or issued at any time
after the effective date hereof. Nothing in this paragraph shall affect any other fees, taxes, permits, licenses or other charges or requirements
imposed by law upon the lots in the Clublands Subdivision. (Ord. 11-01-01, 1-3-2011)
C. Sewer Connection Fee:
1. The sewer connection fee shall be for each unit for which there is an individual sanitary sewer service, a basic fee of two hundred seventy five
dollars ($275.00) per population equivalent, plus one thousand nine hundred dollars ($1,900.00) per unit. This fee shall reimburse the village for a
portion of the sewerage system previously constructed by the village which the applicant now seeks to utilize.
However, in any instance in which the volume and/or strength of sewage from a single commercial, institutional or industrial user shall be greater
than a population equivalent of thirty (30) and with regard to those instances in which the village, at its discretion, shall agree to provide sewerage
service to an area outside of its corporate limits, the sewer connection fee for such user or users shall be determined by the volume and nature of the
wastewater to be treated, but in no case less than three thousand eight hundred dollars ($3,800.00).
2. The fees described above, except as otherwise provided, pertain to each detached single-family residential, attached single-family residential (such
as townhouses), commercial or industrial connection. In the event that any industrial or commercial building shall contain multiple units within a
structure served by a single sewer service, a basic fee of one thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) per unit shall be assessed. (Ord. 05-12-27,
12-19-2005)
13-1-4: REVENUE REGULATIONS:
A. Disposition Of Revenues:
1. The revenue received by the village from the inspection fee, water connection fee, and the sewer connection fee shall be deposited into the
waterworks and sewage fund of the village.
2. The revenue received by the village from the water and sewer improvement and extension connection fee shall be used by the village for the
necessary expansion of the works of the system to meet the requirements of new or additional users thereof; such funds shall be placed until they
are used, into a fund which shall be known as the waterworks and sewerage improvement and extension fund. The monies to the credit of such fund
may be invested from time to time by the village treasurer as provided by law. All accrued interest on any investments shall be credited to such fund.
B. Acceptance Of Dedications In Lieu Of Fees: The village may, at the discretion of the mayor and village board of trustees, accept a dedication of
construction, improvement or extension of the works of its system, or a specific sum of money to accomplish such development, in lieu of the water and
sewer connection fees or the water and sewer improvements and extension fees established by this chapter. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
13-1-5: PERMIT FEES, ESCROW DEPOSITS AND BONDS REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
For construction work proposed within public rights-of-way or on public property, such as curb cuts, driveway aprons, etc., and not being performed as part
of the development of a new subdivision, the following shall be required prior to permit issuance:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 519/525
A. Permit Fee: A permit fee shall be based upon two percent (2%) of the total project cost, but in no case less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Escrow Deposit: An initial escrow deposit shall be based upon two percent (2%) of the total project cost, but in no case less than one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
C. Performance Guarantee: A performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution acceptable to the Village shall be posted in the
amount of one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the total project cost or fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), whichever is greater. Such performance
guarantee shall guard and protect any excavation or obstruction and defend, save, keep harmless and indemnify the Village of and from any and all
action, suits, costs, damages and expenses whatsoever, including attorney fees which shall or may at any time happen to come to it for or on account
of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any party or parties by or from acts or omissions of the applicant of his/her/its service in doing such
work; and that he will restore such streets, sidewalks or public property to its former condition and to complete such work as quickly as possible and
when completed to notify the Village engineers of such fact; and guaranteeing that such work so made in the public streets, sidewalks and public
properties, is made and constructed in a good and workmanlike manner and of good and proper material and that the same shall not deteriorate, cave
in or require repair or reconstruction for a period of at least two (2) years from the time of the approval of such work as herein mentioned. (Ord. 09-04-
09, 4-20-2009)
13-1-6: BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
A. Permit Fees: Prior to the issuance of a building permit, all required fees shall be paid up front including building, tap-on, and impact fees. A one percent
(1%) of the estimated building costs shall be paid for administrative and review costs at the time of permit application at the discretion of staff. All
building permit fees shall be based on the following schedule:
New single family or townhome construction $75.00 per 1,000 cubic feet
Commercial, industrial, office, institutional, multi-family construction
2% of total estimated costs based on 2012 IBC in addition to an escrow
deposit of $1.00 per square foot of gross floor area
Alterations, including homes, commercial, industrial, office,
institutional, multi-family or accessory structures
2% of estimated costs plus $12.00 filing fee
Shoring, raising or moving buildings 2% of estimated costs plus $12.00 filing fee
Demolition 2% of estimated costs plus $12.00 filing fee
Sign permit $25.00 minimum or 2% of estimated cost plus $12.00 filing fee
Fences $25.00 minimum or 2% of estimated cost plus a $12.00 filing fee
Swimming pools and hot tubs 2% of estimated costs plus a $12.00 filing fee
Electrical $50.00 minimum or 2% of total estimated costs plus $12.00 filing fee
Plumbing $50.00 minimum or 2% of total estimated costs plus $12.00 filing fee
Driveways or parking lots $50.00 minimum or 2% of total estimated costs plus $12.00 filing fee
Roofing $50.00 minimum or 2% of total estimated costs plus $12.00 filing fee
(Ord. 17-06-19, 6-12-2017)
B. Estimates Of Construction Costs: The costs for new construction and additions shall be based upon the lesser per square foot value for each use group
as most recently published by the International Code Council (www.iccsafe.org/cs/techservices/"building valuation data") and available at the office of
village clerk and the department of planning, zoning and building.
For remodeling work, the estimate of the cost of construction shall be borne by the owner, builder, contractor, developer and the like, and shall be
supplied to the building department prior to the issuance of the permit. Fees based on estimated costs of construction shall be paid in advance at time
of building permit. The director of planning, zoning and building shall have the final determination as to the total costs of remodeling. Prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit or completion certificate, the applicant shall provide a signed and notarized contractor's sworn statement of cost.
Adjustments in permit fees, if any, shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit or completion certificate. The director
shall have sixty (60) days from the date of final occupancy permit or completion certificate to determine whether or not the actual cost of construction is
appropriate and if any further adjustment is necessary. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
C. Outside Plan Review And Inspection Service: If, because of the nature and/or size of a project, the director of community development reasonably
determines that an outside agency should be used to conduct plan reviews and inspections for the project, the building department may contract with
such an outside agency for the performance of all or any part of such plan review and inspection services as are required for the project, with the costs
of such services to be borne by the owner, builder or developer. The permit applicant shall in such cases, deposit into an escrow account an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of the review and/or inspection. (Ord. 09-11-32, 11-16-2009)
D. Site Development Fees And Escrow Deposits:
1. A minimum nonrefundable fee (referred to in this subsection hereafter as "fee") to cover the cost of technical review by full time professional staff,
and partially or fully refundable escrow deposit (referred to in this subsection hereafter as "escrow") are established to cover the cost of consultants
services (including, but not necessarily limited to, attorneys and engineers), in connection with the construction of any site development, subdivision
or watershed development located within the corporate limits of the village, in accordance with this title and title 11 of this code relating to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 520/525
subdivisions and title 12 of this code relating to flood control and related development regulations. The village requires a two percent (2%)
nonrefundable fee and an initial two percent (2%) partially or fully refundable escrow based on the "estimated site improvement construction costs".
2. The nonrefundable fee will be applied to village activities and expenses which are customary and reasonable for like site developments, including,
but not limited to: staff review, site visits, meetings, telephone calls, and use of equipment and supplies. Village staff and consultants will be assigned
to certain projects with the approval of the village administrator or his designated representative.
3. Funds from the escrow account will reimburse the village for "out of pocket" expenses (e.g., outside consultant review of plans and legal counsel),
unusual tasks, extraordinary expenditures of staff time or village resources, and unforeseeable requirements. All debits to the escrow will be
pertinent to the specific development.
4. Upon permit application, the village will send a letter to the developer (owner, contractor, agent, representative or the like) before work commences,
identifying the fee and the escrow amounts. Both monies must be submitted in full prior to site development. The village engineer shall be the final
authority for the anticipated construction costs of all improvements or in his/her absence, the director of planning, zoning, and building.
5. At any time during construction, should the escrow amount deposited by the developer fall below one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fail to cover
actual or foreseeable village expenses, the village shall notify the developer. The notification letter will show the escrow balance, requested
additional escrow amount, and justification. The developer shall, within seven (7) days, deposit such additional escrow funds with the village. Should
the developer fail to deposit these sums within the seven (7) day notification period, the permit(s) will be suspended and all work on the improvement
shall cease.
E. Inspection And Reinspection Fees:
1. Regular, first time, inspections as required by the building code are funded by part of the building permit fee.
2. Any inspection which fails shall be required to be reinspected. The permits coordinator is authorized to charge a reinspection fee which shall be paid
prior to the scheduling of the reinspection. The fee shall be based upon one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per inspector required to revisit the
project.
3. Any special inspection requested that is not part of a permitted project (e.g., life safety inspection due to change of commercial/industrial use of an
existing building), shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
13-1-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW FEES:
A. Application For Review Of Grading; Erosion Control Plans: Application for a plan review shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized
agent to the engineering department on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or
developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable plan review filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus the establishment of an escrow account, the
initial deposit of which shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per acre or fraction thereof. Each application shall include
certification that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon
issuance of the permit. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
13-1-8: ZONING FEES:
A. Zoning Variations, Special Uses, Amendments And Planned Development Requests:
1. Any person who may hereafter file any petition addressed to the combined planning commission and zoning board, praying for a change in zoning
regulations or any variation of the application of zoning regulations provided by law on a single tract or parcel of real estate, shall, at the time of filing
such petition, pay to the village clerk the following sums to defray the necessary costs of publication and expenses incident to the hearing of the
matter:
a. Variation Petition: Six hundred dollar ($600.00) nonrefundable filing fee; plus an initial escrow account deposit as indicated in subsection A2 of this
section.
b. Special Uses: Pursuant to section 10-15-5 of this code, six hundred dollar ($600.00) nonrefundable filing fee; plus an initial escrow account
deposit as indicated in subsection A2 of this section.
c. Zoning Amendments (Nonplanned Unit Developments): Pursuant to section 10-15-4 of this code, seven hundred dollar ($700.00) nonrefundable
filing fee; plus a nonrefundable amount as determined by subsection A1c(1) of this section; plus an initial escrow account deposit as indicated in
subsection A2 of this section.
(1) When a zoning change is sought from any use district to another use district, and one or more acres are sought to be rezoned, the fee shall be
increased as follows:
Acres Additional Fee
1 to 4.99 $235.00
5 to 9.99 350.00
10 to 49.99 600.00
50 or more 925.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 521/525
d. Planned Developments: Pursuant to title 10, chapter 9 of this code, in addition to any applicable fees in subsection A1c of this section, one
thousand five hundred dollar ($1,500.00) nonrefundable filing fee; plus an initial escrow account deposit as indicated in subsection A2 of this
section.
2. The applicant shall also deposit by certified check or money order payable to the village of Antioch an additional amount to be held in a noninterest
bearing escrow account with the village treasurer, to be used for professional examination of the applications, plans and the like by the village
engineers, village attorney and other professional staff or consultants of the village. The amount of the initial escrow deposit shall be based upon the
following:
$2,000.00 plus $50.00 per acre or fraction thereof.
Additional deposits may be required depending upon the nature and extent of the required review. Any portion not used by the professional staff shall
be refunded to the applicant at the end of the process or upon receipt of a signed and notarized letter indicating withdrawal of the petition.
3. If, at the written request of the petitioner, the chair of the combined planning commission and zoning board determines that a special meeting can be
scheduled, then an additional fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be due and payable, prior to scheduling the meeting.
4. Republication necessitated by any act of the petitioner or at the petitioner's request shall be at the petitioner's additional expense. The fee from the
local newspaper(s) plus a fifteen percent (15%) administrative fee shall be charged against the petitioner's escrow account.
B. Annexations:
1. The following fees for annexation are in addition to the fees enumerated in subsection A of this section. Any person that may hereafter file any
petition addressed to the village board of trustees requesting annexation to the village, shall, at the time of filing the petition, pay to the village clerk
the following sums to defray the necessary cost of publication and expenses incident to the hearing of the matter:
a. For request for automatic zoning classification pursuant to section 10-4-4 of this code, a nonrefundable filing fee of nine hundred dollars ($900.00)
plus an initial escrow account deposit as indicated in subsection B2 of this section.
b. For a request to enter into a preannexation agreement, a nonrefundable filing fee of nine hundred dollars ($900.00).
c. For request for R residential zoning classifications, a nonrefundable filing fee of nine hundred dollars ($900.00); plus an initial escrow account
deposit as indicated in subsection B2 of this section; plus a nonrefundable amount determined as follows:
(1) When proposed R residential zoning is sought for heretofore vacant, unsubdivided land, in conjunction with an annexation request, and one or
more acres are sought to be rezoned, the nonrefundable fee shall be increased as follows:
Acres Additional Fee
1 to 4.99 $235.00
5 to 9.99 350.00
10 to 49.99 600.00
50 or more 925.00
(2) When proposed R residential zoning is sought for subdivided and developed land, in conjunction with an annexation request, the fee shall be
increased by twenty five dollars ($25.00) per vacant lot and one hundred dollars ($100.00) per improved lot.
d. For requests for B business and/or M manufacturing, in conjunction with annexation, an additional nonrefundable fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00); plus an initial escrow account deposit as indicated in subsection B2 of this section.
2. The applicant shall also deposit an additional amount to be held in escrow with the village treasurer, to be used for professional examination of the
applications, plans and the like by the village engineers, village attorney and other professional staff or consultants of the village. The amount of the
initial escrow deposit shall be based upon the following:
$2,000.00 plus $50.00 per acre or fraction thereof.
Additional deposits may be required depending upon the nature and extent of the required review. Any portion not used by the professional staff shall
be refunded to the applicant at the end of the project or upon receipt of a signed and notarized letter indicating withdrawal of the petition.
3. If, at the written request of the petitioner, the mayor determines that a special meeting of the village board can be scheduled, then an additional fee
of one thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) shall be due and payable upon request and prior to the date of the special meeting.
4. Republication necessitated by any act of the petitioner or at the petitioner's request shall be at the petitioner's additional expense. The fee from the
local newspaper(s) plus a fifteen percent (15%) administrative fee shall be charged against the petitioner's escrow account. (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-
2005)
13-1-9: SUBDIVISION FILING FEES:
A. Concept: The filing of the concept plan for a subdivision shall be accompanied by a six hundred dollar ($600.00) nonrefundable filing fee, and a two
thousand dollar ($2,000.00) escrow account for professional services.
B. Preliminary: The filing of a preliminary plat for a subdivision shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) plus any additional deposit to the escrow account to bring its balance to a minimum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) plus fifty dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 522/525
($50.00) per acre or fraction thereof.
C. Final: The filing of a final plat for a subdivision shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) plus
any additional deposit to the escrow account to bring its balance to a minimum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per acre or
fraction thereof.
D. Minor Subdivision: Applications that involve: 1) a previously unsubdivided site with a gross development area of one hundred eight thousand nine
hundred (108,900) square feet (2.5 acres) or less; and 2) a site with frontage and proposed vehicular access onto a road or street which is dedicated
and maintained by the village of Antioch; and 3) the creation of five (5) or fewer lots are considered minor subdivisions and may combine preliminary
and final reviews following the payment of a nonrefundable filing fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). If there are any site developments or
drainage issues which, in the opinion of the village engineer, require detailed engineering study and review, an escrow deposit of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) shall be required. Additional escrow deposits may be required depending upon the nature of the site and extent of the engineering
required.
E. Resubdivision Or Land Readjustment: For other than a minor subdivision, the vacation of a previously recorded final plat and/or an application to
resubdivide or reconfigure the lots within a recorded subdivision shall be reviewed as a new final plat and be subject to the filing fees for the filing of a
final plat (as noted above).
F. Unincorporated: The filing of a preliminary or final plat for an unincorporated subdivision situated within the village of Antioch's extraterritorial jurisdiction
shall be accompanied by a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The filing of a plat of consolidation for an unincorporated subdivision situated within
the village of Antioch's extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
13-1-10: TREE REPLACEMENT FUND:
A separate account known as the tree replacement fund shall be created. The developer/owner shall deposit with the village, to be held in escrow, an
amount equal to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per replacement tree. Said amount shall be held in escrow in a noninterest bearing account for twenty
four (24) months from the time of planting to assure the replacement trees live two (2) years and shall be used solely to replace nonsurviving trees, if any.
(Ord. 05-12-27, 12-19-2005)
13-1-11: ELECTRONIC FILING FEE:
A. If electronic documents are not provided by the applicant, each application for a site development or building permit fee shall be accompanied by a ten
dollar ($10.00) flat fee plus, eight dollars ($8.00) for each twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") full sized plan sheet, and one dollar ($1.00) per
eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") or smaller sheet. (Ord. 09-08-23, 8-17-2009)
Title 14
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 1
AMBULANCE SERVICE
14-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-5-7, the village of Antioch restricts the delivery of emergency ambulance service within
village limits to duly licensed entities. (Ord. 12-06-08, 6-4-2012)
14-1-2: NUMBER AND TERM OF LICENSES:
The number of licenses that are authorized to be issued under this chapter shall be one. The initial license shall be effective from June 4, 2012 to
December 31, 2013. Subsequent licenses shall be effective for successive periods of two (2) years each. (Ord. 12-06-08, 6-4-2012)
14-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
No license shall be issued to any ambulance service agency unless it meets the following minimum requirements, in full and without qualification:
A. Be a party to, or be prepared to enter into, a current contract for emergency services with the village of Antioch;
B. Maintain current state of Illinois department of public health (IDPH) certification as an advanced life support transport ambulance agency;
C. Maintain in service at all times adequate staff and fully equipped ambulances to serve the community, according to the requirements established in the
contract for emergency services;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 523/525
D. Carry insurance as required by the contract for emergency services. (Ord. 12-06-08, 6-4-2012)
14-1-4: SUBCONTRACTING:
The village administrator, for good cause shown, may allow the licensee to subcontract with other duly qualified entities to provide emergency services
upon appropriate conditions, but in such event, the licensee shall remain fully responsible for the acts and compliance with this chapter by the
subcontractor. Among the conditions that the village administrator may require is the posting of a performance bond conditioned upon adequate sureties.
(Ord. 12-06-08, 6-4-2012)
14-1-5: COMPLIANCE WITH VILLAGE POLICIES:
While the licensee is an independent body that is solely responsible for the performance of its duties under any license granted under this chapter, it is
required to maintain workplaces within premises owned and controlled by the village, and for that reason, it is necessary for it to have in full force and
effect at all times appropriate policies relating to use of the workplace that is in all respects consistent with the terms of the current contract for emergency
services. (Ord. 12-06-08, 6-4-2012)
14-1-6: ENFORCEMENT:
The village administrator shall be the compliance officer of this license, and for that reason, the administrator shall have the following specific powers and
duties:
A. To negotiate contracts and leases with the licensee consistent with the terms of this chapter, and to present such proposed contracts and leases to the
village board for final approval;
B. To manage all paperwork and ensure timely reports to the corporate authorities;
C. To oversee compliance with all applicable village policies within the fire stations as described in section 14-1-5 of this chapter and in conformance with
the contract for emergency services then in effect;
D. To inform the corporate authorities of any serious infractions of this chapter;
E. To take appropriate action by notifying the senior management of the licensee of any infractions of this chapter and demand timely corrective action;
F. To bring petitions or charges before the village board to sanction any person or entity that the administrator may believe is guilty of an infraction of this
chapter, up to and including an action to terminate the license granted hereunder or an action to bar any specific person from serving under the
licensee, provided that in such instance, the person(s) or entity charged shall be:
1. Given due advance notice at least five (5) business days in advance of any hearing,
2. Shall have the right to counsel at all proceedings,
3. Shall be sanctioned only upon good and sufficient cause shown according to the final administrative decision of the village board;
G. To suspend any license on an emergency basis for flagrant violations of this chapter, provided that such suspension shall not extend longer than thirty
(30) calendar days, during which period the licensee shall appear before a special, emergency meeting of the village board, which shall decide whether
to proceed with any other sanctions or to terminate the suspension. (Ord. 12-06-08, 6-4-2012)
Chapter 2
EMS SERVICE FEES
14-2-1: EMS SERVICE FEES ESTABLISHED:
Each person, resident or nonresident, receiving ambulance or life safety services, or both, from the village of Antioch, or through any village contractor
providing such services pursuant to a license or through mutual aid shall pay to the village fees therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-2013)
14-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ALS REFUSAL: A person who has received or accepted advanced life support (ALS) services from fire department personnel (EMT-Bs and/or
paramedics), but has refused transportation by ambulance to a hospital.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 524/525
EMS: Broadly, emergency medical services, including all life safety services, including, but not limited to, advanced life support, basic life support,
ambulance, extrication and medical related transport.
EXTRICATION: A life safety service performed by the fire department personnel which requires the use of hydraulic, gas powered, electric powered, air
powered or other specialized rescue equipment to remove an entrapped person from a vehicle, equipment, machinery or structure.
NONRESIDENT: A person who is not domiciled within the corporate limits of the village of Antioch.
NONRESIDENT REFUSAL: All persons who are nonresidents of the village who have received or accepted ambulance and/or life safety services from fire
department personnel (EMT-Bs and/or paramedics), but have refused transportation by ambulance to a hospital.
NONRESIDENTS TRANSPORTED TO HOSPITAL: All persons who are nonresidents of the village who are transported by a fire department operated
ambulance from within the limits of the village to a hospital or other authorized medical facility for medical care or attention.
PAYMENT: Payment of the ambulance and/or life safety service fees shall be due upon the rendering of an invoice or statement by the village or its
authorized billing and collection service corporation or agent.
RESIDENT: A person who is domiciled within the corporate limits of the village of Antioch.
RESIDENT REFUSAL: All persons who are residents of the village who have received or accepted ambulance and/or life safety services from fire
department personnel (EMT-Bs and/or paramedics), but have refused transportation by ambulance to a hospital.
RESIDENTS TRANSPORTED TO HOSPITAL: All persons who are residents of the village who are transported by a fire department operated ambulance
from within the limits of the village to a hospital or other authorized medical facility for medical care or attention. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-2013)
14-2-3: EMS FEE SCHEDULE:
Fees for ambulance and/or life safety services and prehospital care provided by the village's fire department shall be charged to the person receiving said
services, or the person's estate, in accordance with the following schedule: (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-2013)
Resident Nonresident
Basic life support $ 800.00 $1,000.00
Advanced life support (ALS-1) 1,200.00 1,500.00
Advanced life support (ALS-2) 1,500.00 1,700.00
Mileage fee $16.00 per mile or portion thereof $20.00 per mile or portion thereof
Oxygen administration $35.00 $ 60.00
Refusal 0.00 150.00
(Ord. 14-02-02, 2-17-2014)
14-2-4: HELICOPTER TRANSPORT:
In addition to the fees required pursuant to the other provisions of this chapter, when the fire department provides ambulance services to a patient in
conjunction with a helicopter transport, that patient shall pay to the village a fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for such services for the preparation of a
safe landing and departure zone using fire department personnel and equipment. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-2013)
14-2-5: MEDICARE COVERAGE:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, patients covered under the federal medicare system shall be billed only under the appropriate billing
code as provided under the uniform medicare fee schedule for services, and based on the services provided and applicable mileage. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-
2013)
14-2-6: THIRD PARTY INSURER:
All persons who receive ambulance and/or life safety services from the village and who have insurance coverage which provides for the payment in whole
or in part of the ambulance and/or life safety service fee, are covered by a governmental entity program such as medicare that provides for the payment, in
whole or in part, of the service fee, or who have the ability to obtain reimbursement, in whole or in part, of the service fee from a
noninsurance/nongovernmental entity third party, shall upon request of the village or its authorized billing and collection service corporation or agent,
provide the names and addresses of said third party to the village. (The term "third party" shall mean any such insurance company, governmental entity, or
other third party as referenced in the foregoing sentence.) The village shall prepare and issue to the third party an invoice for such service fee in
accordance with the appropriate service fee schedule(s) set forth elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-2013)
14-2-7: TORT LIABILITY AND LIEN RIGHTS:
In the event any person who has received services from the village is entitled to compensation from a third party which is allocable to the ambulance
and/or life safety service fee, such compensation shall be promptly forwarded by said person to the village. The village shall have the right to serve a lien
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=592 525/525
upon the recipient of the services and any tortfeasor involved in causing the need for services. The recipient of services shall be under an affirmative duty
to provide contact information to assist the village in preparing and serving such a lien. By serving such a lien, the village does not waive the right to
compensation from the recipient, but such lien shall be considered additional security to ensure ultimate payment of all sums properly due and owing.
Under no circumstances shall any term or provision of this section adversely affect the rights of the village as set forth in the Illinois health care services
lien act, 770 Illinois Compiled Statutes 23/1 et seq., as amended, or any other similar statute. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-2013)
14-2-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The village shall waive the stated fees under the following circumstances:
A. Any current member of the Antioch fire department while on active duty.
B. Any member of another fire department that is on assignment in the village and is rendering aid under a mutual aid agreement.
C. Any employees of the village of Antioch including unpaid and volunteer personnel while performing active duties for the village. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-
2013)
14-2-9: HARDSHIP WAIVERS:
The village may waive service fees for specific residents upon application in writing certifying that payment of such fees will cause undue hardship on the
resident. Said request for waiver of service fees shall be addressed to the village administrator at village hall, 874 Main Street for review. All requests for
hardship waiver shall indicate in writing the location and date which services were performed and the specific reason for the waiver being requested. The
burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate sufficient cause to justify a waiver. A committee composed of the village administrator, the fire chief and
the finance director shall review all hardship waiver requests and determine by majority vote if a hardship waiver for service fees shall be approved. Said
waiver approval shall apply solely to the one specific incident listed in the waiver request.
To simplify application of this provision, and to provide for greater transparency of this process, the committee shall establish and publish guidelines and
forms to assist applicants in filing their requests or submitting adequate information to the committee. All decisions of the committee must remain
confidential as required by applicable federal and state law, and shall not be published nor shall they be subject to any FOIA law. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-
2013)
14-2-10: MUTUAL AID CHARGES:
If an ambulance owned and operated by the fire department or one of its contractors responds under a request for mutual aid to another jurisdiction to
render care and/or transport of any resident or residents of that jurisdiction during the course of that mutual aid response, said resident(s) shall be billed at
the same rate as residents of the village of Antioch. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-2013)
Chapter 3
VEHICLE FIRE ASSIST FEES
14-3-1: FEE FOR NONRESIDENT VEHICLE FIRE:
Each person who is not a resident of the village and receives a fire department response to extinguish a vehicle fire shall pay the village a service fee of
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour for vehicle/equipment use and thirty five dollars ($35.00) per hour and per person for personnel. There shall be
a one hour minimum charge for each of the said services. (Ord. 13-07-15, 7-15-2013)