6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 1/702
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Bartlett, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and including ordinance 2019-38, passed April 16,
2019, and resolution 96-37-R, passed May 7, 1996. Ordinances and resolutions of the Village adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede the
provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any
particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 84-23
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE BARTLETT
MUNICIPAL CODE AS CODIFIED
Published in pamphlet form by the authority of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett.
PassedMarch 6, 1984
ApprovedMarch 6, 1984
Published in pamphlet form on the 6th day of March, 1984.
Roll Call Vote:
Ayes: Trustee Faber, Melchert, Meyer, Weaver, White
Nays: None
Absent: Trustee Taylor
Passed this 6th day of March, 1984.
Approved this 6th day of March, 1984.
/s/
GLEN A. KOEHLER, Village President
ATTEST:
/s/
LINDA HARPER, Village Clerk
CERTIFICATION
I, the undersigned do hereby certify that I am the Village Clerk of the Village of Bartlett, Cook and DuPage Counties Illinois and that the foregoing is a true,
complete and exact copy of Ordinance 84-23 enacted on March 6, 1984, and approved on March 6, 1984, as the same appeared from the official records
of the Village of Bartlett.
/s/
LINDA HARPER, Village Clerk
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 2/702
This Municipal Code of ordinances shall be known as the BARTLETT MUNICIPAL CODE. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein
shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate chapter heading, its article heading, if any, and to the penalty clause relating
thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this Municipal Code by title in any legal document or ordinance of the Village. The words
"the Code" or "the Village Code" as used herein shall mean the Bartlett Municipal Code. (1968 Code, §27.101)
1-1-2: INTENT:
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Village Code shall be liberally construed in the order that the true intent of the
Village President and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.(1968 Code, §27.106)
1-1-3: ACCEPTANCE:
The Bartlett Municipal Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of
this Code. (1983 Code)
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
A. Reference to Code: Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the President and Board of
Trustees to make the same a part of this Municipal Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the Bartlett Municipal
Code shall be understood to include them. (1968 Code, §27.201)
B. Recording Amendments: It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep at least one copy of the Municipal Code, which she shall mark in the following
manner: whenever any ordinance which amends or makes an addition to the Code is passed and approved, she shall note on the margin of the section
or sections amended that such amendment has been made, with a reference in the amendment, hereinafter described, where the amendment may be
found, and in the case an addition, she shall mark in the appropriate place a notation that such addition has been made, with a similar reference to the
aforementioned amendment book
The Village Clerk shall also keep a separate book containing every amendment or addition passed to this Code, with a reference on each copy of such
amendment or addition as to the place in the record of ordinances where the original ordinance may be found.
The aforementioned records shall be kept in addition to the record of ordinances which the Clerk is required to keep by statute. (1968 Code, §27.203)
C. Penalties: In case of amendment of any section of this Municipal Code containing the provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section, the
penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the amended section or the amending section, whether re-enacted in the
amendatory ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. (1968 Code, §27.202)
1-1-5: PRINTING OF MUNICIPAL CODE:
A. Authorization: This Municipal Code shall be printed and published in book form. (1968 Code, §27.301)
B. Distribution of Copies: All of the printed copies of this Municipal Code belonging to the Village shall be deposited with the Clerk. She shall deliver one
copy thereof to the Village President and each member of the Board of Trustees, and copies to such other persons as the President and Board of
Trustees may direct. (1968 Code, §27.302)
C. Presentation of Copies: The Village President and Board of Trustees shall have the power to extend or reciprocate courtesies of other municipalities by
presenting them with a copy of this Code, bound at the expense of the Village, as to them seem suitable, and they shall also have the power to present
two (2) copies of this Code to the Illinois Municipal League.(1968 Code, §27.303)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this Municipal Code are hereby repealed, except such as a) are referred to herein as
being in force, or b) are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal, and c) the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; the Bartlett Zoning
Ordinance and amendments thereto; ordinances relating to elections; social security ordinances; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real
estate by or from the Village; the Bartlett Building Code and amendments thereto; and all special ordinances. (1968 Code, §27.401)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 3/702
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinances relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Municipal Code or by virtue of the preceding section, except such ordinances as are expressly
and specifically amended by this Municipal Code. (1968 Code, §27.402; amd. 1983 Code)
1-2-3: PENDING SUITS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued, or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatsoever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred or any right accrued or claims arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or by implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon
the same subject or any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding Section shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the
Village herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm
or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Village under any section or provision of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Municipal
Code.(1968 Code, §27.403)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1984 Code)
Chapter 3
INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
The following rules of word construction shall apply in the application of the provisions of this Municipal Code:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included although distributive words may not have been used.
B. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included.
C. The words "person, firm and corporation" shall be deemed to include any entity, association or organization of any kind.
D. Words in the present tense shall include the future.
E. The words "this ordinance", whenever used in this Code, shall be held and taken to mean the entire Code, including each and every section thereof.
F. The word "Village", whenever used in this Code, shall be held and taken to mean the Village of Bartlett.
G. The words "written" and "in writing" may including printing.
Provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this Municipal Code which contains any express provision excluding such
construction or where the subject matter or content of such section may be repugnant thereto.(1968 Code, §27.102)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have the meaning herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 4/702
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
CODE: The Bartlett Municipal Code and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The Counties of Cook and DuPage, State of Illinois.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village, for services rendered by the Village where provided by ordinance, for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation. (1983 Code)
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year for the Village shall begin on May 1 and end of April 30 of each year. (1968 Code, §7.603)
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a fine or a sentence to a term of imprisonment in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for less than one
year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on, the property of another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a
part of such building or land, and the beneficiaries of any land trust which holds title to such building or land.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small
quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: This term shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
VILLAGE: The Village of Bartlett, Counties of Cook and DuPage, State of Illinois. (1983 Code)
VILLAGE DATUM: The datum of the establishment of grades in the Village is hereby established as U.S.G.S. which shall be used as a base line from
which all grades and elevations for all public works or public improvements of the Village shall refer or be deduced. (1968 Code, §7.602)
1-3-3: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
A. Interpretation of Title: Whenever reference is made in this Municipal Code to a Village officer or employee by title only, this shall be construed as though
followed by the words "of the Village of Bartlett", and shall be taken to mean the officer or employee of this Village having the title mentioned or
performing the duties indicated.
B. Liability Of:1 No provision of this Municipal Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or
employee liable for any fine or penalty provided in this Code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the Village Board to impose such
a fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1968 Code, §27.105)
1-3-4: DISTINCTION BETWEEN WHOLESALER AND RETAILER:
In all cases where the words "wholesaler" or "wholesaler dealer" are used in this Municipal Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, they shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale, as distinguished
from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer. (1968 Code, 827.103)
1-3-5: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Municipal Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions
of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or re-enacted. (1984 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 5/702
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under
which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
A. Whenever in this Code a minimum but not maximum fine or penalty is imposed, the Administrative Hearing Officer, or the court may, in its discretion,
fine the offender any sum exceeding the minimum fine or penalty, but not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
B. Whenever in this Code the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be
no fine or penalty declared for such breach or violation, any person who shall be convicted of any such breach shall be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate
section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of
a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-
21-2018)
1-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION: Adjudication of alleged Code or ordinance violations pursuant to chapter 15 of this title, or title 6, chapter 20 of this
Code.
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER: The duly appointed Administrative Hearing Officer of the Village, who shall have the powers and duties as
prescribed in subsection 1-15-3E1 of this title and as prescribed in subsection 6-20-4C of this Code, and/or who shall preside over and shall conduct
administrative hearings to adjudicate alleged Code or ordinance violations in accordance with chapter 15 of this title and/or title 6, chapter 20 of this Code.
CIRCUIT COURT: The Circuit Court of Cook County, or the Circuit Court for the Eighteen Judicial Circuit (DuPage County) or the Circuit Court for the
Sixteenth Judicial Circuit (Kane County), Illinois, determined by the Village Attorney or the Village Prosecutor, or as may be appropriate.
OFFICER: Any police officer, the Building Director, Community Developer Director, the Zoning Administrator, the Health Officer, the Village Administrator,
or the designee of any such officer, or other enforcement officer of the Village.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, firm, partnership, association, sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, trust, or any other entity as
well as any agents, representatives or employees thereof upon whom responsibility or liability is imposed by this Code for the violation cited.
VIOLATOR: Any person who violates any provision of this Code or other Village ordinances. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-4-4: PROCEDURES FOR ISSUANCE OF LOCAL ORDINANCE LA CITATIONS FOR CERTAIN OFFENSES:
Whenever a police officer, community service officer, parking enforcement officer, or other officer of the Village witnesses a violation of the Village's codes
and ordinances including but not limited to, titles 3, "Business And License Regulations"; 4, "Health And Sanitation"; 5, "Police Regulations"; 6, "Motor
Vehicles And Traffic"; 7, "Public Ways And Properties"; 8, "Fire Protection And Prevention"; 9, "Bartlett Building Code"; and 10, "Bartlett Zoning Code", of
this Code and other ordinance(s) of the Village (excluding violations of title 6, part 11-1300, "Stopping, Standing And Parking", of this Code or violations of
the equipment, condition and use of vehicle regulations title 6, chapter 12 of this Code), he or she may issue a local ordinance citation and notice to
appear designated on the citation form as "LA" followed by a citation number, to such alleged violator which contains, but need not be limited to the
information pursuant to subsection 1-15-4D of this title. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to preclude the Village from issuing a long form
complaint or filing a complaint at law and/or in equity and filing the same in the Circuit Court. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-4-5: SERVICE OF CITATION OR SERVICE OF PROCESS:
Citations shall be served in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection 1-15-4E of this title. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-4-6: CERTAIN LA VIOLATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR PAYMENT OF FINE WITHOUT MANDATORY APPEARANCE:
The following violations of this Code shall be subject to the procedures described in section 1-4-7 of this chapter:
Description Of Code Violated
Adopted
Code Citation
Bartlett Municipal Code Citation
Uninvited soliciting prohibited 3-18-5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 6/702
Limitations on soliciting 3-18-6
Garage sale permits required 3-21-1
Itinerant food establishment 3-25-8
Garbage cans out too early/not removed from curb 3-26-2B3
Ice cream vendors Title 3, chapter 30
Deposit on right-of-way 4-2-4A3
Dog license required 5-2-2
Prohibited acts with respect to animal control 5-2-5A, B, E, H or M
Animal forbidden in public places 5-2-7
Dog feces 5-2-12
Wind blown refuse 5-3-3B
Deposit of grass and rubbish 5-3-3C
Motorbike required equipment (muffler) 6-607-2A
Motorbike required equipment (brakes) 6-607-2B
Motorbike required equipment (headlight and taillight) 6-607-2C
Motorbike - operating without driver's license 6-607-3A
Motorbike - operating on sidewalk 6-607-3B
Motorbike - operating on private property without written permission 6-607-3C
Motorbike minors, penalty provisions 6-607-4.2
Disturbing barricades 7-1-4B
Deposits on streets 7-1-7A
Deposits on sidewalks 7-1-7B
Obstruction of public way 7-1-8A
Obstruction of drain in public way 7-1-8B
Skateboarding prohibited uses 7-1B-2
Skateboarding on public rights-of-way 7-1B-3
Noncompliance with water conservation regulations 7-5A-6
Open burning restricted 8-1-1A
Burning refuse, garbage, leaves and other waste 8-1-2
Fires 8-1-3A
Temporary/holiday lighting NEC 590.2B 9-1-2F
Accessible parking spaces, aisle, and route condition Illinois Accessibility Code 9-1-2G
Stagnant water IPMC 302.2 9-1-2H
Rubbish IPMC 308.1 9-1-2H
Building permits required 9-2-1
Display of house number 9-5-12
Disposal of garbage and rubbish (garbage cans in front) 9-13-10
Dumpster enclosure 9-13-10, 10-3-5C
Home occupation 10-3-5E
Commercial motor vehicles 10-4A-3A
Inoperable/unlicensed vehicles IPMC 302.8 10-4A-3B
Recreational vehicles 10-4A-3C
Semi-trailers 10-4A-3D
Parking on grass 10-11-1-4B
Signs in right-of-way or public property 10-12-6C11
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 7/702
(Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-4-7: PENALTIES AND SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES FOR CERTAIN LA OFFENSES:
A. Violation: Any person accused of a violation listed in section 1-4-6 of this chapter may settle and compromise the claim pursuant to subsection B of this
section.
B. Settlement Of Penalties; Authorization And Procedure: The following procedure regarding settlement and compromise with certain LA citation violations
as set forth in this section is hereby authorized:
1. Citations issued for violation of those sections of this Code specified in section 1-4-6 of this chapter may be settled and compromised by ceasing
and/or abating said violation and the payment of a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid on or before ten (10) days after the issuance of the
citation not counting the day of issuance. Payment of the fine is an admission of liability and will act as a final determination of liability disposition of
the violation alleged in the citation. In the event the fine for any of the violations listed in section 1-4-6 of this chapter is not paid within ten (10) days
of the issuance of the citation (LA ticket) will be processed through the administrative adjudication system as provided in chapter 15 of this title. Upon
a finding of liable by the Administrative Hearing Officer, whether by default judgment pursuant to subsection 1-15-5H of this title, or after
administrative hearing pursuant to subsections 1-15-5A through H of this title, the total amount of the fine and penalty shall be a minimum of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each separate violation, not to exceed the maximum fine and penalty as expressly provided under the applicable chapter of
this Code, subject to the limits on the authority of the Administrative Hearing Officer as set forth in subsection 1-15-3A8 of this title, or if no maximum
fine or penalty is otherwise stated in the title and chapter of this Code for the violation, then in accordance with the general penalty provisions set
forth in section 1-4-1 of this chapter. Payments received by mail shall be credited as paid on the date received by the Village.
C. Adjudication Fines And Penalties: Pursuant to sections 1-15-9 and 1-15-10 of this title, any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in
accordance with the provisions of that chapter remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust administrative remedies created under
said chapter, and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt due and owing the Village and the Village may take the necessary
actions to collect said fines and/or penalties. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
1-5-1: ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE; TITLE:
A. Election, Term Of Office: The village president shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The
oath and bond shall be administered, and the term of office of village president shall commence, at the first regular or special meeting of the president
and board of trustees of the village during the month of May immediately following the proclamation of the results of the regular municipal election at
which a person was elected to the office of village president; provided that by that date the respective county election authorities: 1) have canvassed,
added up and declared the results of the election for said office; 2) have filed a certified copy of the record thereof with its respective county clerk; and
3) have transmitted the same to the state board of elections as required by law; otherwise, the oath and bond shall be administered and the term of
office shall commence at the second regular or special meeting in May. The village president shall be the president of the board of trustees, as
provided by statute1. In the event the office of village president shall become vacant, the office shall be filled by the appointment of an acting president
by the trustees. The acting president shall have the rights and powers of the village president and shall serve until his or her successor is elected in
accordance with statute and has qualified2. (Ord. 2011-17, 4-5-2011)
B. Title: The term "village president" as used in any ordinance, resolution, motion or other action of the corporate authorities shall be construed as
meaning the mayor; and the term "mayor" wherever so used shall be construed to mean the village president.
The title "mayor" as used in the minutes of the meetings of the corporate authorities or any other official document shall be construed as meaning
"village president"3. (1968 Code, §1.006)
1-5-2: BOND, OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the president shall give a bond, with sureties to be approved by the board of trustees conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his duties, in the penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). He shall take the oath of office as prescribed by statute4. For the
salary of the village president, see subsection 1-8-6A of this title. (1968 Code, §1.004)
1-5-3: GENERAL DUTIES:
The village president shall be the chief executive officer of the village, and he shall perform all duties that may be required of him by statute or ordinance.
He shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by any village officer or employee at any reasonable time. (1968 Code,
§1.002; amd. Ord. 84-38, 4-24-1984)
1-5-4: DESIGNATION OF DUTIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 82-18, 3-16-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 8/702
1-5-5: PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
During the temporary absence or disability of the village president, the board of trustees shall elect one of its members to act as president pro tem, who
during the absence or disability of the president shall perform the duties pertaining to the office. (1968 Code, §1.005)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-6-1: ELECTION; FUNCTIONS:
The board of trustees, consisting of six (6) members, shall be elected to a four (4) year term, according to the method provided by statute1. The oath and
bond to newly elected trustee(s) shall be administered, and the term of office of a village trustee shall commence, at the first regular or special meeting of
May immediately following the proclamation of the results of the regular municipal election at which said person or persons was or were elected to the
office of village trustee; provided that by that date the respective county election authorities: a) have canvassed, added up and declared the results of the
election for said office; b) have filed a certified copy of the record thereof with its respective county clerk; and c) have transmitted the same to the state
board of elections as required by law; otherwise, the oath and bond shall be administered and the term of office shall commence at the second regular or
special meeting in May. A trustee holds office until such time as his or her successor is elected and qualified. In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of
village trustee, the village president shall appoint a qualified person to that office subject to the advice and consent of the trustees, and shall hold office
until his or her successor is elected in accordance with statute and has qualified2. (Ord. 2011-17, 4-5-2011)
1-6-2: OATH AND SALARY:
The members of the board of trustees shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute, and shall receive compensation as set out in subsection 1-8-6A of
this title. (Ord. 77-9, 3-1-1977)
1-6-3: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the president and board of trustees of the village shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month
at the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., or upon such other dates as shall be prescribed by a motion adopted by a vote of the majority of those trustees
present at any meeting. (Ord. 2011-71, 11-1-2011)
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the village president or by any three (3) trustees, upon at least twenty four (24) hours' oral or
written notice to all members and the president; provided that if all the trustees are present at a special meeting, no notice of the meeting shall be
necessary and such notice shall be deemed waived.
C. Meeting Place: The meeting place of the president and board of trustees shall be at the village hall unless otherwise ordered by the board. (1968 Code
§ 2.103)
D. Presiding Officer: The village president shall be the presiding officer of the regular and special meetings of the board of trustees and at all times when
the president and board meets as a committee of the whole. (1968 Code § 2.104)
1-6-4: RULES OF ORDER:
1-6-4-1: QUORUM:
A majority of the trustees, or three (3) trustees and the village president shall constitute a quorum to do business. (1968 Code § 2.207)
1-6-4-2: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The order of business of the Board of the Trustees of the Village shall be as follows:
A. Call to order.
B. Roll call.
C. Pledge of Allegiance.
D. Consent agenda.
E. Approval of minutes of previous meeting(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 9/702
F. Approval of bill list.
G. Treasurer's report.
H. President's report.
I. Question and answer session President and Board of Trustees.
J. Town Hall. (Ord. 2011-71, 11-1-2011)
K. Standing committee reports:
Community and Economic Development
Finance and Golf
License and Ordinance
Police and Health
Public Works
Building and Zoning (Ord. 2018-06, 2-6-2018, eff. 2-6-2018)
L. New business.
M. Question and answer among the President and Board of Trustees.
N. Adjournment. (Ord. 2011-71, 11-1-2011)
1-6-4-3: COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD:
A. Standing Committees: The following shall be the standing committees of the Board of Trustees:
Community and Economic Development
Finance and Golf
License and Ordinance
Police and Health
Public Works
Building and Zoning (Ord. 2018-06, 2-6-2018, eff. 2-6-2018)
B. Special Committees: Special committees shall be created from time to time as directed by the President and/or any Board member with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees.
C. Additional Boards, Commissions And Committees: Additional boards, commissions and committees not otherwise specifically provided for by statute or
ordinance shall be appointed by the President and/or any Board member with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 79-30, 5-1-1979)
D. Board Member Required: There shall be a minimum of one Board member as liaison for all special committees, commissions or boards. The Board
member shall be appointed by the President of the Village Board. (Ord. 82-11, 2-16-1982)
1-6-4-4: RULES:
A. Robert's Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules of Order" shall govern the deliberations of the Board of Trustees, except when in conflict with any of the
provisions of this section 1-6-4. (1968 Code § 2.206)
B. Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the
members present at any meeting. (1968 Code § 2.205)
C. Rules Of Decorum For Board Meetings:
1. Decorum: Meetings of the Board shall be conducted in an orderly manner to ensure that the public has a full opportunity to be heard and that the
deliberative process of the Board is retained at all times. The presiding officer of the Board, who shall be the President, or, in his or her absence,
other member so designated by the Board, or in the case of a Committee of the Whole meeting of the Board when a matter is turned over by the
president to the chairman of a standing committee, in which case said chairman or another member of the board acting as the chair of said standing
committee in the chairman's absence shall be the presiding officer over matters of that standing committee, shall be responsible for maintaining the
order and decorum of meetings.
2. Rules Of Decorum: While any meeting of the board is in session, the following rules of order and decorum shall be observed:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 10/702
a. Persons Addressing The Board: Public oral communications at the board meetings should not be a substitute for any item that can be handled
during the normal working hours of the municipal government. The primary purpose of oral communications is to allow citizens the opportunity to
formally communicate with the board as a whole, for matters that cannot be handled during the regular working hours of the village government.
Each person who addresses the board shall do so in an orderly manner and shall not utter fighting words or make personal, impertinent,
slanderous, obscene or profane remarks to any member of the board, staff or general public. Any person who makes such remarks, or who utters
loud, threatening, personal or abusive language, or engages in any other disorderly conduct, which disrupts, disturbs or otherwise impedes the
orderly conduct of any board meeting shall, at the discretion of the presiding officer or a majority of the board, be barred from further audience
before the board during that meeting.
b. Members Of The Audience: No person in the audience at a board meeting shall engage in disorderly or boisterous conduct, including the
utterance of fighting words, or use obscene, slanderous, threatening or abusive language, whistling, stamping of feet or other acts in a manner
which disturbs, disrupts or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any board meeting. Any person who conducts himself in the aforementioned
manner shall, at the discretion of the presiding officer or a majority of the board, be barred from further audience before the board during that
meeting.
3. Addressing The Board: A person wishing to address the board regarding an item which is on the committee of the whole meeting agenda shall first
submit a request on the form provided if so directed by the presiding officer, or he or she may seek recognition by the presiding officer of the board
during discussion of any such item. Persons wishing to discuss an agenda or a nonagenda item at any regular or special meeting of the board may
seek recognition by the presiding officer during the town hall portion of the meeting. No person shall address the board without first being recognized
by the presiding officer. The following procedures shall be observed by persons addressing the board:
a. Each person shall step to the podium provided for the use of the public and shall state his or her name and address; the organization, if any, which
he or she represents; and, if during the town hall portion of the regular or special meeting of the board, the subject he or she wishes to discuss.
b. During the town hall portion of any regular or special meeting of the board, any subject, whether or not on the board agenda for that meeting, shall
be open for discussion, but shall be subject to the time limitation set forth in subsection C3d of this section and compliance with the rules of
decorum.
c. During the committee of the whole meetings, only matters on the agenda for that meeting may be discussed and members from the public will be
given an opportunity to be heard on each agenda item only after a presentation of the matter by village staff and/or the petitioner and the
petitioner's consultants; the board members have had an opportunity to ask questions of the village staff, the village's consultants, the petitioner
and the petitioner's consultants; and to discuss the matter among themselves. Each person shall confine his or her remarks to the committee of
the whole agenda item or an approved oral communications subject being discussed, subject to the time limit set forth in subsection C3d of this
section and compliance with the rules of decorum.
d. Each person shall limit his or her remarks to three (3) minutes, unless further time is granted by the board.
e. The three (3) minute time limit shall not apply to any public hearings required by law, statute or ordinance. Cross examination of the village staff,
village consultants, a petitioner or a petitioner's consultants shall not be allowed except in the case of a public hearing before the board and only
by a person, or his or her attorney, who lives within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a development project or otherwise has standing to do so as
determined by the presiding officer in consultation with the village attorney. In the event evidence is presented by an objector, or his or her
consultants during a public hearing before the board, limited cross examination may be allowed by the presiding officer in consultation with the
village attorney.
f. All remarks shall be addressed to the board as a whole and not to any single member thereof, unless in response to a question from such member,
or when authorized by the presiding officer to conduct cross examination of a person during a public hearing before the board.
4. Enforcement Of Decorum: The rules of decorum set forth above shall be enforced in the following manner:
a. Warning: The presiding officer shall request that a person who is breaching the rules of decorum be orderly and silent. If, after receiving a warning
from the presiding officer, a person persists in disturbing the meeting, the presiding officer shall order him or her to leave the board meeting. If
such person does not remove himself or herself, the presiding officer may order any law enforcement officer who is on duty at the meeting to
remove that person from the boardroom. Any law enforcement officer on duty and present at such meeting who is ordered by the presiding office
to remove an individual from a meeting shall automatically be deemed the sergeant at arms of the board without formal appointment.
b. Removal: Any law enforcement officer who is serving as sergeant at arms of the board shall, upon confirmation that an actual disturbance,
disruption or action impeding the conduct of the meeting occurred and that the requisite warning was given, carry out all lawful orders and
instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the board meeting. Upon instructions of the
presiding officer and making said confirmations, it shall be the duty of the sergeant at arms to remove from the boardroom any person who is
disturbing the proceedings of the board, and if the sergeant at arms deems it necessary to avoid further disturbance, to further remove the person
violating the rules of decorum from the municipal building.
c. Resisting Removal: Any person who resists removal by the sergeant at arms shall be charged with a violation of this section.
d. Motion To Enforce: If the presiding officer of the board fails to enforce the rules set forth above, any member of the board may move to require him
or her to do so, and an affirmative vote of a majority of the board shall require him or her to do so. If the presiding officer of the board fails to carry
out the will of a majority of the board, the majority may designate another member of the board to act as presiding officer for the limited purpose of
enforcing any rule of this section which it wishes to enforce.
e. Adjournment: If a meeting of the board is disturbed or disrupted in such a manner as to make infeasible or improbable the restoration of order, the
meeting may be adjourned or continued by the presiding officer with the concurrence of a majority of a quorum of the board in attendance, and any
remaining board business may be considered at the next meeting. If no law enforcement officer is on duty at the meeting to act as sergeant at
arms to carry out a removal order of the presiding officer, the meeting may be adjourned temporarily for the purpose of calling an on duty law
enforcement officer to the boardroom to investigate and confirm that an actual disturbance, disruption or action impeding the conduct of the
meeting occurred, that the requisite warning and order of removal were given, and upon such confirmation, to act as sergeant at arms to carry out
any such lawful order of removal. After any such temporary adjournment, the meeting may be reconvened to conduct any remaining board
business, or continued by the presiding officer with the concurrence of a majority of a quorum of the board in attendance, and any remaining board
business may be considered at the next meeting.
5. Penalty: Any person who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2011-71, 11-1-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 11/702
D. Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the board of trustees shall be rescinded at any special meeting of the board of trustees unless there be present
at such special meeting as many members of the board of trustees as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken, as provided by
statute. (1968 Code § 2.202)
1-6-4-5: RESOLUTIONS:
Any resolutions submitted to the board of trustees shall be reduced to writing before being voted on, upon request of any two (2) members of the board.
(1968 Code § 2.203)
1-6-5: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS AND CONTRACTS:
A. General Passage Procedures:
1. All ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the corporate authorities must be introduced and sponsored by the
village president or a member of the board of trustees, except that the village attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or
subjects to the corporate authorities for action, and any trustee may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions,
matters or subjects be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered. (Ord. 75-15, 3-4-1975)
2. Upon the request of the village president or any one member of the board of trustees, the vote on the motion to adopt an ordinance or resolution
shall be deferred from the meeting at which the motion for adoption is made to the next regular meeting of the president and board of trustees;
provided, however, that in no event shall the provisions of this subsection be used to delay final action by the president and board of trustees beyond
their next regular meeting following the meeting at which such request is first made, without the approval of a majority of the president and board of
trustees in attendance at the meeting at which the request is made. (Ord. 75-41, 9-2-1975; amd. Ord. 91-37, 6-4-1991)
3. All ordinances shall be referred to committee for study and report, unless the board of trustees shall, by a majority vote of those trustees present at
the meeting where such ordinance is introduced, waive such committee referral. (Ord. 91-37, 6-4-1991)
4. When the committee to which an ordinance has been referred shall report such ordinance to the president and board of trustees, it shall be in order
for final action to be taken by the board, notwithstanding the fact that such committee reports an amended or substituted ordinance; provided, that
such amendment or substitution is germane to the ordinance originally referred to such committee.
B. Action Of Village President:
1. All resolutions and motions: a) which create any liability against the village, or b) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of village money,
or c) which authorize the sale of any village property, and all ordinances passed by the president and board of trustees shall be deposited with the
village clerk. If the village president approves of them, he shall sign them. Those of which he disapproves, he shall return to the president and board
of trustees with his written objections at the next regular meeting of the president and board of trustees occurring not less than three (3) weeks after
their passage.
2. The village president may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, and if
so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the village president may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion making an
appropriation. If the village president fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution with his written objections within the designated time, it
shall become effective despite the absence of his signature. (Ord. 75-15, 3-4-1975)
C. Reconsideration, Passing Over Veto: Every resolution and motion specified in this section, and every ordinance which is returned to the board of
trustees by the village president shall be reconsidered by the board of trustees. If after such reconsideration two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees elected to
the board of trustees vote to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion, notwithstanding the president's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The
vote on the question of passage over the president's veto shall be by yeas and nays and shall be recorded in the journal. (1968 Code § 2.106)
1-6-6: ATTENDANCE RULES AND PROCEDURES REGARDING VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS:
A. The following rules and procedures shall apply to all regular, special, reconvened, rescheduled and emergency meetings of the village president and
board of trustees (the "corporate authorities") including, but not limited to, committee of the whole meetings:
1. A quorum of members of the corporate authorities must be physically present at the location of any open meeting and any lawfully closed meeting of
the village president and board of trustees ("village board meeting"). Other members who are not physically present at the open meeting may
participate in the meeting and vote on all matters by means of a video or audio conference as herein provided. The village president and members of
the village board may also participate in lawfully closed meetings of the village board, by means of video or audio conference, as herein provided.
(Ord. 2006-12, 2-21-2006)
2. If a quorum of the members of the corporate authorities is physically present at the place designated in the notice of the meeting, the village
president and/or a member of the village board may attend the meeting by other means if the village president or trustee is prevented from physically
attending because of: a) personal illness or disability; b) employment purposes or the business of the village; or c) a family or other emergency.
"Other means" is by video or audio conference.
3. If the village president or trustee wishes to attend a meeting by other means, he or she must notify the village administrator and/or the village clerk at
least twenty four (24) hours before the village board meeting, unless advance notice is impractical. Notice of attendance by other means may be
given for multiple village board meetings, and a separate notice shall not be required for each meeting in which other means of attendance will occur.
Notice specifying a time period in which the village president or board member will be attending meetings by other means, rather than specific
meeting dates, shall be adequate notice hereunder. (Ord. 2012-18, 4-3-2012)
4. Audio and video conferencing provided for herein at open meetings shall: a) allow the member(s) attending the meeting by such other means to be
heard by members of the public and such of the corporate authorities who are physically present at the location of said meeting and by other
member(s) of the corporate authorities attending the meeting by other means; and b) allow the member(s) attending the meeting by other means to
hear the comments, statements, discussion and/or testimony of any person attending the meeting addressed to the corporate authorities at said
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 12/702
meeting; and c) to allow the member(s) attending the meeting by other means to hear the comments, statements, discussions and/or votes of the
village board members and village president, if applicable, at said meeting.
5. Audio or video conferencing provided for herein at lawfully closed meetings of the corporate authorities shall allow the village president and/or board
member(s) participating by other means to be heard by such of the corporate authorities and other persons attending the lawfully closed meeting,
and to allow the village president and/or board member(s) attending by other means to hear the comments and discussion of such of the other
corporate authorities and other persons attending the lawfully closed meeting. (Ord. 2006-12, 2-21-2006)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE CLERK
1-7-1: ELECTION; TERM; VACANCY:
The village clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until his or her successor is elected and qualified as specified by statute1. The term
of office of village clerk shall commence at the first regular or special meeting of the president and board of trustees of the village during the month of May
following the proclamation of the results of the regular municipal election at which a person was elected to the office of village clerk; provided that by that
date the respective county election authorities: a) have canvassed, added up and declared the results of the election for said office; b) have filed a certified
copy of the record thereof with its respective county clerk; and c) have transmitted the same to the state board of elections as required by law; otherwise,
the oath and bond shall be administered and the term of office shall commence at the second regular or special meeting in May. In the event the office of
village clerk shall become vacant for any reason, then until the office is filled by election, the village president shall appoint a qualified person to the office
of village clerk, subject to the advice and consent of the trustees, and shall serve until a new village clerk is elected and qualified as provided by statute2.
(Ord. 2011-17, 4-5-2011)
1-7-2: BOND:
Before entering upon her duties of office, the village clerk shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the board of
trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of her duties. (1968 Code §3.003)
1-7-3: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village clerk shall:
A. Signature: Seal and attest all contracts of the village and all licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality. (1968 Code
§3.003)
B. Documents And Records:
1. Documents: Be the custodian of all documents belonging to the village, which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer.
2. Records: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the clerk is required by statute to keep, she shall keep a register of all
licenses and permits issued, and the payments thereon; a record showing all of the officers of the village; and such other records as may be required
by the board of trustees. (1968 Code §3.006)
3. Indices: Keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by her, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
(1968 Code §3.009)
C. Village Seal: Be the custodian of the village seal and shall affix its impression on documents whenever this is required. (1968 Code §3.007)
D. Village Finances:
1. Money Collected: Turn over all money received by her on behalf of the village to the village treasurer promptly upon receipt of the same; and with
such money she shall give a statement as to the source thereof. (1968 Code §3.004)
2. Accounts: Keep accounts showing all money received by her and the source and disposition thereof; and such other accounts as may be required by
statute or ordinance. (1968 Code §3.005)
E. Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the village clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute
or ordinance. (1968 Code §3.010)
1-7-4: OFFICE HOURS:
The village clerk shall maintain office hours in the Bartlett Municipal Building between eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M.
Monday through Friday, and between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Saturday, except on legal holidays and
except as hereafter provided. During said office hours, the village clerk shall be readily available to assist members of the general public with respect to
village business. (Ord. 69-14, 2-4-1969; amd. 1984 Code)
1-7-5: SALARY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 13/702
The village clerk shall receive an annual salary as set out in subsection 1-8-6A of this title. In addition, the clerk shall receive an annual two (2) week
vacation with pay. (Ord. 77-8, 3-1-1977, eff. 4-20-1977)
1-7-6: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. There is hereby created the office of deputy clerk. The village clerk is authorized to appoint a deputy clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute
all documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the clerk, and affix the seal of the village thereto whenever required.
B. When signing any documents, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the village clerk followed by the word "by" and the deputy clerk's own name and
the words "Deputy Clerk".
C. The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such deputy clerk only in the absence of the village clerk from her office in the village
hall, and only when either written document has been given by the village clerk to exercise such power, or the village board has determined by
resolution that the village clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such function. Such deputy clerk shall have the authority and
power herein described, and such further power and authority as may be provided by statute. (1968 Code §3.012)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-8-1: EFFECT:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply alike to all officers and employees of the Village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or position or
the time of the appointment of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8-2: ELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
A. Elections: Elections for municipal offices shall be held as provided by statute, and at the time prescribed by statute1.
B. Appointments: All officers, other than elective officers and Police and Fire Officers under the jurisdiction of the Fire and Police Commissioners2, shall be
appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees as provided by statute or this Code. All employees,
except for employees who are appointive officers required to be appointed by the Village President, or by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Village Board, shall be appointed or selected by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8-3: TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
A. Every appointive officer of the Village shall hold office until the last occurring May 1 following his appointment or until his successor is appointed and
qualified, unless it is otherwise provided in this chapter or other provision in this Code. In case of a vacancy in any such office, it shall be filled in the
same manner in which appointments or selections are made.
B. Every officer and employee of the Village, upon the expiration of his term for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his successor all books and records
which may be the property of the Village, and if no successor has been appointed within one (1) week after the termination of such term, such property
shall be delivered to the Village Clerk or the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8-4: OATH OF OFFICE:
Every officer of the Village shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath prescribed by statute3. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8-5: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
A. Upon entering upon the duties of his office, each Village Officer shall file with the Village Clerk a surety bond in the amounts hereinafter set forth, on
such forms and in such amounts as shall be approved by the President and Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties
of his or her office; provided, however, that the bond of the Village Clerk shall be filed with the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
Officer Amount
President $3,000.00
Village Clerk 3,000.00
Village Administrator 1,000.00
Village Treasurer 3 times the latest Federal census
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 14/702
Budget Officer 3,000.00
Attorney 3,000.00
Village Engineer 3,000.00
Chief of Police 3,000.00
Zoning Administrator 3,000.00
Building Director 3,000.00
Electrical Inspector 3,000.00
Plumbing Inspector 3,000.00
Village employees who are not officers of the Village shall file with the Village Clerk bonds in such amounts as the President and Board of Trustees may,
from time to time, determine.
B. Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the Village is required as a prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the issuance of a
license or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in
this State as a surety company in the absence of specific provision, by ordinance, to the contrary.
Whenever in its opinion additional sureties or an additional surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the Village against loss or liability because
of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other reason, the Village may order a new surety or sureties to be secured for such bond.
If such new surety or sureties are not procured within ten (10) days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the bond, or his assignee,
the Board shall declare the bond to be forfeited and such principal or assignee shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege or position as
condition of which the bond was required. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8-6: SALARIES:
A. The following salary scale for certain elected public officials of the Village is hereby established:
President $6,000.00 per year, payable monthly.
Liquor Control Commissioner (see
section 3-3-1 of this Code)
$1,000.00 per year, payable monthly.
The salaries for the President and Liquor Control Commissioner shall begin on the later of:
1. The first regular or special meeting of the President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett
during the month of May 2001; or
2. The date on which the person duly elected to such office at the consolidated election in April of 2001
takes and subscribes the oath of office and gives any bond that may be required by law.
The salaries of all of the offices set forth above shall continue for each year of the term of each said office.
Trustees $4,000.00 each, per year, payable monthly.
The salaries for the Trustees who are elected at the general Municipal election held in April of 2001 shall
begin on the later of:
1. The first regular or special meeting of the President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett
during the month of May 2001; or
2. The date on which the person duly elected to such office at the consolidated election in April of 2001
takes and subscribes the oath of office and gives any bond that may be required by law.
The salaries for the Trustees who are elected at the general Municipal election held in April of 2003 shall
begin on the later of:
1. The first regular or special meeting of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett
during the month of May 2003; or
2. The date on which the person duly elected to such office at the consolidated election in April of 2003
takes and subscribes the oath of office and gives any bond that may be required by law.
The salaries of all of the offices set forth above shall continue for each year of the term of each said office.
Village Clerk $4,500.00 per year, payable monthly or more often as shall be determined by the Village President and
Trustees.
B. All other officers and employees of the Village shall receive such salary as may from time to time be provided by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2017-55,
5-2-2017)
1-8-7: RECORDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 15/702
All records kept by any officer of the Village shall be open to inspection by the Village President or any member of the Board of Trustees at all reasonable
times, whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8-8: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Assignment Of Duties: The Village President shall have the power to assign to any appointive officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to
some other specific officer; and shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers or duties of officers.
B. Monies Received: Every officer of the Village shall, at least once each month, turn over all money received by him in his official capacity to the
Treasurer with a statement showing the source from which the same was received.
C. Arrests: The Village President and members of the Board of Trustees, as well as every member of the Police Department, are hereby declared to be
Conservators of the Peace with such powers to make arrests as are given to Conservators of the Peace by statute. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8-9: INSPECTIONS BY VILLAGE OFFICERS:
Any officer or employee of the Village who is authorized to enforce ordinances may make such inspections as may be necessary to see to the
enforcement of such ordinances.
Whenever such officer or employee shall have reason to believe that there exists on or in any premises in the Village any nuisance or any condition
dangerous to the public health, any fire hazard, any structural defect likely to result in injury to person or property, or any electric wiring or equipment in
such condition as to present a fire hazard or danger to persons, he shall ask permission of the occupant of such premises or the owner or custodian
thereof if the premises is unoccupied, to inspect the same.
Each such occupant or owner shall permit such inspections at any reasonable time. Any such owner or occupant who refuses to permit such inspection
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8-10: REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
Except as otherwise provided by statute, the Village President may remove any officer under this Code on any written charge whenever the Village
President is of the opinion that the interests of the Village demand removal. The Village President shall report the reasons for the removal to the Corporate
Authorities at a meeting to be held no less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after removal. If the Village President fails or refuses to report to the
Corporate Authorities the reasons for the removal, or if the Corporate Authorities, upon consideration of such reasons and other information as the
Corporate Authorities may consider, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all members authorized by law to be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer
thereupon shall be restored to the office from which the officer was removed. The vote shall be by yeas or nays, which shall be entered upon the journal of
the Corporate Authorities. Upon restoration, the officer shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be removed a second time for
the same offense. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the Corporate Authorities from discussing matters concerning the discipline, performance or
removal of an officer in executive session pursuant to section 2(c)(3) of the Open Meetings Act4, however, the roll call vote upon whether or not to restore
the officer shall be taken in open session at a regular, special, rescheduled or reconvened meeting of the Corporate Authorities. Upon removal from office
by the Village President, an appointed officer shall immediately cease serving as a representative or agent of the Village in any capacity. If restored to
office, appointed officers shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office as required by ordinance. This shall not be taken to include elected officials
or employees subject to article 10, division 2.1, "Board of Fire and Police Commissioners" of the Illinois Municipal Code5 . (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
1-8A-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the Office of Village Administrator, an administrative office of the Village. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8A-2: APPOINTMENT:
The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for such term as
determined at the time of his or her appointment or by contract, but in no event shall the term exceed that of the Village President appointing him or her.
The confirmation of such appointment shall be considered by the Board of Trustees solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualification with
special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice with respect to the duties of the office hereinafter set forth, and such
requirements and qualifications are hereby declared to be of such a nature as to require technical training or knowledge. At the time of the Administrator's
appointment, the Village Administrator need not be a resident of the Village or of the State of Illinois, but during the Administrator's tenure of office the
Administrator shall reside within the Village. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8A-3: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The Village Administrator may be removed by the Village President on any written charge whenever the President is of the opinion that the interests of the
Village demand removal. The President shall report the reasons for such removal to the Village Board at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor
more than ten (10) days after the removal. If the President fails or refuses to report to the Corporate Authorities the reasons for the removal, or if the
Corporate Authorities, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all members authorized by law to be elected, upon consideration of such reasons and other information
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 16/702
as the Corporate Authorities may consider, disapprove of the removal, the Village Administrator, thereupon shall be restored to the Office of Village
Administrator. The vote shall be by yeas or nays, which shall be so entered into the journal of the Corporate Authorities. Nothing contained herein shall
preclude the Corporate Authorities from discussing the discipline, performance or removal of the Village Administrator pursuant to section 2(c)(3) of the
Open Meetings Act1 in executive session, however, the roll call vote, if any, on whether or not to restore the Village Administrator shall be made in open
session at a regular, special, rescheduled or reconvened meeting of the Corporate Authorities. Upon restoration, the Village Administrator shall give a new
bond and take a new oath of office2. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8A-4: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
A. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village Administrator shall furnish a surety bond in the amount set out in section 1-8-5 of this
chapter, to be approved by the Board of Trustees, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of the Administrator's duties. The premium
for the bond shall be paid by the Village.
B. Oath: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village Administrator shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of the State of
Illinois in such case provided.
C. Compensation: The Village Administrator shall receive compensation in such amount and manner as the President and Board of Trustees shall fix from
time to time by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8A-5: POWERS AND DUTIES WITH REFERENCE TO FISCAL MATTERS:
The Village Administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
A. On or before March 1 of each year, the Village Administrator, in conjunction with the Budget Officer and the Department Heads, shall submit to the
Corporate Authorities a proposed budget for the forthcoming year, including an estimate as nearly as may be of the money necessary to defray the
expenses of the Village during the next fiscal year, and in said report shall classify and detail the purposes of recommended expenditures, the
aggregate income of the preceding year, the proposed income for the forthcoming year categorized by source, the Village liabilities, and such other
information as is necessary to assist the President and Board of Trustees to adopt a budget.
B. For the purpose of preparing the aforesaid estimate, the Village Administrator is authorized to require all Department Heads to submit statements of the
condition and expenses of their respective Departments, a description of proposed Village improvements, and the probable expense thereof, a
description of all unperformed contracts, and a statement of the amount of all unexpired appropriations of the preceding year.
C. The Village Administrator shall recommend to the Village President and the Board of Trustees the salaries to be paid each Department Head of the
Village.
D. The Village Administrator shall supervise the issuance and sale of all bonds, warrants and obligations.
E. The Village Administrator shall act as purchasing agent for the Village and make or supervise all necessary purchases of services, goods, materials,
supplies and equipment by the Village, and all contracts therefor. The Village Administrator shall have the power to enter all contracts for services and
purchase of goods, materials, supplies and equipment involving up to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) without the prior approval of the Village
Board, provided funds for the services, goods, materials, supplies and/or equipment are provided in the budget, and subject also to the statutes of the
State of Illinois pertaining to creation of liabilities against the Village and pertaining to the expenditures or appropriations of the monies of the Village,
but in no event may the Administrator purchase any item or enter any contract which would result in exceeding the budget amount until the President
and Board of Trustees have amended the budget or legally provided for such additional expenditure. While the Village Administrator is authorized to
make budgeted expenditures of materials, supplies, equipment and enter contracts for any work or public improvement for all budgeted expenditures of
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or less without preliminary authorization from the President and Board of Trustees, for such items and contract
for any work or public improvement over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), at least two (2) price quotes or proposals shall be obtained when practical,
and the items purchased or the contract entered from the lowest proposer or from a supplier located within the Village if the price is within ten percent
(10%) of the other quote or proposal. All contracts for any work or public improvement in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and/or
purchase orders for the purchase of equipment, materials and supplies (other than gasoline) and contracts for public improvements shall be: 1) publicly
bid and awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, 2) purchased through the State of Illinois Joint Purchase Program if the equipment,
materials and supplies are available therefrom, 3) purchased through a joint purchasing alliance of a public body through a process that satisfies the
Illinois Procurement Code as determined by the Village Attorney, or 4) when contracts by their nature are not adapted to award by public bidding, such
as: a) design services or technical specifications are required from proposers together with pricing for equipment and/or materials and the installation
thereof on Village property or in Village facilities; b) utility services such as water, light, heat, or telephone; c) contracts for the use, purchase, delivery,
movement or installation of data processing equipment, telecommunications and interconnect equipment, software or services; d) contracts for
duplicating or copying machines and supplies; and e) purchases of used equipment; then when and to the extent practicable a request for qualifications
and/or request for proposal process shall be utilized. All contracts for any work or public improvement in excess of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids, provided however, that any such contract may be entered into
without advertising for bids, if authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Trustees then holding office. The Village Administrator shall make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees with regard to any such bids, purchases and proposals and the waiver of bids as required. The Village
Administrator is authorized to execute purchase orders for gasoline purchases even though said purchase may be in excess of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) without advertising for bids and without preliminary authorization from the President and Board of Trustees provided said purchase order
is entered with the supplier who has quoted the lowest price therefor among not less than two (2) gasoline suppliers who have furnished written price
quotes to the Director of Public Works for each such purchase order.
F. The Village Administrator, in conjunction with the Village Treasurer, shall each month cause to be prepared and shall present to the Board of Trustees a
statement showing the exact financial condition of the Village as of the end of the preceding month.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 17/702
G. The Village Administrator shall give such additional reports and information concerning the fiscal matters of the Village as may from time to time be
required by the Board of Trustees.
H. The Village Administrator shall act as the Business Manager of the Village under the direction and control of the President and Board of Trustees and in
cooperation with the Village Finance Director-Treasurer; control and direct all expenditures made by the Village; supervise the keeping of all necessary
records and books of accounts of the Village that are under the supervision of the Finance Director-Treasurer by ordinance or statute. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-
2-2017)
1-8A-6: POWERS AND DUTIES WITH REFERENCE TO VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION:
In addition to the above duties, the Village Administrator shall perform such other duties as are herein provided.
The Village Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Village and shall be responsible to the Village President and to the Board of
Trustees for the administration and operation of all of the affairs and the departments of the Village. As such Administrative Officer, the Administrator shall
have the administration and control of all matters and things pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the properties of the Village and of all of the
departments of the Village, including the Public Works Department, the Community Development Department, the Building Department, the Finance
Department, the Police Department, and the general offices of the Village. The Village Administrator shall also have supervision of such other
administrative agencies and departments and officers as may be hereafter created by the Board of Trustees. Specifically, but not in limitation of the above,
the Administrator shall have the following additional powers and duties:
A. The Administrator shall have the authority to appoint, suspend or remove all employees of the Village subject to the provisions of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes and the Bartlett Personnel Code. This shall not be taken to include elected officials, employees subject to article 10, division 2.1 "Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners" of the Illinois Municipal Code3, any appointed Village Commissioner, and part time professionals hired on a retainer or
contractual basis. No appointment shall be made upon any basis other than merit and fitness. This shall also not be taken to include the authority to
appoint or remove persons to or from appointive offices created by this chapter or other provision of this Code, or by statute, who are required to be
appointed by the Village President alone or by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board, but shall include the power to suspend
such appointed officer. Upon suspending any appointive officer, the Administrator shall submit or shall cause the Village Labor Counsel to submit to the
Board at the next meeting following such suspension a statement concerning such suspension and the reasons therefor.
The Administrator shall have the authority to recommend to the Village President and Board the appointment of all appointive officers, and to
recommend to the Village President the removal of any officer of the Village required by law or ordinance to be appointed by the Village President
acting alone, or by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board, and to recommend to the Board whether any such removed officer
should be restored to office, subject to the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes and approval by the President and Board of Trustees. This shall
not be taken to include elected officials, employees subject to article 10, division 2.1, "Board of Fire and Police Commissioners" of the Illinois Municipal
Code4. No recommendation for appointment shall be made upon any basis other than merit and fitness. Any recommendation for either hiring or
removal shall be made without regard to political belief or affiliation.
B. The Village Administrator shall attend all meetings of the President and Board of Trustees unless excused therefrom by the President and Board of
Trustees, except when the Administrator's employment is under consideration by the President and Board of Trustees. The Administrator shall have the
privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming before the President and Board of Trustees and shall be entitled to notice of all meetings,
regular and special, of the President and Board of Trustees. The Village Administrator shall not have the right to vote on matters coming before the
President and Board of Trustees.
C. With the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Village Administrator shall consolidate, combine or reorganize positions or units under the
Administrator's jurisdiction.
D. The Village Administrator shall make investigations into the affairs of the Village or any department or division thereof, and shall investigate all
complaints in relation to matters concerning Village services and Village Administration.
E. The Village Administrator shall devote the Administrator's entire time to the discharge of official duties.
F. The Village Administrator shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Corporate Authorities consistent with the Village ordinances and the
statutes of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8A-7: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
The Village Administrator shall abide by the relevant provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes pertaining to conflicts of interest, disclosures of economic
interests and contracts, including, but not limited to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 420/4A-101, et seq., and as
the same and any other relevant provisions of the State Statutes may be amended from time to time by the Illinois General Assembly. The Village
Administrator shall promptly disclose any potential conflict of interest to the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8A-8: ACTING VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
In the event the Village Administrator shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her office, or in the event of a vacancy in the Office of
Village Administrator, a qualified person shall be appointed as Acting Village Administrator by the President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, during such absence, incapacity or vacancy, with all the powers and duties of that office, who shall perform all the duties thereof without
furnishing any additional bond if such appointee shall already be under bond in any other capacity. If such appointment shall be a person not already under
bond to the Village, such appointee shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the President and Board of Trustees,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 18/702
unless said bond is waived by the President and Board of Trustees. The compensation to be paid the Acting Village Administrator or the additional
compensation above his or her regular compensation in the case where an existing officer or employee is appointed Acting Village Administrator and
continues to also perform the duties of his or her prior position, shall be fixed by the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE ATTORNEY
1-8B-1: CREATION OF OFFICE, APPOINTMENT AND BOND:
There is hereby created the Office of Village Attorney, an executive office of the Village. The Attorney shall be appointed by the Village President, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve a term of one (1) year. The bond of the Village Attorney shall be fixed as set out in section 1-8-5 of
this chapter. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8B-2: SPECIAL COUNSEL:
The Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may from time to time retain an attorney to represent or advise the Village on legal
matters if no Village Attorney has been appointed; and he may likewise retain special counsel to advise or represent the Village on special matters or to
assist the Village Attorney. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8B-3: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Attendance At Meetings: The Attorney shall attend all meetings of the President and Board of Trustees and all meetings of the Board of Local
Improvements.
B. Ordinances And Documents: The Attorney shall, on direction of the President or Board of Trustees, draft or supervise the drafting of all ordinances and
resolutions to be acted on, and all contracts or other documents in which the Municipality is interested.
C. Suits And Actions: The Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the Village may be a party or in which it
may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the Village on behalf of the Village or in the capacity of such person as an
officer of the Village, except such suits or actions as are defended by attorneys retained by the Village's insurance carriers pursuant to their rights
under insurance policies, or the Village's risk management agency in accordance with its bylaws and the rights of its excess insurers under applicable
insurance policies, or traffic or housing court citations prosecuted by the Village Prosecutor or matters brought before the Village's Administrative
Hearing Officer that hears administrative adjudication matters.
D. Advice: The Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Village and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting it, whenever requested to do so by
any Village official. Upon request by the President or the Board of Trustees, he shall reduce any such opinion to writing. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8B-4: COMPENSATION:
The Attorney shall receive such compensation as may be decided from time to time by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8B-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AND CONDEMNATION PROCEEDINGS, COMPENSATION:
The Attorney shall carry through to completion all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings for which he shall receive additional
compensation based upon the fair and reasonable value of his services. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8B-6: ACTING VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
In the event the Village Attorney shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her office, or in the event of a vacancy in the Office of Village
Attorney, a qualified person shall be appointed as Acting Village Attorney by the President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, during
such absence, incapacity or vacancy, with all the powers and duties of that office, who shall perform all the duties thereof without furnishing any additional
bond if such appointee shall already be under bond in any other capacity. If such appointment shall be a person not already under bond to the Village,
such appointee shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the President and Board of Trustees, unless said bond is
waived by the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE TREASURER
1-8C-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is hereby created the Office of Village Treasurer, who shall be appointed by the Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, to serve a term of one (1) year. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8C-2: BOND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 19/702
The Village Treasurer shall give a bond before entering upon the duties of his office in the amount set out in subsection 1-8-5A of this chapter. This bond
shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties as the Treasurer, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss by reason of
any neglect of duty or any act of the Treasurer. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8C-3: DUTIES:
The Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute or ordinance. He shall receive all money paid into the hands of such other
officer or employee as may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the Village President and the Village
Clerk.
In addition, the Treasurer shall collect and receive all money due on special assessments and special taxes, and shall keep such records pertaining to
such collection as may be required by statute or ordinance1.
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the Treasurer as a special fund to be applied only to the payment of the improvement or
bonds and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest thereon, for which the assessment was made. Payments on bonds or vouchers shall be made
in accordance with the statutes2. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8C-4: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
The Treasurer shall deposit the Village funds not less frequently than once each week in such depositories as may be selected from time to time as
provided by law; and he shall keep the deposits of the Village money separate and distinct from his own money, and shall not make private or personal
use of any Village money. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8C-5: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. The Treasurer shall keep records showing all money received and paid out by him, showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for
which it is paid, and he shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of the Village.
B. The Treasurer shall make such reports regarding delinquent special assessments as are required by statute, and shall make a monthly report to the
Board of Trustees showing what money has been received and the sources thereof. The Treasurer shall also make an annual report during the last
month of the fiscal year showing the activities of his office. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8C-6: ACCOUNTS:
The Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance, and he shall keep them in the manner required by the
Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8C-7: WARRANTS, TRANSFER OF FUNDS:
All warrants drawn on the treasury must be signed by the Village President and countersigned by the Village Clerk, stating the particular fund or
appropriation to which the same is chargeable, and the person to whom payable. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8C-8: ACTING VILLAGE TREASURER:
In the event the Village Treasurer shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her office, or in the event of a vacancy in the Office of Village
Treasurer, a qualified person shall be appointed as Acting Village Treasurer by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees during
such absence, incapacity or vacancy with all the powers and duties of that office, who shall perform the duties thereof without furnishing any additional
bond if such appointee shall already be under bond in any other capacity. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
ARTICLE D. VILLAGE BUDGET OFFICER AND DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
1-8D-1: BUDGET OFFICER:
A. Office Created, Appointment: There is hereby established the Office of Budget Officer of the Village. The Budget Officer shall be appointed by the
Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of one (1) year, and said Budget Officer may hold another Municipal
office, either elected or appointed.
B. Oath Of Office: Before entering upon the duties of that office, the Budget Officer shall take the oath of office required in section 1-8-4 of this chapter,
which oath shall be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk.
C. Bond Of Office: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Budget Officer shall execute a bond with security approved by the Corporate
Authorities, payable to the Village in the amount set out in subsection 1-8-5A of this chapter, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
the Office of Budget Officer and payment of all monies received by the Budget Officer, according to law and also the ordinances of the Village. Such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 20/702
bond may provide that the obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized
and operated either under the laws of the State of Illinois or the United States wherein such Officer has placed funds in his custody, if the bank has
been approved by the Corporate Authorities as a depository for these funds.
D. General Powers And Duties: The Budget Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all Municipal departments, commissions and boards.
2. Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.3.
3. Examine all books and records of all Municipal departments, commissions and boards which relate to monies received by the Village, Municipal
departments, commissions and boards and paid out by the Village, Municipal departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable,
amounts owed by or to the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions and boards.
4. Obtain such additional information from the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the Budget Officer for
purposes of compiling a Municipal budget, such information to be furnished by the Village, Municipal departments, commissions and boards in the
form required by the Budget Officer. Any department, commission or board which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to
the Budget Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the Municipality until such Municipal department,
commission or board shall comply in full with the request of the Budget Officer.
5. Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions or
boards except as authorized by the budget.
6. Subject to prior written approval of the Budget Officer, the heads of Municipal departments are hereby authorized to delete, add to, change or create
subclasses within object classes budgeted previously to their departments.
E. Acting Budget Officer: In the event the Budget Officer shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her office, or in the event of a vacancy
in the Office of Budget Officer, a qualified person shall be appointed as Acting Budget Officer by the President with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees during such absence, incapacity or vacancy with all the powers and duties of that office, who shall perform the duties thereof without
furnishing any additional bond if such appointee shall already be under bond in any other capacity. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8D-2: DIRECTOR OF FINANCE:
A. Position Created: There is hereby created the position of Director of Finance.
B. General Duties And Responsibilities: The Director of Finance shall be responsible for technical and administrative work in planning, organizing and
directing the activities of the Finance Department.
Work responsibilities shall include overall administration and direction of the Finance Department, including budgeting, accounting, purchasing
coordination, cash management and debt administration. Supervision shall be exercised over subordinate technical and clerical personnel in the
various departmental activities. Considerable emphasis and responsibility shall be directed at policy formulation and financial analysis of Village
operations as well as the development of effective procedures and procedural improvements in the fiscal system of the Village. Work shall be
performed under the general administrative direction of the Village Administrator and shall be reviewed through conferences, reports and independent
audits.
The Director of Finance shall:
1. Plan, organize, coordinate and direct the financial operations of the Village; supervise and review the general procedures, methods and results of the
various functional units of the Finance Department including accounting, budgetary data accumulation, payroll and employee benefit accounting,
water billing and payment recording, receivable and payable accounting, and the coordination of electronic data processing of the Village's financial
data.
2. Confer with and advise subordinate personnel on work problems; conduct meetings with technical staff and explain work techniques and resolve
operational problems.
3. Direct the maintenance of the central accounting system; direct the investment of surplus monies as permitted by law; direct the custody of all
monies, funds and securities; meet with representatives of financial institutions and discuss bond issuance costs and advise the Village Administrator
on the proper administration of bond issues and support recommendations with necessary information.
4. Develop budget forms and procedures to be used in the development of the annual Village budget; assist department heads in budget preparation;
develop revenue estimates; and, after approval of the budget, prepare monthly financial statements and assist in solutions to any budgetary
problems.
5. Supervise the preparation of the payroll and benefit administration.
6. Develop cost information and apply cost analysis to various proposed capital improvements and major Village projects.
7. Effective immediately following the discontinuance of the Office of Collector, it shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to collect and receive all
money due on special assessments and special taxes that is not paid directly to the Treasurer, and keep such records pertaining to such collection
as may be required by statute or ordinance.
8. Effective immediately following the discontinuance of the Office of Collector, the Director of Finance shall issue licenses and permits, and provide
forms therefor, where no provision to the contrary is made by statute or ordinance; and the Director of Finance shall collect and receive all monies
previously collected and/or received by the Village Collector, including, but not limited to, all fees paid or required for licenses and permits in the
absence of any provision to the contrary by ordinance or statute.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 21/702
9. Effective immediately following the discontinuance of the Office of Collector, the Director of Finance shall make such reports regarding delinquent
special assessments, as required by statute, and shall make a monthly report to the Board of Trustees showing what money has been received and
the sources thereof.
C. Acting Finance Director: In the event the Finance Director shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her position, or the position
becomes vacant, the Village Administrator may appoint an Acting Finance Director, who shall have all the power and duties of that position until any
such incapacity ends and the Finance Director returns to work and fulfills the duties of that position, or in the case of a vacancy, until a new Finance
Director is hired. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
ARTICLE E. DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
1-8E-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the Office of Director of Public Works, an executive office of the Village. The said Director shall be appointed by the President by
and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of one (1) year. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8E-2: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Director of Public Works shall:
A. Village Property: Be the custodian of all property of the Village which is not assigned to the care or custody of any other officer.
B. Streets: Have charge of the construction and care of all public streets, alleys and driveways in the Village, and keeping the same clean. He shall see to
it that all gutters and drains therein function properly and that the same are kept free from defects.
C. Street Lighting: Supervise the lighting of the public streets and alleys, and keep the lighting system in efficient operation and good repair.
D. Waterworks: Have charge of the operation and maintenance of the Municipal water distribution system.
E. Sewers: In the absence of provisions to the contrary, he shall have charge of the construction and maintenance of all public sanitary and stormwater
sewers in the Village.
F. Supervise Employees: All officers or employees assigned to the Department of Public Works shall perform their duties subject to the orders and under
the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
G. Acting Director Of Public Works: In the event the Director of Public Works shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her office, or in the
event of a vacancy in the Office of Director of Public Works, a qualified person shall be appointed as acting Director of Public Works by the President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees during such absence, incapacity or vacancy with all the powers and duties of that office, who shall
perform the duties thereof without furnishing any additional bond if such appointee shall already be under bond in any other capacity. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-
2-2017)
ARTICLE F. BUILDING OFFICIALS
1-8F-1: DIRECTOR OF BUILDING DEPARTMENT:
A. Creation Of Office; Appointment; Bond: There is hereby created the Office of Director of the Building Department who shall be appointed by the Village
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of one (1) year. The bond of the Director of the Building Department shall be
fixed by the Board at the time of his appointment1.
B. Qualifications: To be eligible for appointment, the Building Director shall be generally informed on the quality and strength of building materials and
prevailing methods of construction for safety, comfort and convenience.
C. Duties: It shall be the duty of the Building Director to supervise the inspection of all buildings and structures being constructed, repaired or altered, as
frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with Village ordinances and to supervise those individuals empowered to act as building
inspectors, plumbing inspectors and electrical inspectors.
1. Ex-Officio Plumbing Inspector: The Building Director shall act as Ex-Officio Plumbing Inspector and shall have the powers and perform all the duties
connected with that office.
2. Ex-Officio Electrical Inspector: The Building Director shall act as Ex-Officio Electrical Inspector and shall have the powers and perform all the duties
connected with that office.
D. Stop Orders: The Building Director shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction, alteration or repair of buildings in the Village when
such work is being done in violation of any provision of any ordinance relating thereto or in violation of the zoning regulations of the Village. Work shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 22/702
not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written permission of the Building Director; provided, however, that if the stop order is
an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such stop order may be served by any building official or police officer.
E. Entry Powers: The Building Director shall have the power to make or cause to be made an entry into any building or premises where the work of
altering, repairing or constructing of any building or structure is going on, for the purpose of making inspections at any reasonable hour.
F. Copies Of Permits To Assessors: In addition to all other duties, the Building Director shall forward to the Township Assessor and County Assessor a
copy of each building permit issued within fifteen (15) days of such issuance. Each such copy shall show the legal description of the lot or area
concerned, and the area estate index number, if any.
G. Penalty: Any person who shall continue work in violation of a stop order of the Building Director shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day on which any work in violation of such stop order is done.
H. Acting Building Director: In the event the Building Director shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her office, or in the event of a
vacancy in the Office of Building Director, a qualified person shall be appointed as Acting Building Director by the President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees during such absence, incapacity or vacancy with all the powers and duties of that office, who shall perform the duties
thereof without furnishing any additional bond if such appointee shall already be under bond in any other capacity. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8F-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
The Office of Electrical Inspector is hereby created. The Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the Village President with the approval of the Board of
Trustees and shall serve at their discretion. The duties of the Electrical Inspector shall include the examination of plans and specifications for, and the
inspection of all electric wiring and equipment, and enforcement of all provisions of this Code affecting electrical work. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8F-3: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
The Office of Plumbing Inspector is hereby created. The Plumbing Inspector shall be licensed by the State of Illinois and appointed by the Village
President with the approval of the Board of Trustees and shall serve at their discretion. The duties of the Plumbing Inspector shall include the examination
of plans and specifications for and the inspection of all plumbing, sewerage and drainage installations, and enforcement of all provisions of this Code
affecting plumbing and drainage not otherwise required by law to be enforced by other officials. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
ARTICLE G. HEALTH OFFICER
1-8G-1: OFFICE CREATED; BOND:
There is hereby created the Office of Health Officer, an executive office of the Village. Said Health Officer shall be appointed by the Village President by
and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a term of one (1) year. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8G-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. General: It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to enforce all Village ordinances containing provisions for the protection of public health. He shall make
inspection of foodstuffs and of the premises used for storing or selling of provisions, and he shall perform such other duties and functions as may be
required by statute or ordinance.
The Health Officer shall enforce all the rules and orders of the Board of Health, and shall attend the meetings of said Board when requested to do so by
the presiding officer.
A reinspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per inspection shall be charged in every instance where the party requesting the inspection fails to
meet the requirements of any Village ordinance containing provisions for the protection of public health or fails to keep an appointment with the Health
Officer.
B. Supervision: The Health Officer shall have and exercise a general supervision over the sanitary condition of the Village. All orders and directions
emanating from the Health Department in the name of the Health Officer shall be performed by said Health Officer. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8G-3: REPORTS:
The Health Officer shall make such reports to the Board of Trustees as may be required. He shall also make recommendations for rulings, orders or
ordinances respecting the public health, whenever he is requested to do so, or whenever he deems it advisable or necessary. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
ARTICLE H. CHIEF OF POLICE
1-8H-1: CHIEF OF POLICE, GENERALLY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 23/702
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the Office of Chief of Police. The Chief shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees; provided, that if any police officer or patrolman shall be appointed Chief of Police, he shall, while so serving, retain
whatsoever rank he held in the Police Department and resume such rank when his services as Chief terminate.
B. Qualifications: No person shall be eligible to hold the Office of Chief of Police unless he shall possess technical training in, or knowledge of, matters of
public welfare and administration; police duties; scientific investigation of crime and criminals; crime prevention, traffic control and regulations; and
Municipal government as related to police regulations and enforcement of law, so as to reasonably qualify him/her as an expert in such matters.
C. Duties Of The Chief: The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the Village Jail, and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep
such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his Department as may be required by ordinance or statute. The Chief shall be
responsible for the performance by the Police Department of all its functions and all persons who are members of the Department shall serve subject to
the orders of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall execute or cause to be executed all orders directed to him by the Health Officer so far as
they may relate to the preservation of the health of the Village.
D. Reports: The Chief of Police shall, prior to the first meeting of the Village Board in January of each year, make an annual report in writing to the
President and Board of Trustees, of the state of the Police Department with a detailed report of the transactions of the Department for the preceding
year, with such statistics and suggestions in regard to the requirements of the Department as he may deem advisable; and shall also make reports of
any matter or thing concerning such Department whenever requested by the Village President or Board of Trustees.
E. Records: It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of the names and addresses of all persons arrested or committed to the Village Jail
or County Jail, in a book to be provided for such purpose. Such record shall show the date of the arrest or committal, the number of days imprisoned,
the amount of the fine, when and to whom paid, and the date of discharge or other disposition of such persons.
F. Custody Of Stolen Property: The Chief of Police shall be custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen property in the Village.
G. Rules And Regulations: The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the guidance of the members of the Department as
he shall deem fit, such rules to be binding on such members.
H. Serving Processes: The Chief of Police shall be authorized to serve writs, summonses and other processes but no patrolman shall serve any such
summons or process except on the order of the Chief of Police or the Village President. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8H-2: ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT TO THE CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the position of Administrative Assistant to the Chief of Police ("Administrative Assistant") a civilian, nonsworn
administrative position reporting directly to the Chief of Police. The Administrative Assistant will have no supervisory authority over sworn police officers
of the Village and will not hold any rank over any sworn officer. The Administrative Assistant will not be subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners of the Village nor participate in the Police Pension Fund. The Administrative Assistant shall be responsible for the
monitoring and control of all administrative aspects in the Bartlett Police Department as assigned by the Chief of Police and/or the Village
Administrator.
B. Appointment: The Administrative Assistant shall be appointed by the Chief of Police with the approval of the Village Administrator.
C. Qualifications: The position of Administrative Assistant requires a background in police work or related Municipal administrative positions. A minimum of
four (4) years' experience in a governmental administrative position is required. Additional requirements include:
1. Knowledge of Municipal budgeting techniques and constraints.
2. General understanding of data processing functions.
3. General knowledge of police work.
4. Ability to initiate projects and see them through to completion.
5. Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with employees.
D. Duties: The duties of the Administrative Assistant shall include:
1. Budget preparation and monitoring.
2. Research of current police issues.
3. Code revision and monitoring.
4. Workflow and scheduling analysis.
5. Legislative monitoring and analysis.
6. Initiation and establishment of programs of research and planning.
7. Emergency management agency planning and coordination.
8. Citizen complaint handling.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 24/702
9. Various other administrative duties as assigned.
E. Compensation And Benefits: The Village President and Board of Trustees shall determine, by ordinance or resolution, the compensation for the
Administrative Assistant. Benefits of the Administrative Assistant will be determined under appropriate sections of the Personnel Code relating to
permanent full time employees.
F. Dismissal: Dismissal of the Administrative Assistant shall be in accordance with section 10 of the Bartlett Personnel Code, as amended by ordinance
82-19. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8H-3: DEPUTY CHIEF:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the Office of Deputy Chief of Police. There shall be two (2) such positions. Both Deputy Chief of Police
positions shall be filled by the Chief of Police. If a Deputy Chief shall, at a later date, no longer be a Deputy Chief of Police, that person shall
automatically revert to and continue the previous rank held in the Department, and such person shall not lose that rank, if any, by virtue of this
appointment.
B. Exempt Position: The Deputy Chief of Police positions shall be exempt from applicable State Statutes regulating the appointment, promotion, removal,
discharge and/or discipline of law enforcement officials, officers and employees, including 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., as amended,
and the factors considered in filling said positions shall be as follows:
1. Job experience;
2. Management experience;
3. Budgeting knowledge;
4. Ability to plan;
5. Organizational skills;
6. Interpersonal skills;
7. Education/training;
8. Ability to evaluate and assign staff;
9. Ability to research wide and complex issues; and
10. Reporting skills.
C. Duties Of Deputy Chief Of Police: The duties of the Deputy Chief of Police shall be as follows:
1. Act for the Chief of Police during the absence of the Chief or as designated; and execute general and special assignments in the planning,
administration, coordination, direction and review of departmental operations and activities.
2. Serve as a member of the Department's management team; provide advice and assistance to the Chief of Police; assist in setting Department goals
and in evaluating the extent and nature of their accomplishment.
3. Represent the Department in relationships with other governmental officials and members of the public; conduct special assignments at the direction
of the Chief of Police.
4. Direct and coordinate activities and departments; develop policies and procedures; participate in the preparation of the Department's budget; and
administer administrative and staff services.
5. Perform any and all other duties assigned by the Chief of Police.
6. Other related work. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8H-4: VACATION OF POSITION:
Upon the passage and approval of this chapter, the position of Lieutenant in the Police Department shall no longer be filled, other than as provided in
subsection 1-8H-3A of this article. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8H-5: COMMANDER:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the Office of Commander. There shall be three (3) such positions. The Commander of Police positions shall be
appointed by the Chief of Police. If a Commander shall at a later date, no longer be a Commander of Police, that person shall automatically revert to
and continue the previous rank held in the Department, and such person shall not lose that rank, if any by virtue of this appointment.
B. Exempt Position: The Commander positions shall be exempt from applicable State Statutes regulating the appointment, promotion, removal, discharge,
and/or discipline of law enforcement officials, officers, and employees, including 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., as amended, and the
factors considered in filling said positions shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 25/702
1. Organizational skills;
2. Ability to plan;
3. Job experience;
4. Management experience;
5. Budgeting knowledge;
6. Interpersonal skills;
7. Education and/or training;
8. Ability to evaluate and assign staff;
9. Ability to research wide and complex issues;
10. Reporting skills; and
11. Ability to multitask.
C. Duties Of Commander: The duties of the Commander of Police shall be as follows:
1. a. Act as a Watch Commander on either day or night shifts, or
b. Be assigned to supervise the investigation/youth section.
2. Serve as a member of the Department's management team; provide advice and assistance to the Chief of Police; assist in setting Department goals
and in evaluating the extent and nature of their accomplishment.
3. Represent the Department in relationships with other governmental officials and members of the public; conduct special assignments at the direction
of the Chief of Police.
4. Direct and coordinate activities and departments; develop policies and procedures; participate in the preparation of the Department's budget; and
administer administrative and staff services.
5. Perform any and all other duties assigned by the Chief of Police.
6. Other related work. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
ARTICLE I. VILLAGE ENGINEER
1-8I-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the Office of Village Engineer. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8I-2: APPOINTMENT:
The Village Engineer shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, to serve for a term of one (1) year, but not
longer than the term of the current Village President. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8I-3: BOND, OATH AND COMPENSATION:
A. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village Engineer shall furnish a surety bond in the amount set out in section 1-8-5 of this chapter to
be approved conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office. The premium for such bond shall be paid by the Village.
B. Oath: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Village Engineer shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of the State of Illinois.
C. Compensation: The Village Engineer shall receive such compensation as may be decided from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8I-4: ATLASES AND RECORDS:
The Village Engineer shall keep accurate atlases and records of all public works, including atlases of all underground water sanitary sewer and storm
sewer lines, structures and appurtenances, owned by the Village. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8I-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 26/702
A. The Village Engineer shall advise the Village Board, and such Village Officers as the Village Administrator directs, on all engineering matters referred to
him or her and shall perform such duties as are provided by law, ordinance or contract, and in addition thereto, such other duties as may be imposed
upon him or her by the Village Board or by the Village Administrator.
B. The Village Engineer shall:
1. Attend regularly scheduled Village Board meetings and Public Works Committee meetings as requested by the Village.
2. Review preliminary and final plats of developments, preliminary engineering submittals and attendance at all staff, Plan Commission, Committee and
Board meetings regarding preliminary plans, plats, PDs and PUDs related to engineering and planning issues all as requested by the Village.
3. Review final plans, specifications and project cost estimates of proposed projects and developments, provide recommendations of approval of said
plans, specifications and project costs estimates and recommend bond amounts consistent with specific ordinances of the Village, all as requested
by the Village.
4. Provide field observation for the installation of public improvements for new developments and review and approve letter of credit reductions based
on said field observations and requests by developers.
5. At the request of the Village, provide necessary services to investigate, review, make recommendations and provide engineering for certain projects
and developments.
6. Provide the necessary professional engineering services for motor fuel tax maintenance/construction projects and all other projects as requested by
the Village.
C. The Village Engineer shall from time to time as required by the Village Board or the Village Administrator, make reports and specifications regarding
public improvements, repairs of streets, bridges and sidewalks, or such other work as the Village Board or the Village Administrator may request, and
shall make such suggestions to the Board or the Village Administrator, as the case may be, regarding the same, as shall in his or her judgment seem
best and proper. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
1-8I-6: ACTING VILLAGE ENGINEER:
In the event the Village Engineer shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her office, or in the event of a vacancy in the Office of Village
Engineer, a qualified person shall be appointed as Acting Village Engineer by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees during
such absence, incapacity or vacancy with all the powers and duties of that office, who shall perform the duties thereof without furnishing any additional
bond if such appointee shall already be under bond in any other capacity. (Ord. 2017-55, 5-2-2017)
Chapter 9
VILLAGE SEAL
1-9-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
The Corporate Seal of the Village shall be as follows: a circular disc with the words "Village of Bartlett, Cook and DuPage Counties, Illinois", on the
perimeter, and the words "Village Seal" enclosed therein. (1968 Code, §7.601)
Chapter 10
VILLAGE FINANCES
1-10-1: STATE BUDGET LAW ADOPTED1:
The Village hereby adopts the provisions of sections 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10. (Ord. 71-1, 1971)
1-10-2: TAX LEVY:
As required by law2, a tax levy ordinance shall be enacted annually, levying such taxes as may be needed to meet the anticipated expenses of the coming
year, together with such taxes as may be required to meet outstanding bond issues, or for purposes payable from special taxes properly authorized.
A certified copy of the tax levy ordinance shall be filed with the County Clerk of each of Cook and DuPage Counties, not later than the second Tuesday in
September. (1968 Code, § 7.202; amd. 1983 Code)
1-10-3: VILLAGE INDEBTEDNESS:
No indebtedness shall be incurred, excepting such indebtedness as may be payable solely for the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a
designated specified source, unless there is a prior appropriation out of which such indebtedness could be paid as provided by statute. (1968 Code,
§ 7.203; amd. 1983 Code)
1-10-4: CONTRACTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 27/702
A. Execution Of Contracts: The Village President, or any other person designated by the Board of Trustees, may sign, on behalf of the Village, any
contract authorized by the President and Board of Trustees. No contract may be entered into without the authority of the President and Board of
Trustees. (1968 Code, § 7.204)
B. Fair Employment Practices: It is the policy of the Village to comply with the rules and regulations for public contracts heretofore promulgated by the
Illinois Fair Employment Practices Commission, and all contracts entered into by the Village shall contain an "Equal Employment Opportunity Clause"
as set out in 775 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-101 et seq., hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out at length herein. (Ord. 75-38, 8-19-1973;
amd. 1983 Code)
1-10-5: PAYMENT OF BILLS, PAYROLL:
A. All bills payable by the Village, other than for the payment of salaries established by the President and Board of Trustees, shall be submitted to the
Village Board for approval before payment. (1968 Code, § 7.205)
B. The Treasurer shall pay out money in payment of bills or for salaries or for any other purpose other than the retirement of principal or interest on bonds
or tax anticipation warrants only upon warrants lawfully drawn upon him in accordance with the "bill list" previously approved by the President and
Board of Trustees. (1968 Code, § 7.206; amd. 1983 Code)
1-10-6: AUDIT OF RECORDS:
At the close of each fiscal year, as soon as practicable, and no later than six (6) months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the Village
made by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of Illinois, to be designated by the President and Board of Trustees. Copies of
such audit report shall be filed with the Village Clerk and with the Director of the state department of revenue, and in such other places as may be required
by law3. (1968 Code, §7.207)
1-10-7: PUBLIC BENEFIT FUND:
A. Pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-39, there is hereby established a public benefit fund, which fund shall be used solely for
the purpose of paying the public benefit portion of the several amounts that may hereafter be assessed for public benefit under and in pursuance of any
assessment ordinance that may be hereafter passed by the village.
B. The village treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to establish a public benefit fund to be maintained separate and apart from all other municipal
funds, and to be used solely for the purposes set forth in the preceding subsection.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-39, there shall be levied annually a direct annual tax not exceeding five-hundredths
percent (0.05%) or the rate limit in effect on July 1, 1967, whichever is greater, of the value as equalized or assessed by the department of local
government affairs of all taxable property in the village, to be known as the public benefit tax, which shall be over and above and in addition to all other
taxes authorized by law to be levied by the village.
D. The proceeds of such public benefit tax shall be deposited in the public benefit fund to be created pursuant to the provisions of this section and the
proceeds of such public benefit tax shall be used for the purposes hereinbefore set forth and only for those purposes. (Ord. 72-7, 8-1-1972)
1-10-8: DEVELOPMENT FEES:
No property shall be annexed to the village, no subdivision, planned unit development, rezoning, appeal or site plan shall be approved, no amendment to
the Bartlett zoning ordinance or the granting of a special use thereunder, or variation of the bulk restrictions thereof, or any other zoning relief, shall be
processed by the village clerk, the village zoning administrator, or any other village official, until there has been deposited with the village clerk the
requisite fees as set forth in the following schedule:
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE
Development Activity Administrative Fee
Annexation $200.00 plus consultant fees
Site plan, variance, appeal 300.00 plus consultant fees
Text amendment 400.00 plus consultant fees
Rezoning, special use 400.00 plus consultant fees
Subdivision, PUD and any other
related fees
Refer to title 11 of this code (subdivision ordinance)
Abrogation (of an easement) Refer to title 11 of this code (subdivision ordinance)
(Ord. 95-121, 12-19-1995; amd. per correspondence dated 4-13-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 28/702
1-10-9: CONSULTANT FEES:
Each owner, developer, builder, subdivider or any person who or entity which submits a preliminary or final plat of subdivision or plan for a planned unit
development to the village for approval shall be responsible for the payment of the following expenses specifically attributable to such plan which will be
billed directly:
A. The professional fees charged to the village by its outside planning consultant for reviewing such plats and plans, including such professional planner's
attendance at staff, plan commission and committee meetings at which such plans are reviewed.
B. The professional fees charged to the village by its outside professional engineer for reviewing such plats and plans, including such professional
engineer's attendance at staff, plan commission, and committee meetings at which such plans are reviewed.
C. The professional fees charged to the village by its attorney for reviewing annexation agreements, declarations of covenants, zoning ordinances,
preparation of zoning notices, review of performance and/or completion bonds, letters of credit, escrow agreements or other security arrangements
established to guarantee completion of subdivision and PUD improvements, and attendance at staff, plan commission and committee meetings at
which such plans are reviewed. (Ord. 95-121, 12-19-1995)
Chapter 11
DISCLOSURE OF REAL ESTATE INTERESTS
1-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter:
APPLICANT: One who applies for any benefits on behalf of himself or some other entity.
BENEFICIAL INTEREST: Any interest in a land trust.
BENEFICIARY: Any person, corporation or other entity having a beneficial interest in a land trust.
CORPORATION: A body of persons authorized by law to act together as a single person.
LAND TRUST: An express agreement whereby other legal and equitable title to real estate is held by a trustee for the benefit of beneficiaries who have the
exclusive right to manage and control said real estate.
LESSEE: One who has a possessory interest in real estate by virtue of a lease.
NOMINEE: One who holds or receives title for another.
OPTION HOLDER: One having the right to purchase real estate upon compliance with conditions named in a contract.
OWNER: One who holds fee simple title to real estate.
STOCKHOLDER: One owning certificates of stock in a corporation or membership in an association, joint stock company, syndicate or partnership.
1-11-2: APPLICATIONS:
Any application to the President and Board of Trustees or Village boards and commissions for any authorization, benefit, license, permit, variation, zoning
amendment or planned unit development approval relating to real estate shall be signed by the owner, lessee, option holder or agent of either.
A. If the application is made by a person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner (or its president or vice-president if the
owner is a corporation) that the person signing the application has authority to make the application; and the application shall disclose the full names,
addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant and owner.
B. If the applicant or the owner is a corporation, the application shall disclose the names and addresses of the officers, directors, registered agent, and
those shareholders or members owning in excess of five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock or interest in the corporation.
C. If the applicant is a trustee, the full name, address, telephone number and the extent of the interest of each beneficiary must be disclosed.
D. If the applicant is a beneficiary, nominee or option holder, the application must disclose the name, address and telephone number of those persons or
entities for whom he is acting, and if it is a corporation, the provisions of subsection B of this Section shall be complied with.
1-11-3: PENALTY:
Any person making a false or incomplete statement in the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 29/702
After a statement is determined to be false, missing, incomplete or incorrect, a written notice of the omission or falsification shall be sent to the applicant. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day that elapses until the date the required information is furnished or corrected. (Ord. 74-23, 6-4-
74)
Chapter 12
INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-12-1: INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
To the fullest extent permitted by the constitution of the state of Illinois of 1970 and applicable law, each of the following officers of the village: (Ord. 93-
126, 11-16-1993)
Village president
Village board of trustees
Village clerk
Deputy village clerk (if any has been appointed)
Village administrator
Village attorney
Village treasurer
Village budget officer
Director of public works
Director of the building department
Village electrical inspector
Village plumbing inspector
Village health officer
Chief of police
Village engineer
Each member of each board or commission of the village established pursuant to applicable state statute or by ordinance or resolution of the village,
and
All employees of the village
(Ord. 93-126, 11-16-1993; amd. Ord. 2008-108, 10-21-2008, eff. 4-30-2009)
shall be indemnified, defended and held harmless by the village from and against all liabilities, expenses of investigation, judgments and amounts paid in
settlement which may be imposed upon or reasonably incurred or paid by such officer or employee in connection with or resulting from any claim made
against him or her, or any action, suit, proceeding or investigation in which he or she may be involved, by reason of his or her being or having been such
officer or employee of the village, whether or not he or she continues to be such officer or employee at or after the time of such claim, action, suit,
proceeding or investigation; provided, however, that the foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
A. Any liability or cost with respect to any matter as to which such officer or employee is finally adjudged to be guilty of bad faith, or actual malice, or wilful
and wanton misconduct in the performance of his or her duties as such officer or employee.
B. Any payment, expense or cost arising out of a settlement of any claim, action, suit or proceeding, unless: 1) such settlement shall be approved by the
court having jurisdiction over such claim, action, suit or proceeding, with express knowledge of the existence of the indemnification provided hereby; or
2) such settlement shall have been made upon the written opinion of independent legal counsel selected by the village board, to the effect that there is
no reasonable ground for any finding of bad faith, or of actual malice, or wilful and wanton misconduct on the part of such officer or employee and that
the anticipated cost of such settlement will not substantially exceed the estimated cost and expense of defending such claim, action, suit or proceeding
to a final conclusion.
C. Any liability or judgment payable to the village itself.
D. The cost of independent legal representation in any such action, suit or proceeding if the village offers or otherwise indicates its willingness to provide a
legal defense with respect to such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation.
The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any other rights to which such officer or employee may otherwise be entitled as a matter
of law1. (Ord. 93-126, 11-16-1993)
Chapter 13
ETHICS ORDINANCE
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b) relating
to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 30/702
vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code1.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act2.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are
not fixed, "compensated time" for purposes of this chapter includes any period of time when the officer or employee is on premises under the control of the
employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code3.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Bartlett (the "village"), whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties
are subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an
independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage and Kane Counties, Illinois.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a) compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension
benefits, and c) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include
activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are
otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code4, but only with regard to those activities that
require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
B. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser,
political meeting, or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort
to get voters to the polls.
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for
elective office or for or against any referendum question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
B. Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 31/702
C. Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-
63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer or
employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village of Bartlett in connection with any prohibited political activity.
B. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as part of that
officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment, or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
C. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being
awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any
prohibited political activity.
D. Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that
are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis as permitted by law.
E. No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment, or 2) in a position the salary for which is paid in
whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in aid
programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political
party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-3: GIFT BAN:
1-13-3-1: SOLICITATION OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS:
Except as permitted by this section 1-13-3, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-3-2: EXCEPTIONS:
Section 1-13-3-1 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
A. Opportunities, benefits, and services which are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
B. Anything for which the recipient pays the fair market value.
C. Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code, or 2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization
or candidate.
D. Educational materials and missions.
E. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
F. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle,
first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-inlaw,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father,
mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
G. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the
gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of
the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances
under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including
any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift
personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family
members.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 32/702
H. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments
are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared, or 2) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
I. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not
connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
J. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee
from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
K. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
L. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and independent of every other. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-3-3: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
A recipient does not violate this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return the prohibited gift to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as
now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-4: ETHICS ADVISOR:
A. The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees (the "village board") is authorized to appoint an ethics advisor for the village
of Bartlett. The duties of the ethics advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the village unless the position has been created as an officer
by the village.
B. The ethics advisor, if appointed, shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and state ethics laws, and shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the village board. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-
2004)
1-13-5: ETHICS COMMISSION:
1-13-5-1: APPOINTMENT:
The village president, with the advice and consent of the village board, is authorized to appoint members to a village of Bartlett ethics commission (the
"ethics commission" or the "commission") which shall consist of three (3) members. The commission, if created, shall have the powers and duties set forth
herein. No person shall be appointed as a member of the commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any
officer of the village. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-5-2: TERM:
At any first meeting of the commission, the initial appointees shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two (2) commissioners shall serve two (2) year
terms, and the third commissioner shall serve a one year term. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year terms. Commissioners
may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms, subject to the appointment procedures set forth in section 1-13-5-1 of this chapter.
At any such first meeting of the commission, the commissioners shall choose a chairperson and secretary from their number. Meetings shall be held at the
call of the chairperson or any two (2) commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two (2) commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require
the affirmative vote of two (2) members. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-5-3: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES:
The village president, with the advice and consent of the village board, may remove a commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office after service on the commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the
commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than ten (10) days' notice. Vacancies shall be filled in
the same manner as original appointments. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission, if created, shall have the following powers and duties:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 33/702
A. To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers.
B. Upon receipt of a sworn written complaint, to investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary actions, impose
fines in accordance with subsection 1-13-6B of this chapter and refer violations of section 1-13-2 or 1-13-3 of this chapter to the appropriate attorney
for prosecution. The commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a sworn written complaint alleging a violation of this chapter and not upon
its own prerogative.
C. To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons who may have
violated the provisions of this chapter.
D. To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all officers
and employees of the village to cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by
the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.
E. The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-5-5: COMPLAINTS:
A. In the event an ethics commission has been appointed, any complaint alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed with said ethics commission;
otherwise, such complaint shall be filed with the village clerk who shall provide copies of the complaint and notice regarding the date in which the
complaint was received to the village president and board of trustees within forty eight (48) hours of receipt of such complaint. Any complaint alleging a
violation of this chapter shall be signed and sworn to by the complainant(s).
1. Within thirty (30) days of the filing of a sworn written complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, an ethics commission may be appointed in
accordance with the procedures set forth in section 1-13-5-1 of this chapter; provided however, that any official who is a complainant of the complaint
or is alleged to have violated this chapter in said complaint shall not participate in the deliberations, appointment and/or consent regarding any
appointment to the ethics commission. In the event an ethics commission is appointed within thirty (30) days of the filing of such complaint, the clerk
shall immediately file such complaint with the ethics commission, and the procedures and provisions of this section shall be applicable to such
complaint.
2. In the event an ethics commission is not created within thirty (30) days of the filing of a sworn written complaint alleging a violation of this chapter,
then the village board shall determine whether or not there is a probable cause of a violation of this chapter, following the procedures set forth in
subsections B and C of this section regarding notice and hearing requirements. Such determination of probable cause shall be made by a majority of
the village board who are not complainants of the complaint or alleged to have violated this chapter in the complaint. Upon a finding of probable
cause by a majority of such disinterested village board members, the complaint shall be adjudicated judicially. Upon a finding of a lack of probable
cause of a violation of this chapter by such disinterested village board members, such determination shall be final and notice of such determination
shall be sent to the complainants and employees and/or officers accused of violating this chapter via certified mail, return receipt requested, within
forty eight (48) hours of such determination.
B. Within ten (10) business days after the receipt of a sworn written complaint, the secretary of the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of the complaint. The secretary of the commission
shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within ten (10) business days
after receipt by the commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the meeting
to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
C. Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is
deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the
complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission shall issue
notice to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to
proceed within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 1-13-3 of this chapter, and there is a determination of probable cause, then the
commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the
commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the village board to prosecute ordinance and/or code violations (the "village
prosecutor") and request that the complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no
determination of probable cause, then the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to
dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 1-13-2 of this chapter, then the commission shall notify the village prosecutor in
writing and shall transmit to the village prosecutor the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the commission concerning the alleged
violation.
D. On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint
and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the open
meetings act.
E. Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: 1) dismiss the complaint or 2) issue
a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the village board or officer or department head having authority to discipline the officer or
employee, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed
shall be a matter of public information.
If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business days
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 34/702
after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at
least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven (7) days
thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the village board or officer or department head
having authority to discipline the officer or employee or impose a fine upon the violator or both.
F. If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission shall render
its decision as required under subsection E of this section within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7) days preceding
that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if possible.
G. The commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-13-3 of this chapter in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may fine any person who knowingly files a
frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this chapter in an amount of not less than one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including a discharge.
H. A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must be filed within one year after the alleged violation.
I. A decision of the village of Bartlett ethics commission to impose a fine is subject to judicial review under the administrative review law. All other decisions
by the village of Bartlett ethics commission are final and not subject to review either administratively or judicially. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-6: PENALTIES:
A. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-13-2 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
B. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-13-3 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand one
dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
C. Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to the ethics commission, village clerk, local
enforcement authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
D. A violation of section 1-13-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by the village prosecutor by filing in the circuit court an information,
or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the
establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
A violation of section 1-13-3 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the village prosecutor, or, if an ethics commission has
been created, by the commission through the designated administrative procedure.
E. In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any provision of
section 1-13-2 or 1-13-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline, up to and including discharge. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-7: REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of officers and employees of the
village. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-8: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the ethics act that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by units of local government shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action by the village
board. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-9: REPEALER:
If the Illinois supreme court declares the ethics act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois supreme
court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
village board if the ethics act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
1-13-10: SEVERABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 35/702
If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the ethics act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the ethics act, or does not
address the remainder of the ethics act, then that part of this chapter relating to the part of the ethics act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed
without further action by the village board; however, the remainder of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2004-63, 5-18-2004)
Chapter 13A
ANTINEPOTISM
1-13A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
CURRENT EMPLOYEE: Any person who received payment of wages earned for services actually rendered within the sixty (60) days prior to the date of
adoption of this chapter.
ELECTED OFFICIAL: All elected officials of the village of Bartlett, including, without limitation, the village president, village trustees, and village clerk.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who earns wages paid by the village, but not persons acting as an unpaid volunteer.
NEPOTISM: Employment or other favoritism granted to relatives without regard to merit.
OFFICER: Appointed officers of the village, including the officers listed in section 1-8-5, and chapter 8, articles A through I inclusive of this title, as well as
appointed commissioners, trustees and other officers under Illinois state law.
RELATIVE: Father, mother, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, a husband, wife, civil partner, son or daughter, stepson, stepdaughter, son-in-law or daughter-inlaw,
niece, nephew or cousin (by blood, marriage or other legal action). A relative by adoption is treated the same as a biological relative, if the person was
adopted as a minor. (Ord. 2013-72, 9-17-2013)
1-13A-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND POLICY:
A. Nepotism in village government is contrary to good governance for the following reasons:
1. It is the policy of the village of Bartlett that employment decisions, including hiring, promotions, disciplinary actions and dismissals, be taken
according to the merits of the individual, and the facts and circumstances of the matter at hand. Favoritism granted by family members in positions of
authority is inherently contrary to this policy.
2. It is the policy of the village to provide all employees with equal employment opportunities for career advancement without fear of favoritism or
penalty, actual or implied, based on family relations.
3. Public confidence in village government requires openness and transparency in all important functions; concentration of control and access of any
function in any family results in erosion of public confidence.
4. Nepotism creates an appearance of impropriety, whether or not any actual improper activities exist, and can hinder investigation of alleged or actual
improprieties, further eroding effectiveness, integrity and public confidence in public institutions.
5. This policy is intended to comply with the requirements of all applicable federal, state and local laws.
B. It is the policy and purpose of this antinepotism chapter to help remedy these, and other negative consequences associated with nepotism in village
government. (Ord. 2013-72, 9-17-2013)
1-13A-3: PROHIBITIONS:
A. The village of Bartlett is hereby prohibited from employing the relative of any elected official or officer in a full or part time position.
B. In addition, no elected official or officer may take part in actions concerning, or tending to influence, the promotion, discipline or dismissal of his or her
relative.
C. If employees become related to an elected official or officer after employment, every effort will be made to identify a resolution to conflict in coordination
with the related individuals. If an agreed solution cannot be reached, the village administrator will implement such actions as may be necessary to
resolve the conflict, including, but not limited to, involuntary separation from employment. (Ord. 2013-72, 9-17-2013)
1-13A-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to require dismissal, reassignment or similar action of any "current employee" as defined
herein.
B. In the event this chapter is contrary to any existing written contract, collective bargaining agreement or statutory right of any employee, such written
contract, collective bargaining agreement or statutory right shall control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 36/702
C. This chapter does not apply to noncompensated voluntary activities.
D. Any employment of an individual that would conflict with this chapter shall be subject to the approval of a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the village board.
Any elected official related to a prospective employee is expressly prohibited from voting on such approval. (Ord. 2013-72, 9-17-2013)
1-13A-5: IMPLEMENTATION, COORDINATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
The village administrator shall be responsible for the implementation, coordination and administration of the provisions of the policy set forth in this
chapter. Prior to the application of this policy regarding employment or transfer decisions with respect to relatives, supervisors must contact the village
administrator to ensure compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 2013-72, 9-17-2013)
Chapter 14
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
1-14-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord.
2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's finance director is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the
local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village not an agency
or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of
such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax
to the village.
VILLAGE: The village of Bartlett, Illinois. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-3: NOTICE:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
A. First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-4: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-5: PAYMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 37/702
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second to the
interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-6: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have
paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the
taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the
taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of credit. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-7: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than
thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax collector
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment
based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of
overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 38/702
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity
imposing such tax. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-8: APPEAL PROCESS:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a
claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection procedures.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for
hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to
the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the
taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date
of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for
filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day
period. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-9: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 1-14-8 of this chapter, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing.
The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five
percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty,
of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of
the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a
notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is
imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-11: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax
administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-12: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 39/702
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the
local tax administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-13: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
A. No notice of determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination may be issued by the village, the tax paid was
less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which
return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-14: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local
tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the
filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless
the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax
and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid
within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-15: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet
shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village clerk's office. (Ord.
2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-16: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
1-14-17: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 2012-33, 5-1-2012)
Chapter 15
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF NONVEHICULAR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS
1-15-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 40/702
The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of the Village's codes and ordinances as may be allowed by law and
directed by ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of, including but not limited to, titles 3, "Business And License Regulations"; 4,
"Health And Sanitation"; 5, "Police Regulations"; 6, part 607, "Motorbikes"; 7, "Public Ways And Properties"; 8, "Fire Protection And Prevention"; 9,
"Bartlett Building Code"; and 10, "Bartlett Zoning Ordinance", of this Code and other ordinances of the Village (excluding adjudication of parking and
vehicle compliance violations as provided in title 6, chapter 20 of this Code) and by establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and
procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by section 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., of the Illinois Municipal Code1 which authorizes home rule municipalities to provide by
ordinance for a system of administrative adjudication of Municipal Code violations to the extent permitted by the Illinois Constitution, the Village hereby
creates a system of administrative adjudication of charges of violations of this Code, as amended from time to time by this reference. The Village hereby
adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., as amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of said statutes and
the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. The adoption of this chapter does not preclude the Village from using other lawful
methods to enforce the provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, the institution of any action in the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois; the
Circuit Court for the 18th Judicial Circuit, DuPage County, Illinois; or the Circuit Court for the 16th Judicial Circuit, Kane County, Illinois; or any other
administrative proceeding. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-15-2: CREATION OF CODE HEARING UNIT; JURISDICTION:
There is hereby created within the Village of Bartlett an executive unit of the Municipal government to be known as the Code Hearing Unit, which is
authorized to provide for and operate a "system of administrative adjudication", which shall be defined as the adjudication of any violation of any Municipal
ordinance of the Village of Bartlett, including, but not limited to, those actions brought pursuant to titles 3, "Business And License Regulations"; 4, "Health
And Sanitation"; 5, "Police Regulations"; 6, part 607, "Motorbikes"; 7, "Public Ways And Properties"; 8, "Fire Protection And Prevention"; 9, "Bartlett
Building Code"; and 10, "Bartlett Zoning Code", of this Code and other ordinances of the Village, provided that proceedings not within the statutory or
home rule authority of the Village, any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code2 or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles, any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code3, and any other offense for which a court appearance is required under
Illinois Supreme Court rule 551, shall not be subject to administrative adjudication pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Administrative adjudication of
parking and vehicle compliance violations are not subject to this chapter, but are subject to the provisions of title 6, chapter 20 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-98,
8-21-2018)
1-15-3: CODE HEARING UNIT ADMINISTRATION:
The Code Hearing Unit shall be composed of an Administrative Hearing Officer, an Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, and may include any one or
more of the following: a System Coordinator/Computer Operator, hearing room personnel, and any other duly appointed person or persons deemed
necessary for the efficient administration of the Code Hearing Unit, with the following powers, duties and authority:
A. Powers Of The Administrative Hearing Officer: The Administrative Hearing Officer shall have all of the powers granted to Hearing Officers under State
law, set forth at chapter 65, act 5, section 1-2.1-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended, the provisions of which are incorporated herein by this
reference, including the power to:
1. Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the adjudicator;
2. Administer oaths;
3. Hear testimony and/or accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of an ordinance violation;
4. Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant papers or documentation provided the applicable witness
fees provided in section 4.3 of the Circuit Courts Act4, as amended, have been paid by the party requesting the subpoena;
5. Rule upon objections and the admissibility of evidence;
6. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
7. Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the hearing, of whether a Code or ordinance violation occurred or exists. The
Administrative Hearing Officer's determination shall be in writing and shall include written findings of fact, decision, and order including the fine,
penalty, or other action with which the respondent must comply; and
8. Impose penalties consistent with applicable Code provisions and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation. Notwithstanding
those violations for which the Illinois Municipal Code5, as amended, limits the fine or penalty to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), the
Administrative Hearing Officer shall have the authority to impose fines and penalties up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). When applicable, each
day a Code provision is found to have been violated by the defendant shall constitute a separate offense, and each separate offense subjects the
respondent to the penalty provided by the governing penalty provision. In addition to imposing penalties consistent with applicable Code provisions
and assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, the Administrative Hearing Officer may:
a. Impose, in addition to fines, administrative and/or enforcement costs and when applicable, impose costs incurred by the Village for effecting
compliance with Code provision(s) for which a defendant has been found liable.
b. Order, notwithstanding fines imposed or costs assessed, the defendant to comply with Code provision(s) found to have been violated, and, if
appropriate, order the respondent to post a compliance bond as provided by section 1-15-6 of this chapter. The maximum monetary fine of this
section shall be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with this Code and shall not be applicable to cases to
enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the Village.
c. Order, regardless of fines imposed or costs assessed, the defendant to perform a term of community service.
9. In no event shall an Administrative Hearing Officer have the authority to:
a. Impose a penalty of incarceration.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 41/702
b. Impose a fine in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
B. Powers Of The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator: The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall be empowered and is authorized and directed
to:
1. Operate and manage this system of administrative adjudication of nonvehicular ordinance or Code violations.
2. Adopt, distribute and process nonvehicular ordinance and Code violation citations and other notices as may be required under this chapter or as
may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
3. Collect money paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final determination of a Code violation.
4. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain this administrative adjudication system.
5. Collect unpaid fines and penalties and otherwise pursue all post judgment remedies available under law, including but not limited to the Illinois Debt
Recovery Offset Portal (IDROP) program through the Illinois State Comptrollers' Office.
6. Compromise or otherwise settle violation notices prior to a hearing date. However, any such compromise should be made of record by the Ordinance
Enforcement Administrator on the date the violation notice was scheduled to appear for hearing, with an explanation by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator as to the reasons for such compromise. The Administrative Hearing Officer is also required to approve any such compromise or
settlement at the hearing.
C. Powers Of The System Coordinator/Computer Operator: The System Coordinator/Computer Operator shall be appointed by the Village Administrator
and is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain computer programs for the administrative adjudication system created in this chapter.
The System Coordinator/Computer Operator shall be responsible for entering and tracking data and producing and when applicable, generating written
documentation pertaining to:
1. Input of violation notice information.
2. Input of hearing and notice dates.
3. Input of fine and penalty assessments and payments.
4. Issuance of receipts for payment.
5. Issuance of succeeding notices of hearing dates or court dates and/or final determination of liability as directed by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator or by the Administrative Hearing Officer in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
6. Maintenance of accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and
paid.
D. Powers Of The Hearing Room Personnel: The hearing room personnel shall be appointed by the Village Administrator and shall otherwise be employed
as full time Village police officers. The hearing room personnel are hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Maintain hearing room decorum.
2. Have and carry out such authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the Circuit Court for Cook County, Illinois.
3. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required to maintain hearing room decorum as directed by the Administrative Hearing
Officer or the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator.
E. Selection And Appointment Of Personnel: The persons who shall hold the positions of Administrative Hearing Officer, Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator, System Coordinator/Computer Operator, and hearing room personnel under this chapter shall be selected and appointed according to
the following procedures:
1. Administrative Hearing Officer Appointment: The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Village Board (the "Corporate Authorities") and shall serve pursuant to the terms set forth in an employment agreement for such
services as determined by the Corporate Authorities of the Village. The Administrative Hearing Officer under this chapter may be one and the same
Administrative Hearing Officer appointed and conducting administrative hearings of parking and vehicular compliance violations under title 6, chapter
20 of this Code. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be subject to removal by the Corporate Authorities.
2. Information Considered: In making selections, the Corporate Authorities shall consider all pertinent information, including at a minimum:
a. Candidate's ability to comply with the job descriptions as set forth herein; and
b. Background and performance data made available to the Village Administrator on file with the Village, or otherwise obtained by the Village; and
c. Whether the candidate meets the statutory criteria as an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
3. Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, System Coordinator/Computer Operator And Hearing Room Personnel:
a. The Village Administrator shall assign the duties of Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, System Coordinator/Computer Operator and hearing
room personnel to Village employees.
F. Compensation: Authorization for compensation for each of the above stated positions shall be made by the President and Board of Trustees through the
annual budget process, and such compensation shall be determined by the Village Board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 42/702
G. Training Of Personnel: Prior to an Administrative Hearing Officer conducting these administrative adjudication proceedings, the Administrative Hearing
Officer must either:
1. Demonstrate a minimum of three (3) years experience as an Administrative Hearing Officer for a program of administrative adjudication of violations
of nonvehicular regulations; or
2. Successfully complete a formal training program, which includes instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which they will
conduct; orientation to each subject area of the Code violations that they will adjudicate; observation of administrative hearings; and participation in
hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders pursuant to chapter 65, act 5, section 1-2.1-4(c) of the Illinois Municipal
Code, as amended. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-15-4: COMPLAINTS AND NOTICES OF HEARING PROCEDURES:
The system of administrative adjudication of nonvehicular regulations violations shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures to assure
defendants are afforded due process of law:
A. Issuance Of Violation Notices And Citations: Violation notices may be issued by any authorized person and shall contain information and shall be
served, certified and have evidentiary value as hereinafter stated. Certain violation notices may be issued in the form of an "LA" citation allowing the
recipient to pay the stated fine prior to any hearing. If the recipient fails to pay the required fine within the allotted time under the "LA" citation, the
violation notice will be processed through the administrative adjudication system as otherwise provided for in this chapter.
Options for persons charged with certain offenses:
1. Persons charged with a violation of the following sections and/or subsections: subsections 5-3-2A, "Disorderly Conduct"; C, "False Alarms"; D,
"Loitering On Public Property Or In Public Places"; E, "Loitering On Business Property"; 5-3-3D, "Trespassing Prohibited"; sections 5-5-1, "Curfew";
5-5-3, "Truancy Prohibited"; subsection 7-1-8A, "Obstruction"; section 8-6-1, "Discharge, Exhibition Prohibited", of this Code, shall have the option of
avoiding an appearance at an administrative hearing by paying a mandatory fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) within ten (10) days after service
of the notice of violation. Payment of the fine is an admission of liability and will act as a final determination of liability disposition of the violation.
2. Persons charged with a violation listed in section 1-4-6 of this title shall have the option of avoiding penalties and an appearance at an administrative
hearing by timely paying the fine and following the procedures set forth in section 1-4-7, "Penalties And Settlement Procedures For Certain LA
Offenses", of this title. Payment of the fine is an admission of liability and will act as a final determination of liability disposition of the violation.
B. Authorization: All police officers and community service officers, and other specifically appointed individuals including, but not limited to, the Village's
Code official, the Building Director and the Community Development Director, and his or her respective designees, including, but not limited to, Code
Enforcement Officers, health inspectors and building inspectors, shall have the authority to issue violation notices. For the purposes of this section and
for the purposes of any inspections relating to the enforcement of any Village ordinances or codes, authorized designees of the Village's Code official
or approved inspection agencies or approved individuals to conduct inspections, shall also include, but not be limited to, any person retained by the
Village pursuant to a contract to perform ordinance/Code enforcement or inspection related services.
C. Detection Of Violations: Any individual authorized to issue a violation notice who detects a violation of any nonvehicular regulation shall issue a notice
of violation thereof and shall serve the violation notice as herein provided.
D. Content: Violation notices shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
1. The particular Code section or regulation violated and a description of the violation;
2. The date, time and place of the violation;
3. The common address of the building or property alleged to be in violation (the "cited property"), if applicable;
4. The signature and identification number, if applicable, of the person issuing the violation notice;
5. The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the charge may be contested on its merits. This date shall be no less than fifteen (15)
days after the date of service of the violation notice. A hearing may be set at a date less than fifteen (15) days after the date of service of the violation
in an emergency situation where the violation constitutes a threat to public interest, safety or welfare. If service is provided by mail, the fifteen (15)
day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the mail;
6. The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; and
7. A statement of the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
8. If the violation notice issued is for an offense that can be paid in advance according to subsection A1 of this section or section 1-4-6 of this title as
provided in subsection A2 of this section, the notice shall include the amount of the fine and the date required for payment of the fine. The notice
shall also apprise the recipient that the failure to pay the stated fine within the allotted time will operate to process the violation notice within the
administrative adjudication system as otherwise provided for by this chapter and the recipient shall be required to appear at the hearing date
indicated on the notice.
E. Service Of Violation Notices: Service of violation notices shall be made in a manner reasonably calculated to give the defendant actual notice by:
1. Personal service or handing a copy of the violation notice to the person charged or a party's employees or agents if the respondent is a business
entity; or
2. Provided a violation is not of an offense or provision of title 5, 6, 7 or 8 of this Code, delivering a copy of the violation notice to the person charged by
first class mail, postage prepaid, or if the respondent is a business entity, at the address identified for its registered agent or principal place of
business. Such service shall be completed as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 43/702
3. If a violation of title 9, "Bartlett Building Code", or of title 10, "Bartlett Zoning Code", of this Code is alleged where the person charged is an owner or
manager of the property, by posting a copy on the cited property after service has not been made pursuant to those methods provided in subsections
E1 and E2 of this section after at least one attempt.
F. Certification: The correctness of facts contained in the violation notice shall be certified by the issuing person by:
1. Signing his or her name to the violation notice at the time of issuance; or
2. In the case of a violation notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single certificate, to be retained by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all violation citations or printed records produced by the device while under his/her control when the
citation is produced by a computer device.
G. Business Records: The original or a facsimile of the citation or in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated
by the device showing the facts entered on the notice shall be retained by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business.
H. Prima Facie Evidence: Any violation notices, citations issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice or the computer
generated record, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts alleged therein.
I. Admissibility: The violation notices, citations, copies, or computer generated records shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal
proceeding. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-15-5: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES:
An administrative hearing of nonvehicular ordinance violations under this chapter shall be held to adjudicate an alleged Code or ordinance violation on its
merits, or to contest the validity of a violation notice. Specifically, hearings shall be held to adjudicate alleged violations of all Code sections, except those
excluded by law from the Village's administrative adjudication system, those that the Village elects to proceed directly to Circuit Court to enforce the codes
and/or ordinances of the Village, or those parking and vehicle compliance violations for which administrative hearings are initiated by the Village under title
6, chapter 20 of this Code. At administrative hearings initiated by the Village under this chapter:
A. Time And Date: Hearing dates shall be held on the date, time and place set forth in the violation notice or such additional notices issued and served in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Recording: Hearings shall be recorded.
C. Failure To Appear: Persons who do not appear on their scheduled administrative hearing date shall have a default judgment entered against them.
D. Representation By Attorney: Persons appearing to contest an alleged Code or ordinance violation on its merits may be represented by counsel of their
own choice at their own expense, present witnesses, present testimony and documents and cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request
the Administrative Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant
documents.
E. Village's Presentation Of Case: The case for the Village may be presented by a Village employee, the Village Prosecutor, or by an attorney designated
by the Village Attorney, but not by an employee or other representative of the Code Hearing Unit, subject to the following exception: Documentary
evidence prepared by another department of the Village and submitted to the Code Hearing Unit may be presented at the hearing by the Administrative
Hearing Officer.
F. Defendant's Presentation Of Case: The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant or by an attorney or agent of the defendant, except
that corporate or limited liability company defendants must be represented by an attorney. An attorney or agent appearing at an administrative hearing
on behalf of a defendant shall present the Administrative Hearing Officer with a signed appearance form stating on oath or affirmation that he or she
has been authorized by the defendant to represent the defendant at the hearing.
G. Rules Of Evidence: The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in an administrative hearing conducted in compliance with this chapter,
and evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted, pursuant to State law set forth at section 1-2.1-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code6, as amended, only if
it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
H. Administrative Hearing Officer's Determination: 1) Failure to appear at an administrative adjudication hearing properly noticed shall result in a default
judgment, and a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the Administrative Hearing Officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony; 2)
administrative adjudication hearings shall result in a determination of liability or nonliability made by the Administrative Hearing Officer, who shall
consider facts and/or testimony. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance
with this chapter or as otherwise provided in this Code, and issue a notice of determination that shall contain, at a minimum, the following information
and warnings:
1. The findings, decision and order of the Administrative Hearing Officer.
2. A date by which the violation must be brought into compliance with this Code, if applicable.
3. The amount of the fine imposed and any penalty assessed, and a statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt due and owing
the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 44/702
4. A warning that the findings, decision and order of the Administrative Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by
a court of competent jurisdiction. In the case in which a defendant fails to comply with a judgment ordering the correction of a Code violation or
imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of the Code violation, a statement that any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment,
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, shall be a debt due and owing the
Village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
5. A notice of judgment entered by default shall be forwarded to any person who fails to appear and shall contain the same information as a
determination of liability, but shall also state that the judgment may be set aside by the Administrative Hearing Officer for good cause if, within twenty
one (21) days of issuance of the default judgment, a completed petition to vacate default judgment form is received by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall act upon a petition to vacate timely filed and render a decision thereon within thirty (30) days
of the date filed. In the event the Administrative Hearing Officer makes a determination of good cause shown, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer
shall provide the petitioner with notice of a new hearing date, or if the Administrative Hearing Officer denies the petition to vacate or set aside the
default judgment, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall promptly notify the petitioner thereof. The default judgment shall state that it shall
constitute a final determination of liability if such petition is not received, if the petition is denied or if after setting of a new hearing date the person
fails to appear. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-15-6: FINE; COMPLIANCE BOND:
A. All fines, penalties and other monies to be paid to the Village in accordance with this chapter shall be remitted to the Village and deposited in the
appropriate Village account as designated by the Village Administrator.
B. To ensure that Code and ordinance violations are remedied in a timely manner, the Administrative Hearing Officer, upon issuing a determination of
liability that includes an order of compliance, may order the defendant in the case to obtain a bond to ensure defendant's timely compliance with the
Code or ordinance provision(s) found to have been violated. Any bond ordered pursuant to this subsection shall name the Village as beneficiary and
shall be in the amount specified by the Administrative Hearing Officer, provided that the amount of the bond shall be reasonably related to the cost of
compliance. Any bond issued as a result of the Administrative Hearing Officer's order is subject to review and modification by the Village Administrator
as to form and amount. If the defendant fails to remedy in a timely manner the Code or ordinance violation(s) for which a bond has been ordered and
issued and the Village undertakes remediation or otherwise expends funds related to the Code or ordinance violation(s) for which a bond has been
ordered and issued, the Administrative Hearing Officer, after giving the parties notice and opportunity to be heard, may issue an order permitting the
Village to draw against the bond in an appropriate amount. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall order the bond amount, less the reasonable costs
incurred by the Village returned to the defendant upon proof of compliance with the Code or ordinance violation provision(s) found to have been
violated.
C. In the event a defendant ordered to secure a bond as provided by subsection B of this section seeks judicial review of that portion of the Administrative
Hearing Officer's order requiring a bond and prevails on that issue, the Village shall release the bond, and if the Village has drawn against the bond, the
Village shall refund to the defendant the total amount drawn within thirty (30) days of receiving a copy of the reviewing court's mandate. (Ord. 2018-98,
8-21-2018)
1-15-7: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of determinations of liability violations made under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law as set
forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., as amended and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-15-8: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine and penalty after the Administrative Hearing Officer's
determination of liability; the failure to file a timely motion to vacate as set forth in section 1-15-5 of this chapter or the denial of a petition to vacate and
exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any judicial review procedures set forth in section 1-15-7 of this chapter. The notice of final determination of liability
shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
A. A statement that the unpaid fine or penalty, or both is a debt due and owing the Village.
B. A warning that failure to pay the fine or penalty due and owing the Village within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the final determination of liability
may result in the Village utilizing the Illinois Debt Recovery Offset Portal (IDROP) program through the Illinois State Comptrollers' Office as a lawful
means of collecting the judgment or the filing of a petition in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty, or both, rendered a judgment as
provided by this section. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-15-9: ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS; JUDGMENT:
A. Enforcement: Upon expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination
of an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the Administrative Hearing Officer may
be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Contempt: Any person, having received notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this chapter, who knowingly fails to comply with an order
issued by the Administrative Hearing Officer under this chapter, including the issuance of a subpoena, shall, if the order is not stayed by a court of
competent jurisdiction prior to its effective date, be guilty of contempt. Contempt shall be enforceable only by the judicial system of the Circuit Court for
Cook County, the Circuit Court of the 18th Judicial Circuit, DuPage County, Illinois, or the Circuit Court of the 16th Judicial Circuit, Kane County, Illinois,
and shall be punishable by applicable law. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. In a prosecution
under this section, it shall not be a defense that a person came into compliance with an order, sought judicial review of it, or made efforts to comply with
an order, subsequent to its effective date.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 45/702
C. Court Costs, Attorney Fees And Costs Of Collection: In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with an Administrative Hearing Officer's
judgment ordering that defendant to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine, penalty or other sanction as a result of any Code or ordinance
violation, any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment entered against that defendant, to the extent permitted by law, including, but not
limited to, attorney fees, court costs and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or
the Administrative Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the Village of Bartlett and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
1. Prior to any expenses being fixed by the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to this subsection, the Village shall provide a notice to the
defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether the defendant has
failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date that
notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
2. Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure7, or by the Uniform Commercial Code8, a lien shall be
imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the Village under this chapter. The
lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
1-15-10: DEBT TO THE VILLAGE:
Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or
the failure to exhaust administrative remedies created under this chapter, and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt due and
owing the Village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with the applicable law, including the utilization of the Illinois Debt Recovery Offset Portal
(IDROP) program through the Illinois State Comptrollers' Office. Any fees or costs incurred by the Village with respect to attorneys or private collection
agents retained by the Village for the collection of debts pursuant to this chapter shall be charged to the offender. Nothing contained in this chapter shall
prevent the Village from pursuing all available remedies allowed by law to collect money judgments. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
Chapter 16
BARTLETT MINIMUM WAGES
1-16-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the VILLAGE OF BARTLETT MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, definitions and meanings as set forth in section 42-12 of the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance:
"covered employee", "CPI", "director", "domestic worker", "employee, gratuities and occupation", "employer", "Subsidized Temporary Youth Employment
Program", Subsidized Transitional Employment Program" and "tipped employee" shall not be applicable to any employer whose place of business is
located within the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett, or to any employer who employs any employee that performs any work for an employer while
physically present within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Bartlett. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following definitions are applicable to this
chapter:
COOK COUNTY MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE: Cook County ordinance 16-5768, an ordinance creating a minimum wage in Cook County codified at
chapter 42 - Human Relations, article I., In General, division 2, Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance, sections 42-7 - 42-19, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
COVERED EMPLOYEE: As that term is defined and used in the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance shall not apply, but shall mean "employee" as
defined in section 3 of the Minimum Wage Law.
DOMESTIC WORKER: As that term is defined in the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance shall not apply, but shall mean an employee in the domestic
service in or about a private home as defined in section 3.(d)(3) of the Minimum Wage Law.
EMPLOYEE, GRATUITIES AND OCCUPATION: Have the meanings ascribed to those terms in the Minimum Wage Law.
EMPLOYER: Has the meaning ascribed to that term in section 3.(d)(3) of the Minimum Wage Law.
FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT: The United States Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 USC section 201, et seq., in force on the effective date of this
chapter and as thereafter amended.
MINIMUM WAGE LAW: The Illinois Minimum Wage Law, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/1, et seq., in force on the effective date of this chapter and as
thereafter amended.
TIPPED EMPLOYEE: Has the meaning ascribed that term in the Fair Labor Standards Act.
WAGE AND WAGES: Have the meaning ascribed to those terms in the Minimum Wage Law and in the Fair Labor Standards Act. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-
2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-3: MINIMUM HOURLY WAGE:
Except as provided in section 1-16-4 of this chapter, every employer shall pay no less than the following wages to each employee for each hour of work
performed for that employer while physically present within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Bartlett:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 46/702
A. Beginning on July 1, 2017, the greater of: 1) the minimum hourly wage set by the Minimum Wage Law as the same is amended from time to time; 2) the
minimum hourly wage set by the Fair Labor Standards Act as the same is amended from time to time. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-4: MINIMUM HOURLY WAGE IN OCCUPATIONS RECEIVING GRATUITIES:
Every employer of an employee engaged in an occupation in which gratuities have customarily and usually constituted part of the remuneration shall pay
no less than the following wage to each employee for each hour of work performed for that employer while physically present within the geographic
boundaries of the Village of Bartlett:
A. Beginning on July 1, 2017, the greater of: 1) the minimum hour wage set by the Fair Labor Standards Act for tipped employees as the same is amended
from time to time; or 2) the minimum hourly wage set by the Minimum Wage Law for workers who receive gratuities as the same is amended from time
to time. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-5: OVERTIME COMPENSATION:
The wages set out in sections 1-16-3 and 1-16-4 of this chapter are subject to the overtime compensation provisions in the Minimum Wage Law, and in the
Fair Labor Standards Act. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-6: EXCLUSIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to hours worked:
A. By any person subject to subsection 4(a)(2) of the Minimum Wage Law, with the exception that the categories of employees described in subsections
4(a)(2)(A) and 4(a)(2)(B) of the Minimum Wage Law shall be entitled to the wages described in sections 1-16-3 and 1-16-4 of this chapter, whichever
applies, as well as the overtime compensation described in section 1-16-5 of this chapter.
B. By any person subject to subsection 4(a)(3), subsection 4(d), subsection 4(c), section 5, or section 6 of the Minimum Wage Law.
C. By any governmental entity, a category that for purposes of this chapter includes, but is not limited to, any unit of Local government, Township, Park
District, School District, Library District, Fire District, the Illinois State government and the government of the United States, as well as any other
Federal, State, Local government or special district agency or department. The foregoing governmental entities (except for Cook County) are
exclusions under section 42-16(c) of the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance, and are excluded under this chapter; however, nothing contained
herein shall exclude any businesses or employers from complying with State law and Federal law applicable to any such governmental entity regarding
the payment of minimum wages.
Subsections A, B and C of this section are exclusions under the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance and are excluded under the provisions of this
chapter, except to the extent they are not excluded under the Minimum Wage Law and the Fair Labor Standards Act, or either said State or Federal
law. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-7: APPLICATIONS TO COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to interfere with, impede, or in any way diminish the right of employees to bargain collectively with their employers
through representatives of their own choosing in order to establish wages or other conditions of work in excess of the applicable minimum standards of the
provisions of this chapter. The requirements of this chapter may be waived in a bona fide collective bargaining agreement, but only if the waiver is set forth
explicitly in such agreement in clear and unambiguous terms. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-8: CONFLICT WITH THE COOK COUNTY MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE:
This chapter shall be deemed to conflict with the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-9: NO NOTICE AND POSTING:
The notice and posting requirements set forth in section 42-15 of the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance, shall not apply to employers whose
principal office or other office is located in the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett. Employers shall not be required to post in a conspicuous place at
each facility where any covered employee works that is located within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Bartlett, including those portions of the
Village lying in Cook County, a notice advising the employee of the current minimum wages under the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance, and of his
or her rights under said Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance. No employer whose office is located in the Village of Bartlett shall be required to provide
the notice to any "covered employee" as required under section 42-15(b) of the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
however, nothing shall be construed to waive or relieve any employer from any respective notice and posting requirements, if any, set forth in the Minimum
Wage Law, the Fair Labor Standards Act, or any other State or Federal law. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-10: ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS:
The Village defers to the Director of the Illinois Department of Labor to enforce the Minimum Wage Law, and to the Federal authority authorized to enforce
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 47/702
the Fair Labor Standards Act. The Village does not intend to adopt separate regulations, except to the extent necessary to conflict with the Cook County
Minimum Wage Ordinance, or provide for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-61, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-16-11: NO PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION:
No employee who is paid less than the wage set forth in sections 1-16-3 and 1-16-4 of this chapter, or less than the amounts set forth in sections 42-13,
42-14, or 42-15 of the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance, may recover in a civil action the amount of any such underpayment or greater amount or
his or her costs and/or such reasonable attorney's fees, as State and Federal law adequately provide appropriate private remedies therefor. (Ord. 2017-61,
5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
Chapter 17
REGULATIONS FOR EARNED SICK LEAVE FOR BUSINESSES OPERATING IN
BARTLETT
1-17-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the VILLAGE OF BARTLETT EARNED SICK LEAVE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2017-62, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-
2017)
1-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, definitions and meanings set forth in section 42-2 of the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance:
"agency", "construction industry", "covered employee", "domestic partner", "earned sick leave", "employee", "employer", "family member" and "health care
provider" shall not be applicable to any employer whose place of business is located within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Bartlett, or to any
employer who employs any employee that performs any work for an employer while physically present within the geographic boundaries of the Village of
Bartlett. The definitions in the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance which purport to establish different classifications and wage treatment of
employers and employees than as set forth in State law and Federal law shall not apply. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following definitions are
applicable to this chapter:
COOK COUNTY EARNED SICK LEAVE ORDINANCE: Cook County ordinance 16-4229, an ordinance establishing earned sick leave in Cook County
codified at chapter 42 - Human Relations, article I., In General, division 1, Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance, sections 42-1 - 42-10, as the same
may be amended from time to time.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois Department of Labor.
EMPLOYEE: An individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons an employer employs, who in any particular two (2)
week period performs any work for an employer while physically present within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Bartlett.
EMPLOYEE SICK LEAVE ACT: The Illinois Employee Sick Leave Act1 currently in force and as hereafter amended.
EMPLOYER: An individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, business trust, or any person or group of persons that gainfully
employs at least one (1) employee with a place of business within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Bartlett. The term "employer" does not
mean:
A. The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States;
B. An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
C. The government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
D. Units of local government, including municipalities, townships, Park Districts, School Districts, Library Districts, Fire Districts, or any other special
district created by statute, or any agency or department of any such unit of local government, as said units of local government are also not included
within the definition and meaning of "employer" under the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance, and are excluded under this chapter;
however, nothing contained herein shall be construed to affect the applicability of any Federal or State law, regulation, requirement, policy or
standard that mandates sick leave benefits.
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT: The United States Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 USC section 2601, et seq.) as currently in force and
hereafter amended.
PERSONAL SICK LEAVE BENEFITS: Time accrued and available to an employee to be used as a result of absence from work due to personal illness,
injury, or medical appointment, but does not include absences for which compensation is provided through an employer's plan and as defined in the
Employee Sick Leave Act. (Ord. 2017-62, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-17-3: USE OF LEAVE; LIMITATIONS:
The use of sick leave and the limitations thereto as provided in section 10 of the Employee Sick Leave Act and as provided in the Family Medical Leave
Act shall apply to all employees of employers whose principal office, or any office, is located within the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett, and all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 48/702
employees of such employers, and to any employee of any employer who performs work while physically present within the geographic boundaries of the
Village of Bartlett, in lieu of the earned sick leave provisions of the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance. (Ord. 2017-62, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-17-4: NO APPLICATION TO COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to interfere with, impede, or in any way diminish the right of employees to bargain collectively with their employers
through representatives of their own choosing in order to establish wages or other conditions of work in excess of the applicable minimum standards of the
provisions of this chapter, that being the minimum requirements under the Employee Sick Leave Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, as each may be
amended from time to time, and any other applicable State or Federal law. (Ord. 2017-62, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-17-5: CONFLICT WITH THE COOK COUNTY EARNED SICK LEAVE ORDINANCE:
This chapter shall be deemed to conflict with the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance. (Ord. 2017-62, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-17-6: NO NOTICE AND POSTING:
The notice and posting requirements set forth in section 42-6 of the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance, shall not apply to employers whose
principal office or other office is located in the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett. Employers shall not be required to post in a conspicuous place at
each facility where any employee works that is located within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Bartlett, including those portions of the Village
lying in Cook County, a notice advising the employee of the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance, and of his or her rights under said Cook County
Earned Sick Leave Ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to waive or relieve any
employer from the respective notice and posting requirements, if any, set forth in the Employee Sick Leave Act, the Family Medical Leave Act, or under
any other State or Federal law concerning sick leave. (Ord. 2017-62, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-17-7: ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS:
The Village defers to the Director of the Illinois Department of Labor to enforce the Employee Sick Leave Act, and to any Federal authority authorized to
enforce the Family and Medical Leave Act. The Village does not intend to adopt separate enforcement regulations, except to the extent necessary to
conflict with the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance, or provide for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-62, 5-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017)
1-17-8: NO PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION:
No employee who is provided less than the minimum required earned sick leave set forth in section 42-3 of the Cook County Earned Sick Leave
Ordinance, or section 1-17-3 of this chapter, may recover in a civil action the amount of any such underpayment or greater amount or his or her costs
and/or his or her reasonable attorney's fees, as State and Federal law adequately provide appropriate private remedies therefor. (Ord. 2017-62, 5-2-2017,
eff. 7-1-2017)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT AND COMPOSITION:
There is hereby established a Board of Local Improvements which shall be comprised of the Village President and all members of the Board of Trustees.
2-1-2: OFFICERS OF THE BOARD:
A. President: The Village President shall be the president of the Board of Local Improvements.
B. Engineer: The Village Engineer shall be the engineer of the Board of Local Improvements.
C. Secretary: The Village Clerk shall be the secretary of the Board of Local Improvements. She shall keep all records pertaining to the activities of such
Board and shall perform such other duties as may be required of her by the Board or by statute or ordinance.
D. Attorney: The Village Attorney shall be the attorney of the Board of Local Improvements.
2-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES; PROCEDURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 49/702
In making local improvements by special assessment, the Board of Local Improvements and the President and Board of Trustees shall have those powers
and duties and shall follow those procedures set forth in chapter 24, division 2 of article 9, Illinois Municipal Code, as amended prior to the effective date
hereof. Said division 2 is hereby adopted by reference, not less than one copy of such division having been on file in the office of the Village Clerk for a
period of fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date hereof.
The Board of Local Improvements and the President and Board of Trustees shall have all the powers and duties set forth in said statute incorporated
herein by reference.
2-1-4: RECORDS:
The Board of Local Improvements shall keep accurate records of all work undertaken by it, showing the work undertaken, the work accomplished, the
expenditures made and the amount of money received. (Ord. 75-14, 2-18-75)
Chapter 2
BARTLETT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Bartlett emergency management agency (BEMA) to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage, resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural or technological causes or manmade disaster, in accordance with the
Illinois emergency services and disaster act of 1992, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/1 et seq.
In order to provide a means by which the village may effectively respond, preserving the lives and property of its citizens and protecting the public peace,
health, and safety, in the event of such a disaster the BEMA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the
coordinator. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-2: POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
It is found and declared necessary to:
A. Ensure that each village department plan prior to an emergency in order to: minimize the effects of the disaster; enable timely and efficient response
during the disaster and post disaster periods; and identify and mitigate future potential hazards.
B. Emergency management shall be based upon a comprehensive document that shall designate emergency management organization, responsibilities,
procedures, and personnel including agents and employees and officials of the village and those entities who have emergency management
responsibilities and capabilities.
C. The BEMA shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required and pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision or municipality entered into as provided by the state emergency services and disaster act of 1992, 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3305/1 et
seq. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed:
BARTLETT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY: The agency established by this act within the village municipal government responsible for
implementation of the overall emergency management program of the village and with private organizations, other local political subdivisions, the state and
federal governments under the direction and control of the village president, administration and operation of the emergency management coordinator as
appointed.
COORDINATOR: The coordinator of the BEMA shall be appointed by the president and shall serve until removed by same. He shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of the BEMA subject to the direction and control of the president, as provided by
statute. In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the coordinator, the president or any person designated by the president,
shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property from any natural or technological cause, including,
but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, tornado, wind, storm, hazardous material spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert
danger or damage, epidemic, blight, air contamination, extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and energy, riot, explosion, or hostile military or paramilitary action.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR: A person designated pursuant to this chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not
the office, of a village officer in the event that such officer or any duly authorized person is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of
the office.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of the village of Bartlett to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, provide and maintain programs for disaster
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
EMERGENCY OPERATING PLAN: The written plan of the village of Bartlett describing the organization, mission, and functions of the government and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 50/702
supporting services for responding to and recovering from disasters.
MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM: The utilization of personnel to be dispatched by the governor, or if he so authorizes, by the director of the Illinois emergency
management agency to supplement the state and political subdivisions for emergency management programs in response to a disaster.
PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER: The village president or in his/her absence or disability, the interim successor.
STATE OF DISASTER: If the jurisdiction is not able to manage this situation within its available, normal resources, then a declaration of "State of Disaster"
should be initiated. This disaster declaration formally identifies that the situation is larger than the jurisdiction can address and county assistance is
formally requested.
STATE OF EMERGENCY: If it is determined that a situation can be handled locally, with the available normal resources, then the principal executive officer
should declare a "State of Emergency".
UNAVAILABLE: Shall mean either that a vacancy in office exists and there is no person authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties
of the office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office is absent or unable, for physical, mental, or legal reasons, to exercise the powers and discharge the
duties of the office.
VOLUNTEER: Any sworn individual or recognized and approved group, corporation, agency or other entity contributing service, equipment or facilities to
the village of Bartlett emergency management agency with remuneration. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-4: APPOINTMENTS AND ORGANIZATION:
A. The village president is hereby authorized and directed to create a Bartlett emergency management agency, utilizing to the fullest extent the existing
agencies within the village. The BEMA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the coordinator.
B. The coordinator of the BEMA shall be appointed by the village president and shall serve until removed by same. He/she shall have direct responsibility
for the organization, training, administration and operation of the BEMA subject to the direction and control of the village president, as provided by
statute. In the event of the absence, resignation or death or inability to serve as the coordinator, the president, or any person designated by him/her
shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made.
C. The organization shall further consist of the following:
1. Employees that are deemed necessary for the proper function of the BEMA shall be considered as part of the emergency management staff during
the time they are so designated by the coordinator.
2. The employees and facilities of all village departments shall participate in the emergency services activity. Duties assigned to a village department
shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the department.
3. Sworn volunteers or volunteers of other designated agencies whose service has been accepted by the village may perform functions which include,
but are not limited to, clerical assistance, temporary shelter operations, transportation, participation in traffic and crowd control, communications, first
aid, severe weather tracking and spotting, search parties, and public relations/education activities.
4. All or any members of the BEMA organization may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the director of the state
emergency management agency as provided by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator of the BEMA.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director, shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the village while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-
1999)
2-2-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator of the BEMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the president and board of trustees and by the state director of ESDA. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-6: DUTIES OF THE BARTLETT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY:
A. The Bartlett emergency management agency shall be the lead agency in the development, maintenance and revision of the village comprehensive
emergency preparedness plan.
B. The BEMA shall:
1. Provide general direction and control in the response to a disaster as it exists within the village.
2. Determine requirements of the village for food, clothing, shelter, and other necessities in the event of an emergency.
3. Review the village comprehensive emergency preparedness plan and recommend to the village board revisions pursuant to county, state and
federal rules and guidelines.
4. Satisfy the requirements of, and submit the required documents for accreditation of the BEMA on a regular and continual basis, to the appropriate
agency as currently directed by the Illinois emergency management agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 51/702
5. Prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials, a complete copy of the village comprehensive emergency preparedness plan which contains a
clear and complete statement of the emergency responsibilities of all local departments and officials and of the disaster chain of command.
6. Establish and maintain a register of government and private response resources available for use in a disaster.
7. Disseminate warnings, advisories, and other related emergency information regarding any threats to any part of the village, based on information
from recognized agencies and local authorities, and in accordance with the provisions of the village comprehensive emergency preparedness plan.
8. Prepare for issuance by the village president, declarations, proclamations, and regulations as may be necessary or appropriate in responding to
disasters.
9. Cooperate with federal, state and county governments and any public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this chapter and in
promoting and implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response and recovery.
10. Establish and maintain an emergency operating center (EOC), designate an alternate EOC, within an appropriate village structure.
11. Provide, maintain, and supplement a warning system which is capable of reaching to all occupancies of the village.
12. Coordinate the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment personnel and facilities of the village for emergency service purposes.
13. Do all other things necessary, incidental, or appropriate for the implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-7: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT POWERS OF THE VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
A. The village president shall have the general direction and control of the BEMA and shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this section.
B. In performing his/her duties under this section, the village president is authorized to cooperate with state and federal governments and with other
municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to emergency management operations defined in this section.
C. In performing his/her duties under this section, the village president is further authorized:
1. To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this section within the limits of the
authority conferred upon him/her.
2. To cause to be prepared a comprehensive emergency preparedness plan for the village, which plan shall be integrated into and coordinated with
emergency management plans and programs of the federal and state governments and other political subdivisions whenever possible and which
plan may include:
a. Mitigation of injury and damage caused by disaster.
b. Prompt and effective response to disaster.
c. Emergency relief.
d. Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works designed to mitigate danger, damage or loss from flood, or
other disaster.
e. Organization of municipal employees and chains of command.
f. Coordination of federal, state and local emergency management activities.
3. To make such studies and surveys of the resources and facilities in the village as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the village for
emergency management phases of mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery and to plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof.
4. Upon information and recommendation of the village emergency management staff, to declare a state of disaster, and execute the required disaster
declaration document at such time is reasonably possible, in accordance with section 2.2.3 of the comprehensive emergency preparedness plan on
file in the village clerk's office.
5. Upon information and recommendation of the village emergency management staff, to declare a state of emergency, and execute the required
emergency declaration at such time is reasonably possible, in accordance with section 2.2.3 of the comprehensive emergency preparedness plan on
file in the village clerk's office.
6. To exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his/her general powers and duties as defined by law. The judgment of the village
president shall be the sole criterion necessary to invoke emergency powers provided by this chapter.
7. The board of trustees may convene to perform its legislative, and administrative powers as the situation demands, and shall receive reports relative
to the emergency service activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as bridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the village
president and/or the board of trustees as defined by law. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-8: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The village board of trustees may, on recommendation from the village administrator, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the village in
a position to combat effectively any disaster, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to the victims
in the case of such disaster.
In the event of any disaster, the village administrator or BEMA coordinator is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or materials as may be necessary for such purposes in view of exigency, without formalities normally prescribed by law. If the board of trustees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 52/702
meets at the time of such disaster, the village administrator shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the village board. (Ord. 99-97, 9-
7-1999)
2-2-9: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the EMA prescribed by the state director of EMA, compensation for services and expenses for member of a mobile support team while serving
outside the village in response to a call by the governor or state director of EMA as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state
incident to EMA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the BEMA organization shall, before entering upon this duties, subscribe to the following oath, which
shall be filed with the coordinator:
I , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the
Bartlett Emergency Management Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-11: LOCAL DISASTER OR EMERGENCY DECLARATIONS:
A. A local disaster or emergency may be declared only by the village president, or his/her interim emergency successor. Any order or proclamation
declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster or emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the village
clerk.
B. The effect of a declaration of a local emergency or disaster is to activate the village comprehensive emergency preparedness plan and to authorize the
furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
C. A local disaster or emergency may not be declared by an official from another jurisdiction who is operating in the village of Bartlett under a mutual aid
agreement.
D. During a local disaster or emergency, the village president may suspend the provisions of any village ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct
of village business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any village agency, if strict compliance with the provisions thereof would in any way prevent,
hinder or delay necessary action in addressing the disaster or emergency, as authorized by the "Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act of 1992",
provided that after the board of trustees meets at such time, the village president shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the
board of trustees. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The president and board of trustees may make an appropriation for BEMA purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy, in addition for BEMA
purposes only, a tax not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other
taxes as provided by the Illinois emergency management act of 1992; however, that amount collectable under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty
five cents ($0.25) per capita. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-13: IMMUNITY:
Neither the village of Bartlett, nor, except in cases of wilful misconduct, the village president, the village administrator, or the officers, employees,
volunteers, or representatives engaged in any emergency management response or recovery activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with
this chapter is liable for the death of or any injury to persons or damage to property, as a result of such activity. This section does not, however, affect the
right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this chapter under the workers' compensation act or the workers'
occupational disease act, or under any pension law, and this section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation
under any act of congress. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-14: PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS:
If such disaster as is described in section 2-2-3 of this chapter occurs in the village of Bartlett and the services of persons who are competent to practice
any profession, trade or occupation are required to cope with the disaster and it appears that the number of persons licensed or registered in the village to
practice such profession, trade or occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are licensed elsewhere to practice such
profession, trade or occupation may, upon the request of the village of Bartlett, during the time the disaster continues, practice such profession, trade or
occupation in the village without being licensed or registered in the village of Bartlett. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 53/702
2-2-15: UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITIES, AND PERSONNEL:
In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the village president and the coordinator of the BEMA are directed to utilize to the fullest all personnel,
equipment, supplies, and facilities of the village of Bartlett in their preparations for disaster mitigation. All officers and personnel of the various village
divisions and departments are directed, as practicable, to assist with this mitigation process. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
2-2-16: EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR:
A. Designation, Status, Qualifications, And Term Of Emergency Interim Successors: The village president, village trustees and the village clerk, and each
member of the emergency management staff shall designate an interim successor for their office. These individuals shall be designated by name and
title or function.
B. Powers And Duties: If, in the event of a disaster, any officer named in subsection A of this section, his/her emergency interim successor shall exercise
the powers and discharge the duties of such officer. An emergency interim successor shall exercise these powers and discharge these duties only until
such time as the lawful incumbent officer resumes the exercise of the powers and discharge of the duties of the office, or until where an actual vacancy
exists, a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy or is elected as provided by law. (Ord. 99-97, 9-7-1999)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
2-3-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
A. There is hereby created and established in the village an electrical commission, consisting of three (3) members appointed by the village president with
the advice and consent of the board of trustees, whose qualifications shall be as follows:
The chief electrical inspector shall be a member and chairman of such commission. The two (2) remaining members shall be either a registered
professional engineer, an electrical contractor, a journeyman electrician, a representative of an inspection bureau maintained by the fire underwriters,
(or if no such representative resides in the village, then the chief of the fire department), or a representative of an electrical supply company. Such
members shall be appointed for one year, or until their successors shall have been appointed and qualify.
B. Such electrical commission shall recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical
equipment in the village, designed to meet the necessities and conditions in this particular locality, shall recommend reasonable rules and regulations
governing the issuance of permits by the electrical inspection department; provided, that such standards and specifications, rules and regulations, and
fees shall not become effective until adopted by ordinance duly passed by the president and board of trustees. All such fees shall be paid to the village
and all permits shall, when issued, be so issued by the chief electrical inspector. (Ord. 73-29, 12-4-1973; amd. 1984 Code)
Chapter 4
BOARD OF POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSIONERS
2-4-1: COMMISSION CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a Board of Police and Fire Commissioners consisting of three (3) members, who shall be officers of the Village as provided by
statute1. (Ord. 75-18, 4-1-1975)
2-4-2: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Appointments: The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall be appointed by the Village President by and with the consent of the Board of
Trustees.
B. Terms, Vacancies: The terms of office of the members of the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall be three (3) years or until their respective
successors shall be appointed and qualify; provided, that no such appointments shall be made by any President within thirty (30) days before the
expiration of his term of office; and provided further, that the President shall appoint the first members of such Board, one of whom is appointed to
serve until the end of the current Municipal year in which such appointment is made, another to serve until the end of the Municipal year next ensuing,
and the third shall serve until the end of the Municipal year second next ensuing; provided that each of the first members of the Board shall serve until
his successor is appointed and qualifies.
C. Qualifications: The members of the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall have such qualifications as are now or may hereafter be required of
them by law. Not more than two (2) members shall be members of the same political party. Members shall hold no other lucrative office or employment
under the United States, the State of Illinois or any municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. No person shall be appointed to the Board who
is related, either by blood or marriage, up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the Village.
D. Oath And Bond: Each member of said Board shall take the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by statute and shall execute and deliver to the Village
a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with such sureties as the President and Board of Trustees shall approve, conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of his office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 54/702
E. Removal From Office: A member of the Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall be subject to removal from office for cause upon written charges
and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense before a regular meeting of the President and Board of Trustees. Cause shall include absence
from more than twenty five percent (25%) of their meetings per year. (Ord. 75-18, 4-1-1975)
2-4-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. General Powers And Duties: The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners shall have such powers and duties as are now, or as may hereafter, be given
to it by law; provided, however, that the power to appoint the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments is expressly reserved to, and such Chiefs shall
be appointed by, the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 75-18, 4-1-1975)
B. Rules: The Board of Police and Fire Commissioners is hereby authorized to make rules to: 1) carry out the purpose of chapter 65, article 10, division
2.1, of the Illinois Municipal Code2, as hereinafter modified, and 2) for appointments, promotions, suspensions and removals in accordance with the
provisions of said division 2.1 as hereinafter modified:
1. The preference points for appointments given under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-8 to persons who have successfully completed two (2)
years of police cadet training within the cadet program established under the rules of the police and fire commission are hereby eliminated. (Ord. 95-
85, 9-19-1995)
2. Candidates for promotion, upon timely application, shall be awarded preference points for further education as follows:
Every member of the classified service of the police department who has attained an associate's, bachelor's and/or master's degree from an
accredited junior college, community college, college or university shall be given the following preference points:
Associate's degree 1
Bachelor's degree 2.5
Master's degree 3.5
The educational preference points shall be added to the final grade average he or she receives or will receive as a result of any promotional
examination. (Ord. 2007-39, 4-3-2007)
3. In case an officer or member is found guilty by the board of police and fire commissioners of the written charges against him or her after an
opportunity to be heard in his or her own defense at a fair and impartial hearing of the charges, or upon a plea of guilty to the said charges, the board
of police and fire commissioners may discharge him or her, or may suspend him or her not exceeding sixty (60) days without pay, and/or in the case
of ranking officers, may demote him or her by one grade. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the chief of police from suspending
without pay a member of the police department for a period of not more than ten (10) calendar days. Any police officer so suspended by the chief of
police may appeal to the board of police and fire commissioners for a review of the suspension within ten (10) calendar days after such suspension,
and upon such appeal the said police board may sustain the action of the chief of police, may reverse it with instructions that the officer receive his or
her pay for the period involved, or may suspend the officer for an additional period not more than sixty (60) days without pay, or discharge him or her
depending on the facts presented. The provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-7 not expressly modified hereby shall remain applicable
and shall govern all disciplinary matters.
4. The board of police and fire commissioners is hereby authorized, but shall not be required, to use the municipal fire and police registry to perform the
initial phase of testing of candidates, including agility tests, written test(s), polygraph and psychological tests as an alternative to having the board of
police and fire commissioners administer said tests. (Ord. 95-85, 9-19-1995)
2-4-4: COMPENSATION OF SECRETARY AND BOARD MEMBERS:
The members of the board of police and fire commissioners shall serve with such compensation as the corporate authorities may determine and provide
for by ordinance. (Ord. 75-18, 4-1-1975)
Chapter 5
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-5-1: BOARD CREATED:
There shall be a Police Pension Fund Board consisting of five (5) members. Of these members, two (2) shall be appointed by the Village President,
serving a term of two (2) years each; two (2) shall be elected from the regular police force of the Village; and one shall be elected from the benficiaries of
the pension. Each member shall serve for two (2) years and elected members shall be selected in the manner provided by law.1 Provided, that the terms
of the members of the Police Pension Fund Board first appointed shall commence on the second Tuesday of May following the adoption of this Chapter.
(1968 Code, §6.501)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 55/702
Chapter 1
LICENSES
3-1-1: PURPOSE; LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES; SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
A. Because each commercial establishment located in the Village is a basic part of and affects the physical and economic well being of the Village
necessitating services from the Village in the form of building, health and police inspections and other services, and fire inspections by the Bartlett Fire
Protection District, such commercial establishments shall in all respects be in full compliance with the provisions contained in this title. This title is
designed to provide for the means whereby the Village may render the necessary inspections and services to commercial establishments and
commercial activities in order to promote, protect, and safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and consumers of the Village
and to enable the effecting of an accurate record of commercial establishments located and carrying on commercial activities or commerce within the
Village.
B. No person shall conduct, engage in, or maintain, operate, carry on, or manage any commercial establishment or activity either by himself or itself, or
through an agent, employee, or partner, without first having obtained a license for such activity or commercial establishment. Whenever in this title, or
in any Village ordinance, a license or permit is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or commercial establishment, or for
doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, partnership, joint venture, firm, corporation, limited liability company, trust or other
entity shall be subject to such requirement if by himself or itself, or through an employee, partner, joint venture, officer, manager, trustee, or agent, he or
it is held forth as being engaged in such business, activity or occupation, or if he or it solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or if he or it
performs or attempts to perform any part of such business, activity or occupation in the Village.
C. A license is required for the maintenance, operation, or conduct of any commercial establishment or activity, and any person, firm, or corporation shall
be subject to the requirement, if, by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee, partner, officer, manager of, independent contractor acting on its or
his behalf, he or it is held forth as being engaged in the activity or commercial establishment, or if he or it solicits patronage therefor, actively or
passively, or if he or it performs or attempts to perform any part of such activity or commercial establishment in the Village.
D. Whenever a person engages in more than one licensed business or activity in the Village, or uses any device requiring payment of a license fee, such
person shall obtain such business or activity and for each such device. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
E. No person shall engage in or conduct the usual operations of any of the businesses, trades or occupations specified in column I of this subsection
without first obtaining a license therefor and paying the annual or per event license fee therefor specified in column II of this subsection. Each licensee
shall comply with any special regulations for his business, trade or occupation specified in the section numbers listed in column III of this subsection.
I
Business, Trade Or Occupation
II
License Fee
III
Special
Regulations
In This Title
Amusements:
Amusement devices $200.00 per machine per year Chapter 4
Public places of amusement:
Athletic contests and exhibitions $20.00 per day Chapter 4
Automobile show 25.00 per day
Balloon contest 10.00 per day
Carnival, circus or sideshow 50.00 per day Chapter 4
Concert, minstrel or musical entertainment given
under canvas
5.00 per performance Chapter 4
Horse or dog show 25.00 per day
Jukeboxes $50.00 per machine per year
Public dance $15.00 per dance
Public skating rink 25.00 per year
Rodeo 25.00 per day
Stock or poultry show 25.00 per day
Theater (motion picture or dramatic) and cabaret (for
each seat contained in the theater)
$25.00 per year plus $5.00 per seat Chapter 4
Answering service $ 50.00 for the first year Chapter 24
25.00 per year thereafter
Asian bodywork approach practitioner 75.00 per year Chapter 29B
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 56/702
Asphalt plants 200.00 per year Chapter 13
Auctioneers 10.00 per day Chapter 20
25.00 per year
Automobile service station 100.00 per year Chapter 8
Bakeries and bakery vehicles:
Itinerant vendor of bakery products
Each delivery vehicle (see Wholesale food vendor)
50.00 per year Chapter 25
Retail bakery (see Retail food establishment) 125.00 per year Chapter 25
Wholesale bakery (see Wholesale food establishment) 100.00 per year Chapter 25
Banking institutions 50.00 per year
Barbershops $50.00 per year plus $10.00 per year for each chair in excess of 1 Chapter 23
Billiard and pool halls $300.00 per year plus $25.00 per table per year (if in conjunction with
liquor license, $25.00 per table per year)
Chapter 4
Bodywork approach establishment $200.00 per year Chapter 29B
Bodywork approach practitioner 50.00 per year Chapter 29B
Bowling alleys $20.00 per alley per year Chapter 4
Brokers (other than real estate and insurance) $50.00 per year
Bus service companies $100.00 per year plus $50.00 per bus per year Chapter 12
Catering services and establishment: Chapter 25
Service location or establishment $100.00 per year
Central station 50.00 for the first year
25.00 per year thereafter
Chapter 24
Community antenna television system 5 percent of the annual gross revenues during the franchise term
Confectionery stores $125.00 per year Chapter 25
Contractors:
General contractor 100.00 per year
Subcontractors 50.00 per year
Day nursery/nursery school 50.00 per year
Dealer - precious metals: Chapter 17
Itinerant dealer 50.00 per week
Precious metal dealer 250.00 per year
Delicatessens (see Retail food establishment) 140.00 per year
Dogs 2.00 per year Title 5,
chapter 2
Dry cleaning establishment (self-service coin operated):
For each dry cleaning machine up to and including the
first 10 machines
For each machine in excess of 10 maintained on the
premises
Dry cleaning plant: Chapter 5
Not over 10 employees 50.00 per year
11 - 15 employees 60.00 per year
16 - 35 employees 70.00 per year
36 - 60 employees 80.00 per year
Each additional employee over 60 1.00
Dry cleaning retail outlet 25.00 per year Chapter 5
Factories: Chapter 14
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 57/702
1 - 9 employees 100.00 per year
10 - 25 employees 200.00 per year
26 or more employees 300.00 per year
Fish markets (see Retail food establishment) 125.00 per year Chapter 25
Florists 75.00 per year
Food delivery vehicles and food dispensers 150.00 per year Chapter 25
Food vending machines, coin operated: Chapter 25
$0.01 machine 2.00 per year
$0.05 machine 5.00 per year
$0.10 - $1.00 machines 10.00 per year
Fruit and vegetable stands (see Retail food establishment):
Chapter 25
Permanent 100.00 per year
Seasonal 75.00 per year
Game rooms:
Class A 50.00 per year Chapter 4
Class B 100.00 per year Chapter 4
Class C 150.00 per year Chapter 4
Class D 200.00 per year Chapter 4
Garage, yard or rummage sale No charge Chapter 21
Garages (public): Chapter 10
Enclosed within a building $50.00 per year
Not enclosed within a building (see Parking lot) 50.00 per year Chapter 10
Gasoline service stations See Automobile service station Chapter 8
Gravel pits $200.00 per year Chapter 16
Grocery stores (see Retail food establishment) 175.00 per year Chapter 25
Hardware stores and implement dealers 75.00 per year
Hotels and motels:
Per room for each sleeping room used for guests $150.00 per year plus $5.00 per unit Chapter 6
Ice cream stores or parlors (retail) (see Retail food
establishment)
$125.00 per year Chapter 25
Ice cream vendors 150.00 for the first year
100.00 per year thereafter
Chapter 30
Itinerant merchants and transient vendors See Solicitors Chapter 18
Junk peddlers See Solicitors Chapter 18
Laundry (self-service coin operated): Chapter 5
Not exceeding 10 washing machines $ 50.00 per year
Each additional unit 5.00 per year
Liquefied petroleum gas:
Equipment installation 15.00 per permit Section 8-5-
7
Plant 50.00 per year Subsection
8-5-3A
Storage facility 50.00 per year Subsection
8-5-3B
Liquor sales: Chapter 3
Class A $1,250.00 per year
Class A extended 1,600.00 per year
Class B 900.00 per year
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 58/702
Class C 950.00 per year
Class C extended 850.00 per year
Class D 5.00 per year
Class F 1,000.00 per year
Class G 250.00 per year
Class H 850.00 per year
Class I 1,250.00 per year
Class J $100.00 per 2 day special event and $75.00 per 1 day special event
Class K $200.00 per year
Class L 900.00 per year
Class M $200.00 per year plus $25.00 per amendment to add catered event(s)
not included in the initial application
Class N $2,000.00 per year
Class O $100.00 per year plus $25.00 per additional special use permit per
catered event not included in the initial application
Class P $250.00 per year
Lumberyards and lumber storehouses $ 50.00 per year
Machine shops: Chapter 14
1 - 10 employees 150.00 per year
More than 10 employees 300.00 per year
Massage establishment 100.00 per year Chapter 29A
Meat dealers and meat markets (see Retail food
establishment)
125.00 per year Chapter 25
Milk products and milk: Chapter 25
Dealer (see Retail food establishment) 100.00 per year
For each vehicle used in delivery or sale (see Peddlers
or Wholesale food vendor)
50.00 per vehicle
Processing or bottling plant 200.00 per year
Mining operations 200.00 per year Chapter 16
Mobile home park 50.00 per year Chapter 27
Modified central station 50.00 for the first year
25.00 per year thereafter
Chapter 24
Motor vehicle repair establishments:
1 employee 20.00 per year
2 employees 25.00 per year
3 employees 30.00 per year
4 employees 35.00 per year
5 employees 45.00 per year
6 or more employees 60.00 per year
Parking lot 50.00 per year Chapter 9
Pawnbroker 50.00 per year
Peddlers See Solicitors Chapter 18
Public garages See Garages (public) Chapter 10
Quarry, gravel pits, mining operations $200.00 per year Chapter 16
Radio and TV sales and service 50.00 per year
Raffles 5.00 per year Chapter 19
Redi mix plants 200.00 per year Chapter 15
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 59/702
Restaurant:
Itinerant food establishment 25.00 per application
Service accommodation for 100 or fewer seating
capacity
150.00 per year
Service accommodation for 100 or more seating
capacity
200.00 per year
Retail food establishment:
Delicatessen 140.00 per year Chapter 25
Food sales, retail 150.00 per year Chapter 25
Grocery 175.00 per year Chapter 25
Ice cream store (including all ice cream products) 125.00 per year Chapter 25
Scavengers 250.00 per year per vehicle Chapter 26
Secondhand dealers (antique, etc.) 50.00 per year Chapter 17
Solicitors: Chapter 18
Commercial $7.50 per day per person
$37.50 per week per person
$75.00 per month per person
$150.00 per year per person
Registration:
Charitable $ 10.00 per person
Commercial 10.00 per person
Newspaper 10.00 per person
Stables 300.00 per year Chapter 7
Taxicabs $50.00 per year plus $25.00 per operator per year Chapter 11
Tobacco dealers:
Cigarettes, vending machines $25.00 per machine per year
Retail - over the counter $50.00 per year
Wholesale tobacco dealers $250.00 per year plus $25.00 for each vehicle used in Bartlett
Trailer coach park $50.00 per year Chapter 27
Vending machines:
Beverage $10.00 per machine per year
Food - candy, nut, gum $10.00 per machine per year Chapter 25
Video gaming terminal $250.00 per terminal per year (5-1-2017 - 4-30-2018) or for first year of
operation
Chapter 31
$500.00 per terminal per year (5-1-2018 - 4-30-2019) and for each
year thereafter
Wholesale food establishment:
Baker $100.00 per year
Food vendor (each vehicle) 50.00 per year
All other special commercial establishments not specified: Chapter 28
0 - 1,000 square feet 50.00 per year
1,001 - 5,000 square feet 100.00 per year
5,001 - 10,000 square feet 150.00 per year
10,001 - 20,000 square feet 200.00 per year
20,001 - 30,000 square feet 300.00 per year
30,001 square feet and over 400.00 per year
(Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015; amd. Ord. 2017-19, 3-7-2017; Ord. 2017-107, 8-15-2017; Ord. 2018-08, 2-6-2018, eff. 2-6-2018; Ord. 2018-118, 10-16-2018;
Ord 2019-38, 4-16-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 60/702
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
The following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have
the meanings indicated by common dictionary definition.
ALARM BUSINESS: See chapter 24 of this title.
ALARM USER: See chapter 24 of this title.
AMPLIFIER: Any device which amplifies or magnifies sound.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE, GAME ROOM: See chapter 4 of this title.
APPLICANT: The individual owner of a sole proprietorship; each general and limited partner of a partnership; each joint venturer of a joint venture; each
director and officer of a corporation, and except for publicly traded corporations, each shareholder that owns twenty five percent (25%) or more of said
corporation's stock; each manager and each member of a limited liability company that owns twenty five percent (25%) or greater membership interest in
said limited liability company.
ASIAN BODYWORK APPROACH: See chapter 29B of this title.
ASPHALT PLANT: A plant or facility which produces or makes or processes asphalt or bituminous concrete.
AUCTION/AUCTIONEER: One who engages in the public sale of property to the highest bidder.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any place of business where gasoline, or any highly volatile fuel for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines is
sold or offered for sale at retail, and dispensed into fuel tanks of such motor vehicles, or any place of business where motor vehicles are repaired. This
definition shall include also the private storage and dispensing of such products for the same purpose as that served by a service station, whether the
storage is maintained for the use or benefit of the owner, lessee, agents or employees of either, or any others (nonbusiness stations).
BARBERSHOP: Any building, room, place or establishment wherein is carried on the occupation of shaving or trimming beards or cutting and dressing the
hair of patrons for money or other consideration.
BODYWORK APPROACH ESTABLISHMENT: See chapter 29B of this title.
BUS: Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons;
and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
BUS SERVICE: The business or occupation of providing buses for compensation.
CATERING SERVICE: The service of providing food or beverages for private residents and business establishments. See also chapter 3 of this title when
alcoholic beverages are proposed to be served.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS: Includes the following activities of commerce or commercial activity located in the village:
A. Food Establishment: A building or premises or a portion thereof the principal use of which is for the sale or dispensing or distribution or serving or
storage of food, foodstuff, or drink for consumption on or off the premises or in or out of the building.
B. Retail Sales Establishment: A building or premises or portion thereof the principal use of which is for the retail sale or distribution of merchandise,
goods or chattel not included with or related to the sale of material goods or chattel or the provision of services of food establishments or service
establishments.
C. Service Establishment: A building or premises or a portion thereof the principal use of which is for the rendering of personal or material services to
consumers for profit, including, but not limited to, the wholesale distribution, or storage of material goods or chattel, the sale or servicing or storage of
motor equipment, the washing or cleaning or dyeing or repair of fabrics of wearing apparel or footwear on the premises, the storage or assembly or
distribution or servicing or repair of building materials or electrical equipment or mechanical equipment, the storage or distribution of fuels or
petroleum products, the services of printing or blueprinting or photocopying or multilithing or publishing or duplicating or similar reproduction services,
the provision of facilities for a hotel or motor hotel or apartment hotel or similar structure housing facilities for the transient or permanent guests or
persons, the provision of facilities for instruction or training or participation in or presentation of the fine arts or athletic skills or dexterity of physical
skills or dexterity.
The term "commercial establishment" shall not include:
A. A "home occupation" as defined in title 10, chapter 2 of the Bartlett zoning ordinance;
B. A governmental unit;
C. A public utility or cable television company which is subject to regulation by the federal communications commission or the state commerce
commission and which operates in the village pursuant to a franchise agreement with the village.
D. A massage establishment which shall be governed by chapter 29A of this title, except for the fees therefor repeated in section 3-1-1 of this
chapter.
E. A bodywork approach establishment, bodywork approach practitioner and Asian bodywork approach practitioner which are governed by chapter
29B of this title, except for the respective fees therefor which are repeated in section 3-1-1 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 61/702
CONVICTION: A plea of guilty or nolo contendere, finding of guilty, jury verdict or entry of judgment by sentencing of any crime, including, but not limited
to, convictions, preceding sentences of supervision, conditional discharge or first offender probation under the laws of any jurisdiction of the United States.
DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT: A place where there is kept or used more than two (2) quarts of naphtha, benzine, carbon tetrachloride, or any other
volatile inflammable liquids or other solvents customarily used in the dry cleaning industry.
FACTORY: A building or group of buildings, usually with equipment, used for the manufacture of goods.
FLOOR AREA: The sum total of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings in square feet from the exterior
walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two (2) buildings or business establishments on each of the respective floors and includes the
basement floor, cellar floor, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for mechanical equipment, whether open or enclosed. In
computing such floor area, there shall not be included open area devoted to vehicular parking or loading or storage of materials.
FLORIST: Any person engaged in the business of selling flowers, shrubs or ornamental plants at retail.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS: Any place where food, food products, drinks or beverages are manufactured, processed, packaged, stored or sold for
consumption, on or off the premises. The term shall include, without limitation, bakeries, delicatessens, groceries, meat, fish or poultry markets,
confectioneries, fruit and vegetable shops, food or drink processing plants, package food or drink stores or warehouses and other similar food
establishments.
GAME ROOM: See chapter 4 of this title.
GARBAGE: Refuse, animal or vegetable matter, trash, rubbish or junk.
GRAVEL PITS: A place where gravel, sand, clay, dirt or other materials are mined, excavated or otherwise removed from the earth.
ITINERANT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: One operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar
gathering.
ITINERANT JUNK DEALER: Any person who goes to any premises in the village, with or without a prior appointment or prearrangement with the occupant
of such premises, or goes upon any public street, sidewalk or other property owned by the village, to sell, offer for sale, or to buy, purchase, barter or
exchange, or to take orders for the present or future delivery of junk.
JUNK: Old iron, glass, paper, discarded materials or appliances which may be used again in some form; waste; refuse.
LOTTERY: See chapter 19 of this title.
LUMBERYARD: A place where lumber or millwork is stored or sold.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: See chapter 29A of this title.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: See chapter 29A of this title.
MINING OPERATIONS: The removal from the earth of gravel, sand, clay, dirt, ore, metal, coal or precious stones.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: Any mobile vehicle from which food, drink or other substances for human consumption are sold, offered for sale,
manufactured, stored, dispensed or otherwise handled.
MOBILE HOME PARK: See chapter 27 of this title.
MOTEL OR AUTO COURT: Any parking lot or garage for the accommodation of motor vehicles where transient sleeping accommodations of five (5) or
more units are afforded or provided on the same premises for the public or for the occupants of such automobiles.
PARKING LOT: Any place maintained for the outdoor parking of cars, except streets, alleys or other public places, where such parking is permitted upon
the payment of compensation or is made available to patrons or customers of any place of business.
QUARRY: An open excavation, usually for obtaining gravel, building stone, slate or limestone.
RAFFLES: See chapter 19 of this title.
REDI MIX PLANT: A place where cement is mixed with water and other materials to produce concrete.
RESTAURANT: A food establishment where any kind of food or drink is prepared and served to the public for consumption on the premises. The term shall
include restaurants, ice cream parlors, lunchrooms, tearooms, lunch stands, box lunch deliveries, cafeterias and retail drugstores serving counter lunches
and drinks, caterers and industrial food servers dispensing food or drinks to office personnel or employees of an industrial plant.
RESTAURANT, ITINERANT: A restaurant operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar
gathering.
RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENT: A building or premises or portion thereof the principal use of which is for retail sale or distribution of material goods or
chattel.
SCAVENGER: One who is engaged in the business or occupation of collecting garbage.
SECONDHAND STORE: A store or place of business which sells used or previously owned merchandise including, without limitation, antiques.
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A building or premises or portion thereof the principal use of which is for the rendering of personal or material services for
profit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 62/702
STABLE: A business where horses, ponies, donkeys, mules or other animals ordinarily used for riding are kept, boarded or otherwise maintained for public
hire, or for any remuneration.
TAXICABS: Any vehicle used to carry passengers for hire but not operating a fixed route and shall include livery cabs.
TRAILER COACH PARK: See chapter 27 of this title.
The term "person" as used in this chapter shall include sole proprietorships, partnerships, joint ventures, corporations, limited liability companies, trusts,
and all other business associations, firms or entities.
The masculine pronoun shall be construed to include the feminine and the neuter, and the singular pronoun shall be construed to include the plural. (Ord.
2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-3: APPLICATIONS:
A. Applications for all licenses required by this chapter shall be made to the village clerk or her designees in writing on a form prepared by the village.
B. If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the application shall contain his name, date of birth, driver's license number and state of issuance,
residential address, residential telephone number, business address, business phone number, and website address (if any). If the applicant is a
partnership, joint venturer, or other noncorporate business entity, the application shall contain the name, date of birth, driver's license number and state
of issuance, residential address and residential telephone number of each partner, joint venturer, principal, or member. If the applicant is a corporation,
the application shall contain the name, date of birth, and residential address of each principal officer and the registered agent thereof. If the applicant is
a limited liability company, the application shall contain the name, date of birth and residential address of each manager.
C. Each application shall be under oath and also shall contain:
1. Applicant's name, including any business or assumed name used or proposed to be used by applicant.
2. A brief description of the nature of applicant's business and the goods to be sold or services to be rendered by applicant.
3. A designation of the type or kind of license desired.
4. The location or proposed location of the commercial establishment or activity to be conducted and the phone number and website address (if any) of
the commercial establishment.
5. The period of time for which the license is requested.
6. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for license under this code, if any.
7. The names of all other cities and villages in which the applicant has been licensed or has been denied a license within the past three (3) years.
8. Applicant's business addresses for the previous three (3) years and the number of the certificate of registration for the commercial establishment
required under the retailers' occupation tax act1, service occupation tax act2, and/or use tax act3, if applicable.
9. The applicable fee to be paid.
10. Such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of village officials in the evaluation of such application, including, but not
limited to:
a. Proof of any insurance policy or bond if required.
b. Identity of management employees and their position with the applicant.
c. Applicants' businesses in other communities.
d. Whether the applicant has ever had a previous license denied, revoked, or suspended.
e. Whether the applicant has ever voluntarily withdrawn a license or application for a license during or pending an investigation for the suspension or
revocation of that license.
f. Whether the applicant: 1) has ever been convicted of a felony; 2) has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor involving injury to a person or
property within the past ten (10) years; or 3) has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving theft or deception an essential element of which is
dishonesty, within the past five (5) years, under the laws of the state, or any other state, or the laws of the United States, and if so, a detailed
description of such felony or misdemeanor.
g. Whether the applicant has ever been found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this code or the substantially identical provisions of the
ordinance of any other municipality and if so, a detailed description of such violation.
h. Whether any complaint against the applicant, or any entity represented by him, to the consumer fraud division of the attorney general's office has
resulted in a finding that the consumer fraud laws of the state have been violated.
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the information requested in the foregoing subsections C10f through C10h of this section, all inclusive, must be
furnished for each officer and director, and for each shareholder who owns or controls, directly or indirectly through any other person or entity,
twenty five percent (25%) or more of the outstanding stock of such corporation.
j. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the information requested in the foregoing subsections C10f through C10h of this section, all inclusive,
must be furnished for each manager and for each member who owns or controls, directly or indirectly, through any other person or entity, twenty
five percent (25%) or more membership interest in the limited liability company.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 63/702
k. If the applicant is a limited partnership, the information requested in the foregoing subsections C10f through C10h of this section, all inclusive,
must be furnished for each general partner, and names and addresses for all limited partners shall be listed, indicating which partners are general
and which are limited.
l. If the applicant is a joint venture, the information requested in the foregoing subsections C10f through C10h of this section, all inclusive, must be
furnished for each joint venturer.
m. If the applicant is a partnership or joint venture and any partner is a corporation or limited liability company, the information requested in the
foregoing subsection C10i or C10j of this section shall be submitted for each such entity.
n. If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, proof of corporate good standing from the applicable secretary of state.
o. If the applicant is employed by, or represents another person or entity, credentials evidencing such employment, agency or authorization to
represent such person or entity shall be submitted with the application.
p. If the premises of the commercial establishment are owned by the applicant, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the deed to the property where
the commercial establishment is or will be located. If the premises of the commercial establishment are not owned by the applicant, the applicant
shall furnish a copy of the commercial lease or license agreement signed by the owner of the property or the landlord's agent and by the person or
commercial establishment applying for the business license (with rental amount and any proprietary information redacted). (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-
2015)
3-1-4: INVESTIGATION:
A. Where this chapter requires or when it is deemed reasonably necessary or appropriate, an investigation or inspection by any department or official of
the village before the issuance of a license, and requires the approval of such department or official regarding the property location or condition of the
premises in which the commercial establishment or activity for which a license is applied is to be managed, conducted, operated, or carried on, or
regarding the condition and nature of the equipment and methods intended to be used by the applicant in such activity or commercial establishment,
the village clerk shall transmit to the appropriate official or department such information necessary for the required investigation or inspection.
B. If it shall appear to the village clerk that the matters and circumstances relating to an application require further information before a proper
determination can be made, such application shall be returned to the applicant for the inclusion of such additional information as may be specified by
the village clerk.
C. The designated official or department in a reasonable time after receiving a copy of the application:
1. Shall make all necessary investigations and inspections, and the results thereof shall be reported in writing to the village clerk; and
2. Shall indicate on the application a recommendation for the approval or disapproval thereof. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-5: APPROVAL; DISAPPROVAL:
A. If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and related investigative and inspections reports, the village clerk
determines that the applicant meets the standards set forth, the village clerk shall approve the application. The village clerk shall notify the applicant
that the application has been approved and shall issue a license. All licenses shall be subject to the provisions of this code which may be in force at the
time of the issuance thereof or which may subsequently be passed by the village board of trustees.
B. If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and related investigative and inspection reports, the village clerk
determines that matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory, the village clerk shall disapprove the application, indicating the reasons therefor.
Thereupon, the village clerk shall notify the applicant that the application has not been approved and that no license will be issued and the license fee
paid shall be refunded. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-6: APPEAL OF DENIAL:
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the village clerk in regard to the denial of an application for a business license, as provided in this chapter, shall
have the right to appeal to the village president. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the village clerk within five (5) days after notice of a denial of
an application, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The village president shall thereupon set the time and
place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided
in subsection 3-1-15D of this chapter. The decision of the village president on such appeal shall be final.
B. The acceptance of the license, upon reversal by the village president, shall constitute a waiver of all claims against the village, the village clerk, or any
other officer or employee, arising out of the original refusal to issue the license. The burden shall be upon the applicant to show wherein the village
clerk has failed to meet the standards set forth in this section. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-7: LICENSE TERM; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL:
A. All annual licenses shall commence on May 1 each year. No license shall be granted for a period longer than one year. Except where otherwise
provided herein, every license shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance. Applications received for new licenses between March 1 and April
30 of each year shall be issued licenses for the ensuing year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 64/702
B. The village clerk shall endeavor to notify each annual licensee of the expiration of time of the license held by the licensee at least twenty one (21) days
prior to such expiration date; provided, that a failure to make such notification or the licensee's failure to receive it, shall not relieve the licensee from
the obligation to obtain a new license or renewal.
C. Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon proper application and payment of the required fee. The requirements and
procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be the same as the requirements and procedures for granting a new license. (Ord. 2015-78,
10-6-2015)
3-1-8: LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE:
A. No license may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as collateral, or otherwise encumbered. No person, firm, or corporation shall use or display
any license, certificate, plate, tag, badge, or sticker which has been improperly acquired.
B. No person, firm, or corporation shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any license, certificate, plate, tag, badge, or sticker issued by the village. (Ord.
2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-9: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
A. It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed commercial establishment or activity in the village to keep his license displayed at all times in a
prominent place on the premises used for such commercial establishment or activity.
B. No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove, or carry away without the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate, or sticker which has
been discontinued or the licensed premises have been abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the village clerk or his or her duly authorized
representative from removing any license, certificate, plate, or sticker from the possession of a former licensee, the premises, any vehicle, or any
machine when said license has been revoked under the provisions of this chapter.
C. In addition to the posting of licenses, unattended service oriented businesses, such as coin operated laundries and car washes, are required to display
a sign that properly informs their customers of the appropriate telephone number to contact in case of emergency situations. The sign displaying the
telephone number shall be conspicuous, unobstructed, permanent in nature, and contained in a heavy plastic type framing device securely mounted to
the wall. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-10: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for any commercial establishment or activity if the premises and building to be used do not fully comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the village and the state. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-11: LOCATION:
No license for the operation of a commercial establishment or activity in the village shall be construed to permit its operation in more than one location in
the village. A separate license shall be required for each location. For the purpose of this chapter, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced by
the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall be:
A. Connected or shall be located on the same lot or zoning lot;
B. Operated and managed by the same person or owner; and
C. An establishment with the same classification. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-12: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
A. No commercial establishment, or activity whether or not licensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no building,
vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business so as to occasion
any nuisance, or otherwise threaten the public health, safety, morals, or welfare. Any charge of conducting or operating a nuisance may be made under
this chapter or under the provisions of any other village ordinance.
B. No building or structure, utilized, constructed, or maintained in connection with any commercial establishment or activity shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe or any other dangerous or unlawful condition. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-13: INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Whenever an investigation or a hearing pursuant to this chapter by any department or official of the village requires additional information from the
licensee, the licensee shall be given written notice by the village of what additional information from the licensee is required, and the licensee shall fully
and completely comply with that request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 65/702
B. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed commercial establishment or activity are provided for or
required by this chapter, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the village or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection
any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is requested.
C. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance
or regulations, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized
officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon official request. (Ord.
2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-14: ENFORCEMENT; AUTHORITY:
The village administrator shall take all necessary and appropriate action to compel compliance with the regulatory provisions of this chapter. All municipal
employees duly authorized and acting as license inspectors shall be conservators of the peace with police powers for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter and other village ordinances relating to the licensing of commercial establishments and activities and their regulations. (Ord.
2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-15: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Suspension Of Business Operations:
1. When the conduct or operation of any commercial establishment or activity whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact and a
clear and present danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare, the village administrator shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business and the closing of the premises for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
2. Unless: a) waived by the affected business; or b) the nuisance is substantially abated in the opinion of the village administrator and the business is
allowed to resume and reopen, within eight (8) days after a license or permit is summarily suspended by the village administrator, the village
president shall call a hearing as provided in subsection D of this section for the purpose of determining whether or not the license or permit should be
revoked or further suspended.
B. Revocation Of License:
1. Licenses issued by the village may be suspended for up to thirty (30) days or revoked in addition to any fine imposed by the village president after
notice and hearing as provided in subsection D of this section for any of the following causes:
a. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for the licensee;
b. Failure by the applicant to comply with any provision of this code or any statutes of the state relating to the business, occupation, or activity of the
license;
c. Conviction of the applicant of any felony or of a misdemeanor where such conviction indicates their inability to operate a safe, honest, and
legitimate business operation within the village;
d. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine, penalty, or charge owed to the village;
e. Any deceptive trade practices as defined by state or federal law or regulation and shall comply with any applicable laws and regulations regarding
consumer protection and deceptive trade practices;
f. Compliance with all village zoning, building, fire and health codes, and ordinances, as well as all other applicable village codes, ordinances, rules,
and regulations and the premises shall be maintained in good repair, free of litter and debris and kept in a safe condition for employees,
customers, and other persons present therein or thereon;
g. Any other violation of any village ordinance, resolution, or regulation; or
h. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the reasonable
performance of his duties in making such inspections.
C. Ordered Revocation: Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the village. No person whose license has been revoked shall be eligible for a new license
during the period for which the original license was originally issued.
D. Hearing Procedures:
1. Notice:
a. Notice of a hearing shall set forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing.
b. Such notice shall be served by certified mail (return receipt requested) and regular mail, or by personal service by the applicable county sheriff or
Bartlett police officer or special process server, to the licensee at his last known residence or business address, at least five (5) days prior to the
date set for the hearing.
c. If the licensee shall request a continuance in the date of the hearing, any suspension in effect shall be continued until the continued hearing date.
d. All pleadings, motions, notices, and orders shall be filed with the village clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 66/702
2. Procedural Rules:
a. Prior to the beginning of any hearing, the village president may adopt additional procedural rules as may be necessary for that hearing.
b. At the hearing, the licensee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to respond, present evidence, and cross examine witnesses.
c. All proceedings shall be stenographically or electronically recorded.
d. Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The rules of evidence as applied in civil cases in the circuit courts of the
state shall be followed. Evidence not admissible under those rules of evidence may be admitted, however, if it is of a type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent men in the conduct of their affairs. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record.
e. No discovery procedure shall be used prior to a hearing except by leave of the village president who shall supervise all or any part of any
discovery procedure.
f. The standard for proof for hearings shall be by the preponderance of the evidence.
g. The village president shall preside and render the decision within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not later than thirty
(30) days after such conclusion. The decision shall be in writing and shall summarize the evidence and state the reasons for the decision.
3. Hearing Costs:
a. Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked, or a business that operates without a license shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing
before the village president. The village president shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but not limited to,
court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing the mailing or serving notices and orders, and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the village president may allow.
b. The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the village president. Failure to pay said costs
within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this section and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. (Ord.
2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-16: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
3-1-17: PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT:
A. In addition to the suspension and revocation provisions above, any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. Whenever a person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, firm and/or other entity violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, the village may cause appropriate legal actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, to be instituted and maintained to enforce compliance
herewith. (Ord. 2015-78, 10-6-2015)
Chapter 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION AND USE TAXES
3-2-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible
personal property titled or registered with an agency of this State's government, at retail in this Municipality at the rate of 1.0 percent of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in
this Municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1.0 percent of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by
such servicemen as an incident to a sale of service. This "Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax" and this "Home Rule Municipal Service
Occupation Tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
The imposition of these Home Rule Taxes is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois
Municipal Code1.
B. Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer: The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be
collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue and the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2018-18, 3-20-2018)
3-2-2: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
There is hereby levied, imposed and assessed, in accordance with the provisions of 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/2, of the Illinois Municipal Code, a
tax upon the privilege of using in the Village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 67/702
titled or registered with an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible personal
property, with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the "Use Tax Act", approved July 14, 1955. (1984 Code)
3-2-3: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: It shall be unlawful for any corporation or association not incorporated under the laws of the State to engage in effecting fire insurance or
to transact any business of fire insurance in the Village without having fully complied with the provisions of this section. Any such corporation or
association shall pay to the Village for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department Fund a sum of money equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross receipts each year received for premiums by any and all agents of any such corporation or association or on any property in the Village. Such
payments shall be made to and for the year ending July 1 of each year.
B. Reports: Every person acting as representative for or on behalf of any such company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each year, render to
the Village Treasurer a full, true and just account, verified by oath, of all premiums which have been received by him on behalf of the company during
the year ending the preceding July 1 of such fire insurance policies.
C. Time Of Payment: All payments under the provisions of this section shall be made on or before July 15 following the termination of the year for which
the payments are due. (1984 Code)
Chapter 3
THE BARTLETT LIQUOR CONTROL ORDINANCE
3-3-1: STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Liquor Control Act of 19341 (as amended) including, without limitation, sections 5/1-2, 5/1-3 (subsections 5/1-3.01, 5/1-3.02,
5/1-3.03, 5/1-3.04, 5/1-3.05, 5/1-3.06, 5/1-3.07, 5/1-3.08, 5/1-3.09, 5/1-3.10, 5/1-3.11, 5/1-3.12, 5/1-3.13, 5/1-3.14, 5/1-3.15, 5/1-3.16, 5/1-3.17, 5/1-3.17.1,
5/1-3.18, 5/1-3.19, 5/1-3.20, 5/1-3.21, 5/1-3.22, 5/1-3.23, 5/1-3.24, 5/1-3.25, 5/1-3.26, 5/1-3.30, 5/1-3.31, 5/1-3.32, 5/1-3.33, 5/1-3.34, 5/1-3.35 and 5/1-
3.36), sections 5/2-1, 5/4-1, 5/4-2, 5/4-3, 5/4-4, 5/4-5, 5/4-6, 5/4-7, 5/5-1, 5/5-2, 5/6-1, 5/6-2, 5/6-3, 5/6-4, 5/6-5, 5/6-10, 5/6-11, 5/6-12, 5/6-13, 5/6-14, 5/6-
15, 5/6-16, 5/6-16.1, 5/6-16.2, 5/6-17, 5/6-18, 5/6-20, 5/6-22, 5/6-23, 5/6-24, 5/6-24a, 5/6-25, 5/6-26, 5/6-27, 5/6-28, 5/6-29, 5/6-29.1, 5/6-31, 5/6-32, 5/6-
33, 5/6-34, 5/6-35, 5/7-1, 5/7-2, 5/7-3, 5/7-4, 5/7-5, 5/7-6, 5/7-7, 5/7-9, 5/7-10, 5/7-11, 5/7-12, 5/7-13, 5/7-14, 5/8-14, 5/10-1, 5/10-2, 5/10-3, 5/10-4, 5/10-5,
5/10-6, 5/10-7, 5/10-7.1, 5/10-8, 5/10-9, and 5/10-10; the Video Gaming Act2 (as amended); and title 11 Illinois Administrative Code subtitle D: Video
Gaming, chapter I: Illinois Gaming Board, part 1800 Video Gaming (General) (as amended),
are hereby adopted as and for:
Subsections 5/1-2, 5/1-3 (sub-subsections 5/1-3.01, 5/1-3.02, 5/1-3.03, 5/1-3.04, 5/1-3.05, 5/1-3.06, 5/1-3.07, 5/1-3.08, 5/1-3.09, 5/1-3.10, 5/1-3.11, 5/1-
3.12, 5/1-3.13, 5/1-3.14, 5/1-3.15, 5/1-3.16, 5/1-3.17, 5/1-3.17.1, 5/1-3.18, 5/1-3.19, 5/1-3.20, 5/1-3.21, 5/1-3.22, 5/1-3.23, 5/1-3.24, 5/1-3.25, 5/1-3.26,
5/1-3.30, 5/1-3.31, 5/1-3.32, 5/1-3.33, 5/1-3.34, 5/1-3.35 and 5/1-3.36), subsections 5/2-1, 5/4-1, 5/4-2, 5/4-3, 5/4-4, 5/4-5, 5/4-6, 5/4-7, 5/5-1, 5/5-2, 5/6-1,
5/6-2, 5/6-3, 5/6-4, 5/6-5, 5/6-10, 5/6-11, 5/6-12, 5/6-13, 5/6-14, 5/6-15, 5/6-16, 5/6-16.1, 5/6-16.2, 5/6-17, 5/6-18, 5/6-20, 5/6-22, 5/6-23, 5/6-24, 5/6-24a,
5/6-25, 5/6-26, 5/6-27, 5/6-28, 5/6-29, 5/6-29.1, 5/6-31, 5/6-32, 5/6-33, 5/6-34, 5/6-35, 5/7-1, 5/7-2, 5/7-3, 5/7-4, 5/7-5, 5/7-6, 5/7-7, 5/7-9, 5/7-10, 5/7-11,
5/7-12, 5/7-13, 5/7-14, 5/8-14, 5/10-1, 5/10-2, 5/10-3, 5/10-4, 5/10-5, 5/10-6, 5/10-7, 5/10-7.1, 5/10-8, 5/10-9, 5/10-10; the Video Gaming Act (as
amended) as subsections 40/1 through 40/85, inclusive; and title 11 Illinois Administrative Code subtitle D: Video Gaming, chapter I: Illinois Gaming Board,
part 1800 Video Gaming (General) as amended as subsections 1800.110 through 1800.1110 of this section. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-3-2: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS; HOURS, FEES, NUMBER ISSUED:
Licenses issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the Village shall be of the following classes. (Ord. 90-31, 5-1-1990)
3-3-2-1: CLASS A:
Class A licenses, which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption, but not for resale in any form, during the hours hereinafter specified:
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M.
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M.
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. (1984 Code)
C. Number Issued: The number of Class A licenses shall be limited to 15. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-15-2019)
3-3-2-2: CLASS A EXTENDED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 68/702
Class A extended licenses, which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption, but not for resale in any form, during the hours hereinafter specified:
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M.
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. until 4:00 A.M.
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. (1984 Code)
C. Number Issued: The number of Class A extended licenses shall be limited to 3. (Ord. 2008-50, 6-3-2008)
3-3-2-3: CLASS B:
Class B licenses, which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail on the premises specified in such license, beer and wine, as defined in 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.03 and 5/1-3.04, for use and consumption on said premises, but not for resale in any form, during the hours hereinafter
specified:
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M.
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M.
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. (Ord. 2006-105, 10-3-2006)
C. Number Issued: The number of Class B licenses shall be limited to 9. (Ord. 2018-103, 9-4-2018)
3-3-2-4: CLASS C:
Class C licenses, which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license alcoholic liquor, in the original
package only, and not for consumption on the premises where sold, during the hours hereinafter specified:
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. (1984 Code)
C. Number Issued: The number of Class C licenses shall be limited to 6. (Ord. 2015-03, 1-6-2015)
3-3-2-5: CLASS D:
Class D licenses, which allow a special event retailer (as defined in section 3-3-1 of this chapter3) a license to sell and offer for sale, at retail, alcoholic
liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form and only at the location and on the specific dates designated for the special event (as defined
in section 3-3-1 of this chapter4) in the license, for a time period that meets the following restrictions:
A. Hours Of Operation:
1. Not to exceed twelve (12) hours within a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours; and
2. Within the time limits for class A licenses set forth in section 3-3-2-1 of this chapter, i.e.:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 69/702
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M.
3. Within the time limits imposed by any applicable state statute.
B. License Fee: See section 3-1-1 of this title.
C. Issuance; Time Period: A class D license may be issued at any time by the village president with the approval of the board of trustees, and shall be
issued for a specific time period, not to exceed fifteen (15) days per licensee per location in any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 98-87, 9-15-1998)
3-3-2-6: CLASS C EXTENDED:
This license class is created for the operation of a twenty four (24) hour food and beverage convenience store, to allow the licensee to sell and offer for
sale at retail in the premises specified in such license, alcoholic liquor, in the original package only, and not for consumption on the premises where sold,
during the hours hereinafter specified:
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. (Ord. 85-27, 3-19-1985)
C. Number Issued: The number of class C extended licenses shall be limited to 2. (Ord. 89-10, 2-21-1989)
3-3-2-7: CLASS E EXTENDED:
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-40, 5-21-2013)
3-3-2-8: CLASS F:
Class F licenses which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail, in restaurant premises specified in such license, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption on the licensed premises, but not for resale, in any form. Such license may only be issued to a licensee whose primary business is the sale
of food and meals in a restaurant, with the sale of alcoholic liquor incidental and secondary to the restaurant business. A class F licensee may, in addition
to the sale of alcoholic liquor at a table in the restaurant dining room(s) where food service is provided, operate and sell and offer for sale alcoholic liquor
at retail in a room adjacent to and separate from the restaurant dining room(s) on the licensed premises, provided such room does not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the total floor area of the principal structure in which the restaurant facilities are located, and further provided such room is open to and
not closed off from a restaurant dining room and is operated solely as a waiting area for restaurant patrons. "Restaurant", as used in this section, shall
mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, without sleeping
accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a
sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
No merchandise shall be displayed in original packages except as may be incidental to serving customers on the premises and on the back of the bar of
such premises, and it shall be unlawful to advertise such merchandise in any other manner. The application for a class F license shall include an accurate
floor plan for the existing premises if no alterations are planned, or as proposed if the licensee intends to make any improvements or alterations to the
premises for which a building permit is required under the building code, drawn to scale with the dimensions of all rooms clearly shown thereon.
The class F license shall also meet the following restrictions:
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday From 10:30 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
Friday and Saturday From 10:30 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
C. Number Issued: The number of Class F licenses shall be limited to 5. (Ord. 2014-49, 6-3-2014)
D. Change In Floor Plan:
1. During the term of any license issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor in a restaurant for consumption on the premises, if a licensee proposes to make
any of the changes hereinafter enumerated, which would alter its operation from the conditions pursuant to which the license was initially granted,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 70/702
the licensee shall apply in writing to the Local Liquor Commissioner for approval of such changes, and provide information concerning the specific
changes proposed, including a revised floor plan, if any. The following shall be considered a change in the operation for purposes of this section:
a. A change in the floor plan in any manner which would alter the number of seats provided primarily for restaurant use by more than ten percent
(10%), or which would expand by more than ten percent (10%) any area in which entertainment or service of alcoholic liquor is provided;
b. A change in the operation of the licensed premises which would add entertainment or dancing, or which would substantially increase the
promotion of the sale of alcohol or the entertainment available on the premises as opposed to the availability of food service, or which would
change the ratio of alcohol sales to other activities on the licensed premises by more than ten percent (10%).
2. Upon receipt of a request for approval of any of the changes as provided in subsection D1 of this section, the Local Liquor Commissioner shall
review the licensee's proposed changes to determine the nature and significance of the changes in the consideration of the classification of license
held and the requirements established for such classification. The Local Liquor Commissioner may approve the proposed changes if it is determined
that the proposed changes in the floor plan or operation, and the ratio of alcoholic sales to other activities on the premises are not so substantial as
to make questionable the continued conformance of the licensed premises with the requirements of this chapter for the applicable license
classification. The Local Liquor Commissioner shall notify the licensee in writing as to whether approval of proposed changes is granted or denied.
3. So long as an application for approval of any of the changes described in subsection D1 of this section is pending, and not yet acted on by the Local
Liquor Commissioner, the applicant may continue to conduct its business and operations in the manner approved at the time the license was initially
granted. If approval of the proposed changes is granted, the licensee may proceed to implement such changes in accordance with the approval
granted, and subject to any conditions which may be established as part of such approval. If approval is denied, licensee shall continue to operate its
business in the manner approved at the time the license was initially granted or shall cease operation.
4. Any licensed business which implements any of the changes on licensee premises described in subsection D1 of this section, without requesting
and receiving approval of the Local Liquor Commissioner as provided herein, shall be subject to penalties for violation of this chapter, as established
by section 3-3-7 of this chapter, up to and including revocation of the license. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
3-3-2-9: CLASS G:
Class G licenses which allow the holder of a valid Class A, A extended, B, and/or F liquor license that has been issued by the Village of Bartlett Local
Liquor Control Commission (the "Local Liquor Control Commissioner") which is in good standing, to sell and offer for sale at retail, alcoholic liquor limited
to wine in its original sealed package or container for consumption off the premises, and for wine tastings and consumption on the premises in the
designated wine bar area, or if purchased from a point of sale in the wine bar area, may be delivered, served and consumed at tables or booths in the
dining room or designated areas of a restaurant when the food service component of the business is operational, and otherwise limited by the hours of
operation set forth in subsection A of this section.
For purposes of this section, "wine" shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits and vegetables,
excluding grains, containing sugar, and including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits.
For purposes of this section, "restaurant" or "food service establishment" shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with an adequate and sanitary
commercial kitchen and separate dining room with dining room equipment and capacity, and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
For purposes of this section, "wine bar area" shall mean a room or area adjacent to or otherwise separated by full or partial walls or display shelving from
the restaurant dining room, which room or area shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total floor area of the principal structure in which the restaurant
facilities are located. Said wine bar area shall be devoted to the display and sale of wine and wine products in its original package, or in gift boxes or gift
baskets, and for the consumption of wine for tasting and sampling.
The application for a Class G license shall include an accurate floor plan for the existing premises depicting the wine bar area to scale, and building plans
for any improvements or alterations to the premises for which a building permit is required under the Building Code, or other methods proposed to
separate or segregate the wine bar area from the restaurant dining room, other bar(s) and bar areas, the kitchen, video gaming, and waiting areas. All floor
plans, and building plans if applicable, shall be drawn to scale with dimensions of all such rooms and areas with the wine bar, point of sale, fixed shelving,
wall and entrance and exit for the wine bar area depicted thereon.
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday From 10:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
Friday and Saturday From 10:00 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title.
C. Number Issued: The number of Class G liquor licenses shall be limited to 1.
D. Change In Floor Plan:
1. During the term of any Class G license issued for the sale of wine in a wine bar area or restaurant for consumption on the premises, or sale of wine
in the original package for consumption not on the premises, if a licensee proposes to make any of the changes hereinafter enumerated, which
would alter its operation from the conditions pursuant to which the license was initially granted, the licensee shall apply in writing to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner for approval of such changes, and provide information concerning the specific changes proposed, including a revised floor
plan, if any. The following shall be considered a change in the operation for purposes of this section:
A change in the floor plan in any manner which would expand the wine bar area by more than twenty percent (20%).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 71/702
2. Upon receipt of a request for approval of any of the changes as provided in subsection D1 of this section, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall review the licensee's proposed changes to determine the nature and significance of the changes in the consideration of the classification of
license held and the requirements established for such classification. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may approve the proposed changes if
it is determined that the proposed changes in the floor plan for the wine bar area or operation of the wine bar are not so substantial as to make
questionable the continued conformance of the licensed premises with the requirements of this chapter for the applicable license classification. The
Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall notify the licensee in writing as to whether approval of proposed changes is granted or denied.
3. So long as an application for approval of any of the changes described in subsection D1 of this section is pending, and not yet acted on by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner, the applicant may continue to conduct its business and operations in the manner approved at the time the license was
initially granted. If approval of the proposed change is granted, the licensee may proceed to implement such changes in accordance with the
approval granted, and subject to any conditions which may be established as part of such approval. If approval is denied, licensee shall continue to
operate its business in the manner approved at the time the license was initially granted or shall cease operation of the wine bar area and shall
cease the sale of wine in its original package for consumption off premises.
4. Any licensed business which implements any of the changes on licensed premises described in subsection D1 of this section, without requesting
and receiving approval of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner as provided herein, shall be subject to penalties for violation of this chapter, as
established by section 3-3-7 of this chapter, up to and including revocation of the Class G license and the suspension of any other liquor license held
by the licensee. (Ord. 2018-118, 10-16-2018)
3-3-2-10: CLASS H:
Class H licenses, which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail on the premises specified in such license, beer and wine, as defined in 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.03 and 5/1-3.04, in the original package only, and not for consumption on the premises where sold, during the hours
hereinafter specified:
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. until 10:00 P.M.
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. until 12:00 midnight
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. (Ord. 2006-105, 10-3-2006)
C. Number Issued: The number of Class H licenses shall be limited to 0. (Ord. 2014-82, 10-7-2014)
3-3-2-11: CLASS I:
Class I licenses, which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license alcoholic liquor for use and
consumption on said premises, but not for resale in any form, during the hours and subject to the limitations herein specified. Such license may only be
issued to a licensee who owns and/or operates an assisted living establishment and/or shared housing establishment, as defined in section 10 of the
Assisted Living and Shared Housing Act5 (the "Act") and is licensed by the Department of Public Health to operate said assisted living establishment or
shared housing establishment in accordance with the Act.
The sale and/or offer for sale of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to lounge/bar, dining, and multipurpose rooms and indoor and/or outdoor patios that are
adjacent to such room(s), provided such room(s) and/or patio(s), as the case may be, that are made available for use and/or rent by all residents of the
assisted living and/or shared housing establishment located in the premises specified in the liquor license and further provided that such room(s) and/or
patio area(s) have been designated for such use in a special use ordinance approved by the Village of Bartlett Corporate Authorities, or in the absence of
such special use ordinance, as designated by the Village of Bartlett Local Liquor Control Commissioner in the license. Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or
offered for sale from private or semiprivate rooms located upon the premises.
The application for a Class I license shall include an accurate floor plan for the existing premises if no alterations are planned, or as proposed if the
licensee intends to construct new improvements or make any improvements or alterations to the existing premises for which a building permit is required
under the Building Code, drawn to scale with the dimensions of all rooms clearly shown thereon.
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday From 11:00 A.M. until 10:00 P.M.
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title.
C. Number Issued: The number of Class I licenses shall be limited to 1.
D. Use Of Premises: In the event the premises for which the Class I liquor license ceases its operations as an assisted living and/or shared housing
establishment and/or the license to operate such establishment issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health, or its successor agency, is
suspended, revoked and/or not renewed, then licensee's Class I liquor license shall similarly be suspended and/or revoked, as the case may be such
that the sale or offer for sale of alcoholic liquor shall be prohibited at all times when the premises are not operated as an assisted living and/or shared
housing establishment pursuant to a valid license in accordance with the Act. (Ord. 2008-11, 2-5-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 72/702
3-3-2-12: CLASS J:
Class J licenses, which allow a licensee who holds a Class A, A extended, B, F and/or G liquor license that has been issued by the Village of Bartlett Local
Liquor Control Commissioner (the "Local Liquor Control Commissioner") to sell and offer for sale, at retail, alcoholic liquor for use and consumption, but
not for resale in any form, only at the location and on the specific date or dates designated for the "special event" as defined below, and as set forth in the
license, subject to the restrictions set forth below:
A. Hours Of Operation:
1. Not to exceed twelve (12) hours within a period of twenty four (24) hours for a special event that falls on a Friday or a Saturday, or both; otherwise,
not to exceed ten (10) hours within a period of twenty four (24) hours for a special event that falls on a Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday;
2. Within the following time limits:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 11:00 A.M. until 9:00 P.M.
Friday and Saturday From 11:00 A.M. until 11:00 P.M.
3. Within the time limits imposed by any applicable State Statute.
B. License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. The applicable license fee shall be paid by the applicant for each special event at the time of application for
said special event.
C. Issuance: A Class J license may be issued at any time by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with the approval of the Board of Trustees, and shall
be issued for a specific time period, not to exceed twelve (12) consecutive hours in any one day for a special event falling on a Friday and/or a
Saturday and not to exceed ten (10) consecutive hours in any one day for a special event falling on any other day of the week, per licensee, per
authorized location, and not to exceed six (6) days in total in any twelve (12) month period, or to exceed two (2) successive days for any single special
event covered by the issuance of a single Class J liquor license, each of which shall constitute a separate special event and each of which shall require
a separate Class J license application fee, the documentation as required in subsections D, E and G of this section, and the issuance of a separate
Class J license.
D. Location: The location shall be as designated on the license. Locations shall be limited to property that is located adjacent to the premises and/or in the
same commercial center in which the licensee's business for which licensee has been granted his, her or its respective Class A, A extended, B, F
and/or G liquor license by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, is located. The proposed location and size limits of the area to be used for the
special event shall be depicted on a site map of the adjoining property which shall be attached to the application for the Class J license and/or shall be
concisely described in the application therefor. In the event licensee does not own said adjacent property or the commercial center in which its
business is located, licensee must furnish proof that the owner of said property or its authorized agent has granted licensee a right to use and occupy
the property on which the special event will take place for the time period, times and purposes of the event in the form of a written lease agreement,
license agreement and/or other written agreement authorizing said special event to take place on his, her or its property acceptable to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner for such license to issue.
E. Insurance: Licensee must also furnish evidence that licensee's liquor liability insurance coverage required under section 3-3-6 of this chapter and any
additional liquor liability and/or dramshop insurance coverages required by statute provide coverage for liability arising out of the event and/or premises
applies separately to said special event on said separate premises. Evidence of such insurance shall be furnished with the application for a Class J
license for each special event. Licensee shall comply with the liquor license and additional insured endorsement requirements set forth in said section
3-3-6 of this chapter.
F. Definition: "Special event" as used herein means an event involving the sale and/or offer for sale of alcohol during the time period on the date(s) and at
the location specified on the Class J liquor license. A special event retailer licensee for the purposes of this section includes for profit business entities.
G. State Special Use Liquor License: The Class J license will be conditioned upon the licensee procuring a State of Illinois special use permit liquor license
from the Illinois Liquor Control Commission for each special event for which the applicant seeks a Class J license, and filing it with the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner at least two (2) days prior to the start of the special event. (Ord. 2018-08, 2-6-2018, eff. 2-6-2018)
3-3-2-13: CLASS K:
Class K licenses, which allow a licensee who holds a class A, A extended, B, and/or F liquor license that has been issued by the village of Bartlett local
liquor control commissioner (the "local liquor control commissioner") to sell and offer for sale alcoholic liquor, at retail, for use and consumption off the
premises for which said class A, A extended, B, and/or F liquor license has been issued, as an incidental part of food services; provided that such sales
are provided by caterers, as defined below, and are limited to guests and invitees at catered functions, subject to the restrictions set forth below: (Ord.
2008-88, 9-2-2008; amd. Ord. 2013-40, 5-21-2013)
A. Hours Of Operation:
1. Not to exceed eight (8) hours within a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours;
2. Within the following time limits:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 73/702
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M.
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M.
3. Within the time limits imposed by any applicable state statute. (Ord. 2008-88, 9-2-2008)
B. License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title. (Ord. 2013-79, 10-1-2013)
C. Number Issued: The number of class K licenses shall be limited to 2. (Ord. 2013-62, 8-20-2013)
D. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, "caterer" shall mean and include a person or entity licensed by the village of Bartlett to operate a "catering
service", as defined in section 3-1-2 of this title, within the corporate limits of the village.
E. Insurance: Licensee must furnish evidence that licensee's liquor liability insurance coverage required under section 3-3-6 of this chapter and any
additional liquor liability and/or dramshop insurance coverages required by statute provides coverage for liability arising out of the sale and/or
consumption of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the class K liquor license. Licensee shall comply with the liquor license and additional insured endorsement
requirements set forth in said section 3-3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-88, 9-2-2008)
F. Limits On License: A class K liquor license shall only be issued to caterers, as defined above, who operate their catering business from the same
premises for which their class A, A extended, B, and/or F liquor license and catering service license have been issued and shall only be valid for
catered functions located within the corporate limits of the village in connection with the catering of foods. (Ord. 2008-88, 9-2-2008; amd. Ord. 2013-40,
5-21-2013)
G. BASSET Certification: A class K liquor license holder shall at all times cause the sale, offer for sale, and/or serving of alcoholic liquor pursuant to said
class K liquor license to be performed exclusively by persons who have received a beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training
(BASSET) certification from an entity that has obtained a BASSET license from the Illinois liquor control commission. (Ord. 2008-88, 9-2-2008)
H. State Caterer Retailer License: A class K liquor license holder shall file a copy of its caterer retailer license issued by the Illinois liquor control
commission ("state caterer license") with the village clerk within thirty (30) days of issuance of the class K license to said class K liquor license holder
by the local liquor control commissioner and shall not engage in any sale or offer for sale of alcoholic liquor, at retail, in connection with any catered
function within the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett without holding and maintaining both a village class K liquor license and a state caterer
license. (Ord. 2013-79, 10-1-2013)
3-3-2-14: CLASS L:
Class L licenses, which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail in the premises specified in such license, alcoholic liquor in the original package
only, and not for consumption on the premises where sold, during the hours hereinafter specified.
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 10:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M.
Friday and Saturday From 10:00 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title.
C. Number Issued: The number of class L licenses shall be limited to 1.
D. Limits On License: Class L licenses shall be further limited to retail businesses: 1) operated on commercially zoned property, including property lying in
the B-1 district, the B-2 district, the B-3 district, the planned development district (provided it includes a special use permit for planned unit development
that provides for uses, or a combination of uses, that include permitted and/or specially permitted uses in the B-1, B-2 and/or B-3 zoning districts), or is
zoned B-3 PUD; and 2) that are operated on properties located within the geographic area which lies south of North Avenue, east of Berteau Avenue,
west of Western Avenue and north of Devon Avenue in the village of Bartlett. (Ord. 2009-103, 11-3-2009)
3-3-2-15: CLASS M:
Class M licenses, which allow out of town caterers not possessing another class of village of Bartlett liquor license, a license to serve alcoholic liquor for
use or consumption, but not for resale in any form, and only at the locations and on the specific dates designated for the catered events approved by the
local liquor control commissioner as herein provided, as an incidental part of food services; provided that such serving of alcoholic liquor and the
consumption thereof is limited to guests and invitees at catered events and not the general public, and further subject to the following restrictions:
A. Hours Of Operation:
1. Not to exceed eight (8) consecutive hours within a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 74/702
2. Within the following time limits:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M.
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M.
3. Within the time limits imposed by any applicable state statute.
B. License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title.
C. Number Issued: The number of class M liquor licenses shall be limited to 5.
D. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings, except where otherwise specifically indicated:
CATERED EVENTS: A prearranged party, planned function, or event for a specific social or business occasion hosted by an individual or entity held on
a specific date or dates at a business location in the village approved by the local liquor control commissioner or on the premises of a business
establishment that does not otherwise have an on premises village liquor license, at which invited guests, and not the general public, are served food
prepared off site by an out of town caterer and alcoholic liquor is served only as an incidental part of food services, at no charge to the said invited
guests, but at the expense of the host.
OUT OF TOWN CATERER: Shall mean and include a person or entity, whose place of business is located outside of the village, that is in the business
of preparing food off site and providing food, beverages, and alcoholic liquor, as an incidental part of food service, at catered events, and which person
or entity holds an out of town local license issued by another municipality, county or other local government and a caterer retailer liquor license issued
by the Illinois liquor control commission.
OUT OF TOWN LOCAL LICENSE: 1. A business license for a catering business issued by a municipality other than the village of Bartlett, or by a
county, or by another unit of local government; and
2. A caterer retailer liquor license, issued by a municipality other than the village of Bartlett, or by a county, or by another unit of local government.
STATE LIQUOR LICENSES: A caterer retailer liquor license issued by the Illinois liquor control commission.
E. Insurance: Licensee must furnish evidence that licensee's liquor liability insurance coverage required under section 3-3-6 of this chapter and any
additional liquor liability and/or dramshop insurance coverages required by statute provides coverage for liability arising out of the sale and/or service of
alcoholic liquor for each of the catered events. Licensee shall comply with the liquor license and additional insured endorsement requirements set forth
in section 3-3-6 of this chapter. The property owner at which the catered event will take place shall provide evidence that said owner has host liquor
liability insurance in place.
F. Limits On License: A class M liquor license shall only be issued to out of town caterers that do not possess a village of Bartlett liquor license, but that
hold valid out of town local licenses issued by another municipality, a county, or another unit of local government and a state liquor license, including a
business license and a caterer retailer liquor license issued by said other municipality, county or unit of government, and a caterer retailer liquor license
issued by the Illinois liquor control commission. The class M license shall be limited to catered events on specific date(s), times and location(s) set forth
in the application, or amended application, and all alcoholic beverage service and consumption shall be confined to a specified area on the premises at
which the catered event shall take place and shall be subject to such other conditions as may be imposed by the local liquor control commissioner.
Licensee shall not engage in any sale, or offer for sale or service, of alcoholic liquor in connection with any catered event without holding and
maintaining a village class M liquor license, out of town local licenses and state liquor license, and shall not accept payment from any guest and/or
invitee at any catered event, but shall only accept payment from the individual, entity, or business establishment, hosting the catered event at a
package price agreed to by contract.
G. BASSET Certification: A class M liquor license holder shall at all times cause the sale, offer for sale, and/or serving of alcoholic liquor pursuant to said
class M liquor license to be performed exclusively by persons who have received a beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training
(BASSET) certification from an entity that has obtained a BASSET license from the Illinois liquor control commission.
H. Submittal Of License: The class M license application shall be submitted in accordance with section 3-3-4 of this chapter and shall include the following:
1. Copies of all out of town local licenses and state caterer retailer liquor license.
2. Copies of certificates of insurance evidencing not less than the types and amounts of coverages required under subsection E of this section and as
otherwise required by law.
3. Payment of the application fee as required pursuant to section 3-1-1 of this title.
4. A listing of the time(s) and location(s) of the catered events within the village of Bartlett subject to the hours of operation set forth in subsection A of
this section.
5. Such other information and/or documentation required by the local liquor control commissioner relative to the catered events.
6. Provided there is an available class M license, or one has been newly created by the corporate authorities, and all of the other conditions of this
section have been satisfied, the local liquor control commissioner will issue a class M liquor license for one or more catered events, and it shall be
incumbent upon the holder of a class M license to amend its application to add any new catered event not listed on the initial application for a class
M license during the term of the license filed with the local liquor control commissioner at least fourteen (14) days before the catered event. (Ord.
2014-19, 4-1-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 75/702
3-3-2-16: CLASS N:
Class N licenses, which allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale at retail on nightclub premises specified in such license (including outdoor service),
alcoholic liquor for use or consumption on the licensed premises, but not for resale in any form, during the hours and subject to the limitations herein
specified. Such license shall only be available for premises defined as a "nightclub" herein. The application for a class N license shall include a floor plan
for the existing premises if no alterations are planned, or as proposed if the license applicant intends to make any improvements or alterations to the
premises for which a building permit is required under the building code.
The class N license shall also meet the following restrictions:
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday through Saturday,
both inclusive
From 10:00 A.M. until 3:00 A.M. the following morning
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title.
C. Number Issued: The number of class N licenses shall be limited to 1.
D. Definitions: For purposes of this section, "nightclub" shall mean and include: a building, or a portion of a building, consisting of not less than seven
thousand (7,000) square feet, which is kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place permitting and promoting dancing, by
patrons only, on a dance floor of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet, or portion of a building utilized for such purposes, to prerecorded
music reproduced by an amplified sound system, or live music provided by a soloist or group not to exceed eight (8) persons, and for musical
entertainment, including personal appearances of amateur or professional music entertainers.
E. Conditions Of License:
1. A class N license holder shall at all times cause the sale, offer for sale, and/or serving of alcoholic liquor pursuant to said class N license to be
performed exclusively by persons who have received a beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) certification from an
entity that has obtained a BASSET license from the Illinois liquor control commission. In addition to having all bartenders and waitstaff that sell or
serve alcoholic liquor to be BASSET certified, every employee posted at any entrance to the licensed premises to check identification of admittees
shall also be BASSET certified.
2. Each class N license holder shall install and maintain an ID camera or scanner to record and store a picture or scan of at least one form of
identification from each admittee to the licensed premises at the time of each and every admission to the licensed premises.
3. Each class N license holder shall install and maintain CCTV or other high quality video surveillance security camera and security system, with real
time recording and data storage capability, with cameras positioned to view and record the entire indoor licensed premises and of all outdoor seating
areas and parking lots that service the licensed premises.
4. No employee of a class N licensee, or third party musician, disc jockey, entertainer, performer or dancer that is a part of a musical act shall engage
in any act, or simulate any act (even if fully or partially clothed) that would constitute: a) specified sexual activities as that term is defined in the
Bartlett adult use ordinance; or b) "obscenity", as that term is defined in section 3-18-1 of this title; or c) engage in, simulate or perform any lewd act
or behavior offensive to an average person applying contemporary standards and would find that taken as a whole would appeal to prurient interests.
(Ord. 2013-40, 5-21-2013)
3-3-2-17: CLASS O:
Class O licenses are special use permit liquor licenses which allow a licensee who holds a class A, A extended, B, and/or F on premises liquor license that
has been issued by the village of Bartlett local liquor control commissioner (the "local liquor control commissioner") to sell and offer for sale alcoholic liquor
off premises, at retail, at a package price agreed to by contract with the host and/or to serve alcoholic liquor for use and consumption off the premises for
which said class A, A extended, B, and/or F liquor license has been issued, as an incidental part of food services at a prearranged party, planned function
or event for a specific social or business occasion event at a business location in the village, which event is not open to the general public but is by
invitation or reservation in conjunction with food services provided by a third party food caterer(s), as defined below, and where alcoholic service is limited
to guests and invitees pursuant to a special use permit issued by the Illinois liquor control commission and the local liquor control commissioner for a
specific date, time and location, subject to the restrictions set forth below.
A. Hours Of Operation:
1. Not to exceed eight (8) hours within a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours;
2. Within the following time limits:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday From 8:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M.
Friday and Saturday From 8:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M.
3. Within the time limits imposed by any applicable state statute.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 76/702
B. License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title.
C. Number Issued: The number of class O special use permit licenses shall be limited to 10 off premises catered events per class A, class A extended,
class B and/or class F liquor licensee per term (May 1 - April 30).
D. Definitions: For purposes of this section, "food caterer" shall mean and include a person or entity with a business license issued by the village of
Bartlett, another municipality, a county, or by another unit of local government to allow that individual or entity to provide off premises food service for a
prearranged party, planned function or event for a specific social or business occasion not open to the general public but only to invited guests, and
food service is provided under contract with the host and at no charge to the invited guests.
For purposes of this section, "catered event" shall mean a planned or prearranged party, planned function or event for a special or business occasion
by invitation or reservation hosted by an individual or entity, held on a specific date or dates (up to 8 events per licensee, per term) on the premises of a
business that does not have a regular on premises village of Bartlett liquor license, where alcoholic liquors are served as an incidental part of food
service provided by one or more food caterers for that same prearranged party, planned function or event sold at no charge to the invited guests, but at
the cost of the host under contract with the food caterer(s) and/or the licensee for which a special use permit has been issued by the Illinois liquor
control commission and the local liquor control commissioner to sell and/or serve alcoholic liquor off premises from the location of its on premises retail
liquor license.
E. Insurance: The owner of the premises at which the prearranged party, planned function or event will take place must furnish evidence of host liquor
liability coverage and the licensee must furnish evidence that licensee's liquor liability insurance coverage required under section 3-3-6 of this chapter
and any additional liquor liability and/or dramshop insurance coverages required by statute provides coverage for liability arising out of the sale and/or
service of alcoholic liquor for the date(s), time(s) and off premises location set forth in the state and local special use permits. Licensee shall comply
with the liquor license and additional insured endorsement requirements set forth in section 3-3-6 of this chapter.
F. Limits On License: A class O special use permit liquor license shall only be issued to class A, A extended, B, and/or F liquor licensees and for catered
events as defined in this section as an incidental part of food service provided by the licensee or a third party food caterer(s) that is also under contract
with the host to provide prepared meals at the same catered event. The class O special use permit liquor license shall only be valid for catered
functions located within the corporate limits of the village on the dates, times and location set forth in the class O special use permit.
G. BASSET Certification: A class O special use permit liquor license holder shall at all times cause the sale, offer for sale, and/or serving of alcoholic liquor
pursuant to said class O liquor license to be performed exclusively by persons who have received a beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) certification from an entity that has obtained a BASSET license from the Illinois liquor control commission.
H. Submittal Of Licensee Application: The class O license application shall be submitted in accordance with section 3-3-4 of this chapter and shall also
include the following:
1. A copy of licensee's class A, A extended, B and/or F on premises Bartlett liquor license.
2. A listing of the time(s) and location(s) of the catered events within the village of Bartlett subject to the hours of operation set forth in subsection A of
this section.
3. A copy of the food catering contract for each catered event.
4. Copies of certificates of insurance evidencing not less than the types and amounts of coverages required under subsection E of this section.
5. Such other information and/or documentation required by the local liquor control commissioner relative to the catered events.
6. Payment of the application fee as required pursuant to section 3-1-1 of this title.
7. Upon review of submittals set forth in subsections H1 through H6 of this section and a preliminary determination that all of the conditions of this
section have been satisfied, the local liquor control commissioner will issue an unsigned class O special use permit liquor license or letter directed to
the Illinois liquor control commission, to enable the applicant to procure a state special use permit for the catered event(s) applied for, and evidencing
or stating the local liquor control commissioner's intention to sign or issue a class O special use permit liquor license for the dates and times set forth
in a valid special use permit liquor license issued by the Illinois liquor control commission, provided the submittal documents are filed with the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner at least fourteen (14) days before the catered event, or before the first catered event if more than one catered event.
8. Provided the Class O liquor licensee has filed its State issued special use permit license with the Local Liquor Commissioner at least seven (7) days
before the catered event and has otherwise complied with the requirements of this section, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner will issue a Class
O special use permit for the catered event.
I. Service Off Premises: Alcoholic liquor shall not be served off premises at any catered event by a Class A, Class A extended, Class B, or Class F Bartlett
liquor licensee that does not also have either a Class K caterer's license or a Class O special use permit liquor license for such catered event. (Ord.
2014-19, 4-1-2014)
3-3-2-18: CLASS P:
A Class P carry-in license shall authorize the carry-in of beer or wine only (spirits are not permitted) by the business patron(s) or guest(s) of a commercial
business that does not sell alcoholic beverages but operates as a restaurant or food service establishment in which food service preparation and service of
food is the principal business conducted, to allow for consumption of said carried-in beer and/or wine on the premises, subject to the following limitations
and restrictions:
For purposes of this section "beer" shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or
other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 77/702
For purposes of this section, "wine" shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits and vegetables,
excluding grains, containing sugar, and including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits.
For purposes of this section, "restaurant" or "food service establishment" shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, where the principal business conducted is food
preparation and the service of food on the premises, where such space being provided has an adequate and sanitary commercial kitchen and separate
dining room with dining room equipment and capacity, and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve
suitable food for its patrons and guests.
A. Hours Of Operation:
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday From 10:30 A.M. to 12:00 midnight
Friday and Saturday From 10:30 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
But with said hours of operation subject to the restriction that carried-in beer and wine may be served only during the hours that food is being served, and
subject to the further limitations and restrictions set forth in this section.
B. Annual License Fees: See section 3-1-1 of this title.
C. Number Issued: The number of Class P liquor licenses shall be limited to 3.
D. Insurance: Proof that the licensee has in place, carries and maintains dram shop liability insurance, or liquor liability insurance or commercial general
liability insurance which includes host liquor liability coverage.
E. Conditions:
1. The licensee or the owner of the premises shall have applied for and shall have procured a special use permit to serve alcoholic beverages (limited
to beer and wine) on the licensed premises, and if there is outdoor seating for the restaurant, a special use permit therefor, and for the consumption
of beer and/or wine in a fenced in area.
2. The beer and/or wine that is carried in by patrons and guests of the commercial business must be in the original bottle or can and must be
unopened.
3. No more than one bottle of wine not exceeding seven hundred fifty milliliters (750 mL) per guest and no more than one (1) 6-pack of beer (six 12-
ounce cans or bottles, or in cans or bottles not exceeding in the aggregate 72 fluid ounces) per guest may be brought into the restaurant or food
establishment for consumption by any patron.
4. At the licensee's discretion, the licensee may require the beer or wine to be opened and served by the licensee, and the licensee may charge a
corkage or setup fee for that service.
5. The beer or wine may only be consumed by persons who are served a meal.
6. The beer or wine may be served only during the hours that food is being served.
7. Carry-in beer or wine may only be consumed inside the restaurant premises (and in a designated fenced in area provided a special use permit has
been procured therefor).
8. Carry-in licensees are prohibited from storing alcohol on the premises.
9. Patrons may remove one, unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off-premises consumption and any sealed bottles/cans of beer,
provided that the patron or guest has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine and/or beer with the meal on the restaurant or
food establishment premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine or sealed beer bottles/cans that are to be removed from the premises shall be
securely sealed by the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal from the premises and placed in a transparent, one-time use,
tamperproof bag.
10. Illinois Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training (BASSET) certification from an entity that has obtained a BASSET training
license from the Illinois Liquor Control Commission. BASSET training is required for at least one person who is on duty at all times that wine and/or
beer is allowed to be carried into the premises and consumed by the patron that carried in said wine and/or beer and his or her guests, and subject
to the limits set forth in subsection E3 of this section.
11. Carry-in licensees shall be liable for violation of this chapter in the same manner as the holder of any other classification of liquor license, including,
but not limited to, violations for service to minors and the over serving of patrons and guests, and in addition to the fines, suspension and/or
revocation of the carry-in liquor license issued under this section, shall further be subject to the fines and penalty provisions set forth in chapter 1 of
this title, including the suspension and/or revocation of the business license issued to the commercial establishment. (Ord. 2019-38, 4-16-2019)
3-3-3: VIOLATION OF HOURS:
No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor except during the hours authorized for the class of license held by such licensee under section 3-
3-2 of this chapter. (1984 Code)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR INITIAL LICENSE OR RENEWAL OF EXISTING LICENSE; CONTENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 78/702
Application for an initial license or renewal of an existing license required by this chapter shall be made to the Local Liquor Commissioner on forms
provided and submitted to the Village Clerk. Such application shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual, or, if a club or
corporation, by a duly authorized agent thereof, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following information, statements and certifications:
A. The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits
thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses
of the officers and directors and the name and address of each shareholder in the corporation. In the event any stock in said corporation is held by a
nominee then the name and address of the person for whom the nominee holds ownership.
B. The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
C. The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
D. The length of time that such applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was issued.
E. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
F. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
G. A statement as to whether the applicant has made similar application for a similar license on premises other than those described in this application,
and the disposition of such application. (1984 Code)
H. Whether the applicant: 1) has ever been convicted of a gambling offense or felony; 2) has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving injury to a person
or property within the past ten (10) years; or 3) has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving theft or deception within the past five (5) years, under
the laws of the state, or any other state, or the laws of the United States, and if so, a detailed description of such felony or misdemeanor. (Ord. 86-29,
5-6-1986)
I. Whether a previous license issued by a state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked and the reason therefor.
J. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the village, this state or the United States in the conduct of his place of business.
K. In the case of a corporation, a list of the name and residence address of any owner of stock of such corporation. (1984 Code)
L. Each applicant, except applicants for class D license, shall designate at least one individual who shall serve as liquor manager for the applicant. Upon
each renewal of a liquor license, the licensee shall designate a liquor manager or managers. The applicant shall supply the following information with
respect to such manager or managers:
1. The name of the manager.
2. The residence address of the manager or agent and the length of time such manager has resided at that address, and if such length of time is less
than one year, the previous residence address of such manager or agent.
3. The place and date of birth of the manager.
4. The social security number and driver's license number of the manager.
5. The experience of the manager in handling alcoholic liquor or in conducting a business of the character for which a license is being applied.
6. The home and business telephone numbers of the manager or agent.
7. The number of hours during which the manager will be on the premises to be licensed; provided that at least one manager, to be designated as the
liquor manager for the premises, shall be on the premises not less than thirty five (35) hours per week. This provision shall not apply to class D or
class F licenses. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
8. Statement and representation from the applicant whether the applicant will be applying for a video gaming license and will be conducting video
gaming at the proposed licensed premises. (Ord. 2013-80, 10-15-2013)
M. Certificates of completion of a state certified alcohol awareness program for the managers of liquor sales, bartenders and servers for the licensed
premises, except for those managers, bartenders or servers who have been employed by the licensee less than ninety (90) days. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-
1995)
N. Each license application for an initial liquor license at a premises where the applicant has stated the applicant will be applying for a video gaming
license or will be conducting video gaming shall be accompanied by a set of floor and site plans prepared under the seal of an architect or engineer
licensed to practice in the state. The plans shall show the dimensions of the premises, its location on and the dimensions of its site; the property lines
and their relationship to the building and all parking areas located on the property; and the design and layout for determination of occupancy, including,
but not limited to, exiting, seating, dining rooms, bars, game and waiting areas, proposed video gaming areas, and position of equipment and fixtures
therein whether or not an application for a video gaming license has or will be submitted. The plans shall show on the face thereof a written
computation of proposed occupancy limits, parking requirements and areas which will be reasonably necessary for loading and unloading. The
requirement to submit floor and site plans shall not be applicable to liquor license applications that do not state the applicant's intention to apply for a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 79/702
video gaming license that allow for the sale of alcoholic beverages and/or liquor on the premises (except that a floor plan shall be required for a class F
license) and shall not be required for liquor license renewals. The layout of a licensed premises, as depicted on the floor plan submitted with the initial
liquor license application that states an intention to apply for video gaming filed with the village after the effective date hereof, may not be substantially
changed without submission of a new set of plans and approval by the local liquor control commissioner. The requirements of this subsection shall not
apply to any applicant seeking a class C, C extended, G, H, J, K, L, or M license. (Ord. 2013-80, 10-15-2013)
O. A statement authorizing a police background investigation to verify the information included in the application and releasing the village, its officers,
agents and employees from any and all liability which may arise as a consequence thereof. Each individual owner, partner, joint venturer, manager of
an LLC, member of an LLC owning more than a five percent (5%) interest therein, officer, director, proposed manager of the premises, proposed liquor
manager of the premises, and shareholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock in the corporation applying or reapplying
for a liquor license, shall execute such a statement and submit himself or herself to the police department for fingerprinting. This provision shall not
apply to special event retailers applying for a class D license unless requested in writing by the local liquor commissioner. For corporations whose stock
is publicly traded and listed on a recognized stock exchange, this provision shall not apply to the following: shareholders owning less than twenty five
percent (25%) of the stock of such corporation, and directors and officers who do not have any management responsibilities of such corporation.
P. In addition to the license fees set forth in section 3-1-1 of this title, an application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid at the time any
application for initial licensing is filed, except that no application fee shall be required for a class D license. The purpose of this fee is to partially offset
the costs incurred by the village for performing an investigation of the applicant and its liquor manager. Such fee shall be due and payable whenever a
different person is designated as liquor manager, or there is a change in ownership as set forth in section 3-3-12 of this chapter.
Q. Except for special events retailers applying for a class D license, unless requested to do so in writing by the local liquor commissioner, upon receipt of
an application and the fee, if any, required under subsection P of this section, the local liquor commissioner shall direct a police investigation of any: 1)
individual applicant, 2) each partner, 3) each joint venturer, 4) each manager(s), 5) each member owning more than five percent (5%) of a limited
liability company (LLC), or 6) each officer, director and shareholder owning more than five percent (5%) of the stock in a corporation, and each
proposed manager of the premises, if any, and each liquor manager designated by the applicant pursuant to subsection L of this section as the case
may be. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, and assuming the criminal background research has been completed by the state
police and/or the FBI and returned to the police department in a timely manner, the local liquor commissioner shall either issue the license upon
payment of the applicable fee under the provisions of this chapter, or shall render a decision in writing refusing to issue such license and state the
reason such license has been refused. The local liquor commissioner may require the applicant, or a specific agent(s) of the applicant, to present
himself, herself or themselves for an interview with the local liquor commissioner prior to a decision on the issuance of a license. The local liquor
commissioner's decision in the issuance or denial of a license shall be conclusive. For corporations whose stock is publicly traded and listed on a
recognized stock exchange, this provision shall not apply to the following: shareholders owning less than twenty five percent (25%) of the stock of such
corporation, and directors and officers who do not have any management responsibilities of such corporation. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
R. No person shall knowingly furnish false or misleading information or withhold any relevant information on any application for any license required by this
chapter nor knowingly cause or suffer another to furnish or withhold such information on his behalf. No person shall knowingly furnish any false or
misleading information in the investigation of any application for a license required by this chapter. No person shall wilfully withhold any information that
is relevant to any such investigation when called upon by any village officials to furnish such information. The furnishing of false or misleading
information or withholding any relevant information on any application for any license required by this chapter shall be grounds for denial of any such
application, or if discovered after the granting of the license, shall be grounds for a fine and/or the suspension or revocation of the license.
S. A licensee shall conduct the business at a licensed premises in a manner consistent with the statements and representations made on the licensee's
application before the local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 2013-80, 10-15-2013)
3-3-4-1: STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
No liquor license shall be issued under the terms of this chapter to any person, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company (LLC) or corporation, if
any person, partner, joint venturer, manager of an LLC, member of any LLC owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) interest therein, officer,
director, stockholder or shareholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, manager of the licensed
premises or liquor manager is a person who refused to cooperate in providing necessary information and fingerprints for the conduct of a background
check or for whom a background check reveals information which would disqualify such person from receiving a license under:
A. Section 3-1-5 of this title, as amended, which is hereby incorporated by this reference;
B. Sections 3-3-1-5/6-1, 3-3-1-5/6-2, 3-3-1-5/6-11, 3-3-1-5/6-12, and/or 3-3-1-5/6-25; and/or
C. Matters pertaining to the public health, safety, morals and welfare, including, but not limited to, traffic congestion, whether the issuance or renewal of the
liquor license will cause or contribute to the blighting and/or reduction of property values in an area, and the condition of the licensed premises and
surrounding property.
For corporations whose stock is publicly traded and listed on a recognized stock exchange, this section 3-3-4-1 shall not apply to the following:
shareholders owning less than twenty five percent (25%) of the stock of such corporation, and directors and officers who do not have any management
responsibilities of such corporation. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
3-3-5: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Every applicant for a liquor license shall file with his application a joint and several bond executed by good and sufficient sureties residing or licensed to do
business within the state, payable to the village in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), said surety to be approved by the local liquor control
commissioner, said bond being conditioned upon true and faithful compliance by said licensee with all of the provisions of this chapter. Provided further,
that an applicant for a nonbeverage user license need not file the bond as set out in this section. (1984 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 80/702
3-3-6: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All licensees shall have in effect, prior to the issuance of any new license or the renewal of any license hereunder, liquor liability insurance with a common
law liquor liability endorsement under which the village, its local liquor commissioner, president and board of trustees, all of its elected or appointed
officials, employees and any volunteer while acting on behalf of the village and the licensee are named additional insureds, with limits of not less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit or five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate, and
shall submit a certificate or policy of insurance as evidence of such coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and
having a Best rating acceptable to the village. The effective period of such insurance coverage shall coincide with the period for which the license is in
effect, and said certificate and policy of insurance shall provide that the insurance coverage shall not be canceled, modified or reduced in coverage or
limits except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, has been given to the village. The licensee shall maintain
said coverage throughout the term of the license and shall also have in effect prior to issuance of the license and maintain throughout the term
owners/landlords and tenants liability insurance in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit or five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and per aggregate. This section shall not apply to class D licenses. In the case of class D
licensees, the local liquor commissioner may allow insurance in such lesser amounts as he or she deems appropriate, based upon the conditions and
circumstances surrounding the sale of alcoholic liquor by such licensee(s). (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
3-3-7: REVOCATIONS, SUSPENSIONS, FINES:
The village president, as local liquor control commissioner, may revoke or suspend any license issued by him if he determines that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of the liquor control act of 19346 incorporated in this chapter as sections 3-3-1-5/1-2, 3-3-1-5/1-3, 3-3-1-5/1-3.01 through 5/1-
3.36 inclusive, 3-3-1-5/2-1, 3-3-1-5/4-1 through 5/4-7 inclusive, 3-3-1-5/5-1, 3-3-1-5/5-2, 3-3-1-5/6-1 through 5/6-5 inclusive, 3-3-1-5/6-10 through 5/6-35
inclusive, 3-3-1-5/7-1 through 5/7-7 inclusive, 3-3-1-5/7-9 through 5/7-14 inclusive, 3-3-1-5/8-14, 3-3-1-5/10-1 through 5/10-10 inclusive; the video gaming
act7 incorporated in this chapter as sections 3-3-1-40/1 through 3-3-1-40/85; the rules of the Illinois gaming board8 incorporated in this chapter as sections
3-3-1-1800.110 through 3-3-1-1800.1110 inclusive; and/or violated sections 3-3-3, 3-3-16, 3-3-17, 3-3-18, 3-3-19 of this chapter, or chapter 31 of this title;
or if he determines the licensee has failed to conduct the business at the licensed premises in the manner consistent with the statement and
representations made on the licensee's application for a liquor license; or if he determines the licensee has permitted the business on the licensed
premises to be conducted in a manner inconsistent with the representations in the licensee's application for a liquor license; or if he determines the
licensee has permitted any violation of any state video gaming laws, rules or regulations; or the violation of any federal law, other state law or ordinances
of the village. No such license shall be revoked or suspended for more than thirty (30) days and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by
the local liquor control commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee opportunity to appear and defend. The local
liquor control commissioner may also levy a fine only or a fine in addition to a suspension not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first
violation within a twelve (12) month period; one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period; two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period. Each day on which a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines under this section may be imposed against a licensee
during the period of his, her or its license. Proceeds of such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the village.
If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will in any way threaten the
welfare of the village, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee opportunity to be heard during that period; except that if such licensee shall also be
engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or
businesses.
The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked
or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order, and either the amount of the fine,
the period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the licensee. The
licensee shall have the privilege, within a period of twenty (20) days after the receipt of such order of fine, suspension or revocation, of appealing the order
to the Illinois liquor control commission and upon the filing of such an appeal by the licensee, the Illinois liquor control commission shall determine the
appeal upon the certified record of proceedings of the local liquor control commissioner in accordance with state law. (Ord. 2013-80, 10-15-2013)
3-3-8: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each liquor license, except a class D license, shall commence on May 1 in the year in which it is issued, and shall terminate on April 30 of the following
year, unless otherwise so determined by the local liquor control commissioner. The license fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the number of
full calendar months which have expired during the year in which the aforesaid license was issued. A nonbeverage user license shall expire when the
quantity of alcoholic liquor which may be purchased, as hereinafter provided, has been exhausted. (1984 Code)
Any licensee may renew its license at the expiration thereof, provided that such licensee is then qualified to receive a license, and that the premises for
which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose. Application for renewal shall be made on forms as prescribed in section 3-3-4 of this
chapter. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate by operation of law if not renewed within ten (10) days after the date of its expiration.
Thereafter, the licensee may apply for reissuance, consideration of which application shall be made pursuant to the procedures established by section 3-3-
4-1 of this chapter. In order to assure eligibility to renew the license, the licensee shall certify to the continued compliance of the premises with the
conditions pursuant to which the license was initially granted, including the floor plan, if any, which was approved as part of the initial licensing. The
privilege of renewal shall not be construed as a vested right or property right, and nothing herein shall prevent the local liquor commissioner or village
board from reducing the available licenses in any license classification, or reducing the hours of operation of such license or otherwise amending its
ordinances, rules and regulations. All information and material required for license renewal shall be submitted to the village clerk not less than fifteen (15)
business days prior to the date of expiration of the current license (the due date). Failure to timely submit all required information and material shall result
in a twenty five percent (25%) increase of the applicable license fee as set forth in section 3-1-1 of this title. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
3-3-9: REVIEW OF LIQUOR HEARINGS:
A. The appeal shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the local liquor control commissioner, as the board of trustees has
heretofore adopted resolution 93-13-R on February 2, 1993, which resolution requires that such review be on the record. A certified official record of
the proceedings taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter shall be filed by the local liquor control commissioner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 81/702
within five (5) days after notice of the filing of such appeal, if the appellant licensee pays for the cost of the transcript. The state commission shall
review the propriety of the order or action of the local liquor control commissioner and shall consider the following questions:
1. Whether the local liquor control commissioner has proceeded in the manner provided by law.
2. Whether the order is supported by the findings.
3. Whether the findings are supported by substantial evidence in the light of the whole record.
B. The only evidence which may be considered in the review shall be the evidence found in the certified official record of the proceedings of the local liquor
control commissioner. No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or considered. The state commission shall render a decision affirming, reversing
or modifying the order or action reviewed within thirty (30) days after the appeal was heard. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-3-10: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner, proprietor or person in charge of any place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold
from the restrictions and requirements of any other provision of this code, other ordinances of the village or the statutes of the state. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-
1995)
3-3-11: LICENSE A PERSONAL PRIVILEGE; NOT SUBJECT TO ATTACHMENT, TRANSFER, DEVOLUTION, RENEWALS:
A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and shall
not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily,
or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the
death of the licensee; provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt
licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the
appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency
or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency. No refund shall be made for
any portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall not have operated under such license. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
3-3-12: CHANGE IN PERSONNEL:
A. Any proposed changes in ownership, management and/or who the general partners, joint venturers, members or managers in partnerships, joint
ventures, officers, directors, and shareholders holding directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership interest will be in a
partnership, joint venture, limited partnership, limited liability company (LLC) and/or corporation or managers of premises licensed under this chapter,
shall be reported in writing to the local liquor commissioner not less than thirty (30) days prior to the proposed change. All new personnel, including
every partner, joint venturer, member and manager of an LLC; officers, directors and shareholders of a corporation (except as provided in subsection D
of this section); managers of the licensed premises; liquor managers and sole proprietors, shall meet all the standards of this chapter and must
otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license under section 3-3-4-1 of this chapter just as if such person was applying for a liquor license individually. All
such changes in personnel shall be subject to review and approval by the local liquor commissioner.
B. When a license has been issued to a partnership or joint venture and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a change in the general partnership
interest or joint venture interest of more than five percent (5%) in said partnership or joint venture, such license shall terminate and the partnership or
joint venture shall surrender its existing license and reapply for a new license.
C. When a license has been issued to an LLC and a change takes place in the manager(s) and/or members who own more than a five percent (5%)
interest in said LLC, such license shall terminate and the LLC shall surrender its existing license and reapply for a new license.
D. When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in the officers, directors and/or shareholders who own more than five
percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation, resulting in the holding of office, director's position, or ownership interest, such license shall terminate and
the corporation shall surrender its existing license and reapply for a new license. This section shall not be applicable to corporations whose stock is
publicly traded on recognized national stock exchanges, provided the liquor manager designated pursuant to section 3-3-8 of this chapter meets, and
continues to meet, all of the standards of this chapter and otherwise qualifies and remains qualified under section 3-3-4-1 of this chapter.
E. When a change takes place in any manager and/or liquor manager of a licensed premises, resulting in a manager and/or liquor manager who is not
eligible to hold a liquor license and is, therefore not eligible to be a manager and/or liquor manager, such license shall terminate and the license
surrendered, unless such manager is replaced by a manager who is qualified to hold a liquor license within ten (10) days of notice thereof to the
licensee.
F. When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer eligible and qualified for a license, such license shall terminate and the existing
license shall be surrendered. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
3-3-13: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in or from the premises described in the application for the license. Such location may be
changed only upon prior notice to the local liquor commissioner by the licensee, and written permission to make such change issued by the local liquor
commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of
the state, this chapter and other ordinances of the village. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 82/702
3-3-14: OPERATION IN MANNER CONSISTENT WITH APPLICATION:
A licensee shall conduct his business in a manner consistent with the representations made on his application and before the local liquor commissioner.
(Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
3-3-15: CESSATION OF BUSINESS:
The liquor license of any licensee who has ceased to do business or closes his, her or its place of business for a period of more than thirty (30) successive
days without the prior written permission from the local liquor commissioner, shall lapse and be automatically forfeited, and the licensee shall thereupon
surrender his, her or its liquor license immediately. (Ord. 95-127, 12-19-1995)
3-3-16: OTHER ORDINANCES AND LAWS TO APPLY:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner, proprietor, or person in charge of any bar, tavern, restaurant or other place in the village where
alcoholic liquor is sold, from the restrictions and requirements of any other ordinance or ordinances of the village or statutes of the state of Illinois. (Ord.
2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-3-17: ACTS OF AGENT OR EMPLOYEE:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee, if the act is committed or omission is made with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee shall be deemed
and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and the employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had
been done or omitted by him personally. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-3-18: SELLING TO UNFIT PERSONS:
No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him or her to be under legal disability or in need of mental
treatment. No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of twenty one (21) years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-3-19: PRESERVATION OF PEACE ON PREMISES SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each liquor license holder, its employees or agents, to maintain the premises in a peaceable and orderly manner
so as not to allow any patron, employee or member of the public on the premises to commit any act, which act is done in an unreasonable manner so
as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace or to commit an act which causes another person to become unconscious as a
result of that act.
B. Each liquor license holder shall have sufficient employees or agents on the premises to maintain the peace. Any employee, agent, or person acting on
behalf of the liquor license holder shall be suitably trained to observe and be aware of persons who may become highly intoxicated and/or
unconscious. Any employee, agent, or person acting on behalf of the liquor license holder shall be suitably trained to maintain the peace of the
premises, and may not act in any fashion so as to promote or aggravate situations which may result in physical altercations, fighting or other acts of
any unreasonable manner so as to alarm or disturb another and provide a breach of the peace.
C. No liquor license holder, employee or agent shall knowingly permit any fighting; which shall consist of physical contact or an insulting or provoking
nature; or cause physical harm to an individual.
D. "Premises" as defined for purposes of this chapter, shall mean the actual physical space wherein alcoholic beverages are sold to the public, any area
set aside for use by the general public (restrooms, lounge), any area used by agents or employees of the liquor license holder for preparation of
services (kitchen or storage facilities) any outdoor area wherein the public is served or awaiting service or where the customers are authorized to park
any vehicles and any means of ingress and egress to the parking facility.
E. Each liquor licensee holder, employee or agent who is present or observes any type of criminal activity, fighting, or notes that any person is highly
intoxicated or unconscious is required to immediately notify 9-1-1 of the event. In the event an individual on the premises loses consciousness or is in a
state of stupor so as not to be competent, each liquor license holder, employee or agent who is present shall immediately call 9-1-1 and notify the
police department of the condition of the individual.
F. Failure to immediately report any incident as required under subsection E of this section shall subject the holder of a liquor license to the revocation or
suspension of the retail liquor dealer's license, as well as, or, a possible fine from the local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
Chapter 4
AMUSEMENTS
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 83/702
The following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the
meaning indicated by common dictionary definition.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, game table or other device designed, intended, displayed or kept as an amusement game or test of skill and for the
play of which a charge is made. Amusement device, when used herein, shall include, but not be limited to, devices commonly known as electronic games,
pinball machines, shuffleboards, bowling machines and coin operated games of skill, but shall not include regulation bowling alleys, pool or billiard tables,
vending machines which do not incorporate gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any coin operated mechanical musical devices or
video gaming terminal as said term is defined in the Illinois gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5, for which a valid license has issued by the
Illinois gaming board and by the village administrator pursuant to chapter 31 of this title. Amusement devices shall include any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, or the use of which is made available for any valuable consideration, may be operated by the public generally
for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score, but shall not include any video gaming device for which a valid license
has issued from the Illinois gaming board and by the village administrator pursuant to chapter 31 of this title. It shall include such devices as marble
machines, electronic games, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may
be indicated.
ATTENDANT: Any person acting for and in behalf of a game room licensee.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSES: An intent to operate amusement devices for gain or profit.
GAME ROOM: Any premises in which one or more amusement devices are operated for commercial purposes.
GAME ROOM LICENSEE: Any person, firm, corporation or association in immediate control of the premises, including any owner or lessee thereof, within
or upon which one or more amusement devices are operated for commercial purposes.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, association, trust or entity which owns or leases any amusement device; the person, firm, corporation,
association, trust or entity in whose place of business any such device is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation, association, trust
or entity having control over such device. (1984 Code; amd. Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-4-2: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The number of licenses shall not exceed one for each three thousand (3,000) people residing in Bartlett, based on the most recent federal census. (1984
Code)
3-4-3: CLASSES OF LICENSES; LIMITATIONS:
There shall be four (4) classes of licenses:
A. A class A license shall permit not more than one game machine.
B. A class B license shall permit not more than five (5) game machines.
C. A class C license shall permit not more than thirteen (13) game machines.
D. A class D license shall permit not more than sixty (60) game machines and not more than twenty (20) billiard tables.
There shall be not more than one class A license, not more than two (2) class B licenses, not more than one class C license and not more than one
class D license. (1984 Code; amd. Ord. 90-86, 9-4-1990)
No such game room license shall be required for any video gaming terminal as said term is defined in the Illinois gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 40/5, however, if the same licensee has amusement devices and a game room otherwise subject to this chapter, the issuance of one or more
video gaming licenses issued pursuant to chapter 31 of this title shall not relieve the obligation to procure a license and special use for a game room as
otherwise required by this chapter. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-4-4: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall receive a license pursuant to this chapter authorizing the operation of a "game room" as defined herein unless a special use permit has
first been issued pursuant to the provisions of the Bartlett zoning ordinance permitting the operation of a "game room" upon the premises for which
application is made. No special use shall be granted for the operation of a "game room" and no license shall issue therefor, except as an accessory use to
the principal use, other than a game room, of the premises for which the license and special use are sought. The principal use of any premises for which a
game room license is sought shall be that permitted or special use (as set forth under the applicable provisions of the Bartlett zoning ordinance) which
generates seventy five percent (75%) of the gross revenues from all activities or operations conducted on such premises. (1984 Code)
3-4-5: APPLICATION FOR GAME ROOM LICENSE:
A. Each application for a "game room" license shall contain, in addition to the information required by section 3-1-3 of this title, the following information:
1. Statement as to whether the game room will be operated by an operator, manager or agent, and the name, address and phone number of any such
operator, manager or agent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 84/702
2. A diagram showing the number of amusement devices to be located on the premises, the location of each device on the premises, and a description
of each device.
B. If there is more than one application on file for a game room license, the village administrator shall analyze the competing applications and recommend
to the committee chairman the application that has the most merit on the basis of the standards hereinafter set forth. The license and ordinance
committee shall recommend to the president and board of trustees the issuance of a license to the applicant whose application has the most merit,
based on the standards hereinafter set forth, and the president and board of trustees shall determine on the basis of such recommendations and the
standards hereinafter set forth the license application having the most merit, and shall direct the clerk to issue a license to the successful applicant.
(1984 Code)
3-4-6: SELECTION OF LICENSEES ON THE BASIS OF MERIT:
As each additional game room license becomes available, the president and board of trustees shall grant such license to the most qualified applicant
therefor on the basis of merit in accordance with the following standards:
A. The applicant's prior history in Bartlett and other communities, including, but not limited to:
1. Compliance with regulatory ordinances.
2. Effect on other businesses in close proximity to applicant's other game room operations.
3. Effect on juvenile crime problems.
4. Municipal revenue generated by applicant's game room and other facilities operated in conjunction with applicant's game room, such as sales tax
revenue generated by restaurants, taverns, golf courses, tennis clubs and other sports facilities.
5. The fact that an applicant has no previous record of successful game room operations shall not disqualify an applicant but shall only be one of the
factors to be considered.
B. The quality of the facilities in which the proposed game room will be operated, including:
1. Other proposed facilities, such as restaurants and sports facilities, to be operated in conjunction with the proposed game room, which will tend to
make the game room a family oriented facility.
2. The estimated assessed valuation of the complex in which the game room will be located.
3. The estimated sales tax and other municipal revenues from other facilities which will be operated by the applicant in conjunction with the proposed
game room.
4. The quality of management of the proposed game room including the prior history of the managers designated in the application.
C. The quality of the electronic games and other amusement devices proposed for such game room, including:
1. The commitment to keep all amusement devices in excellent operating condition and repair.
2. The average time of play for each quarter or other coin or token placed in each machine. (1984 Code)
3-4-7: DUTIES OF LICENSEES:
A. It shall be unlawful to permit gambling on the premises except for the use of authorized video gaming terminals which have been duly licensed by the
Illinois gaming board and by the village administrator pursuant to chapter 31 of this title. Any licensee or attendant who observes gambling on the
premises, or has reasonable grounds to suspect that gambling is taking place, excepting use of authorized video gaming terminals as defined in the
Illinois video gaming act1 and chapter 31 of this title, shall immediately cause removal from the premises of such person(s) as is involved in the
gambling activity. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
B. The licensee or operator or attendant shall be on the premises at all times during which the business is open to the public and shall be in such a
position as to have a clear view of all of the amusement devices and activity taking place on the premises.
C. It shall be unlawful for the licensee hereunder to permit such noise, either by mechanical means or noise on the part of patrons which shall cause a
disturbance to the adjacent and surrounding uses as would cause the normal operation of said businesses to be damaged or unreasonably disturbed.
D. The licensee shall cause the premises to remain in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall place such waste receptacles in and around the
premises so as to accomplish the above.
E. The licensee shall provide adequate and orderly parking for all bicycles and motor vehicles and shall keep the storefront unobstructed so that the
sidewalks are clear and open to pedestrian traffic.
F. No game room shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any church or school.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 85/702
G. If the game room is not an incidental use to a business which possesses a liquor license, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed in the
game room.
H. Signs shall be posted in the game room denoting any curfew law then in force within the village.
I. The game room shall be open and operated only during the hours that the primary business establishment shall be open to the public.
J. All licensees or operators hereunder shall have the affirmative duty to report to the police department any and all incidents or reports of a "disturbance of
the peace" as defined and regulated in this code2, and which takes place within the licensed premises or outside the premises within one hundred feet
(100') from the entrance, whether personally observed by such licensee, operator or manager, or reported to such licensee, operator or manager.
Failure to report to the police as herein provided shall be deemed sufficient cause to revoke the license issued hereunder. (1984 Code)
K. Nothing contained in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit the operation of "gambling devices" as defined in section
28-2 of the Illinois criminal code3 which for purposes of this subsection is amended to expressly exclude authorized video gaming terminals as defined
in the Illinois video gaming act4. Any such gambling device, excluding any duly licensed video gaming terminals as defined herein, shall be seized by
the police in accordance with section 28-5 of the Illinois criminal code5. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-4-8: ADDITIONAL GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
Whenever a game room license is issued on the basis of an application which includes other proposed facilities and operations, the failure of the applicant
to construct such other facilities and operations or the cessation or reduction by more than thirty percent (30%) of the operations or the services provided
by such other facilities, or a substantial change in the management personnel of a game room, shall be grounds for revocation of a game room license.
In addition to the grounds for revocation set forth in section 3-1-15 of this title, a license shall be revoked should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit
the operation of any amusement device contrary to the provisions of section 3-4-7 of this chapter, other ordinances of the village, or the laws of the state of
Illinois. Any revocation of authorization, license or permit issued in pursuance of the provisions of this code shall ipso facto bar reinstatement of the same,
or the granting of a new license to any corporation, partnership or individual shareholder, partner or owner of which was a shareholder, partner or owner or
a licensee whose license has heretofore been revoked, for a term of not less than one year immediately following such revocation. (1984 Code)
3-4-9: REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE OPERATION OF THEATERS AND SIMILAR PLACES OF AMUSEMENT:
A. Order: No amusement, show or theatrical shall be conducted at any time unless the audience is orderly.
B. Crowding: No amusement shall be conducted in a room that is so crowded as to create a dangerous condition because of fire and other perils. In no
event shall the occupancy limits set forth in the building code and property maintenance code be exceeded. It shall be unlawful to permit any person
excepting ushers or other theater employees to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture or theatrical is presented during the time of
such performance; and it shall be unlawful to admit to any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by the seating arrangements of the
premises.
C. Smoking: It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe on or beneath any stage or in any dressing room of any building used
as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for more than one hundred (100) persons, or in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures or
other entertainments are offered, operated, presented or exhibited.
It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises or of the occupant in charge to provide and place printed signs on which the words "No Smoking"
shall appear in letters at least four inches (4") high, in conspicuous places; at least two (2) such signs to be placed upon the stage or in the wings
thereof and one in each dressing room. (1984 Code)
3-4-10: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR THEATERS AND SIMILAR PLACES OF AMUSEMENT:
A. General Provisions: It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture or theatrical in any building or structure which does not contain the number
of exits required by the ordinances of the village or by statute concerning buildings or places intended for such performances, or in premises in which
the electric wiring does not fully comply with the village building code. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisle, corridor or
exit leading from any room or enclosure in which a motion picture performance or theatrical is being given or in which an audience for such a
performance is seated.
B. Ventilation: All places used for the exhibition of motion pictures or theatricals must be kept adequately ventilated during the performance and for so long
as the audience remains therein.
C. Scenery: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any scenery in any theater other than nonflammable scenery or such scenery as shall have been
rendered nonflammable by the application of fire preventive coatings.
D. Exit Lights: It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or hall used as an assembly hall with accommodations for one
hundred (100) persons or more, in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures and other entertainments are offered, operated or presented, to
provide and place a sign, on which the word "Exit" shall appear in letters at least six inches (6") high, over every door or other opening from such hall to
every means of egress therefrom; and a light shall be provided with a red globe and placed at or over such sign, which light shall be kept burning
during the entire period that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the hall. (1984 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 86/702
3-4-11: INSURANCE:
It shall be unlawful to conduct an amusement, parade, or exhibition on any public street, alley or other public way, and any carnival to be held within the
corporate limits of the village, unless the licensee or permittee, as the case may be, first agrees in writing to defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless
the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers working on behalf of the village, from and against liability, losses, physical
damage to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under any workers' compensation law, which may arise out of the
licensee's or permittee's acts and/or omissions and the acts and/or omissions of his, her or its employees and agents, as the case may be. In addition,
each applicant shall specify the intended date of the parade and the parade route that is being requested. Each such licensee or permittee, as the case
may be, shall carry and maintain commercial general liability and business automobile liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to do
business in the state, said insurance company having a rating of B+:VII or better in the latest edition of the "Best & Co. Insurance Guide", with policy limits
for the commercial general liability insurance of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury,
personal injury and property damage with a general aggregate limit of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) or an event specific aggregate of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The policy limits for the business automobile liability insurance shall be not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. Such insurance to be utilized to protect the licensee or permittee and the
village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the village, as their interests may appear, from and
against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities, including, without limitation, attorney fees which may arise or result
directly or indirectly from or by reason of any such liability, loss, injury or damage. Said policy shall contain a provision requiring the insured to notify the
village not less than ten (10) days prior to cancellation or change of any policy. The village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and
volunteers while acting on behalf of the village, shall appear as additional named insureds under each policy. At least ten (10) days prior to commencing
any operations in the village, the licensee shall provide the village with certificates of insurance for each policy. Each licensee shall also carry such
insurance as may be necessary to protect it and the village from all claims under the workers' compensation laws from time to time in effect that may be
applicable to the licensee. All insurance required by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect for the entire period of the license or permit. The
certificate(s) of insurance, and, if requested, the policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof, shall be approved by the village attorney and
shall be deposited with and kept on file by the village clerk. (Ord. 96-14, 2-6-1996)
Chapter 5
DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY ESTABLISHMENTS
3-5-1: SELF-SERVICE COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. Attendant Requirements: There shall be present in every self-service coin-operated dry cleaning establishment during all operational hours of the
establishment an attendant who is at least eighteen (18) years old. The attendant shall not permit any person under the age of fifteen (15) years to
operate any such machine.
The attendant shall be familiar with the operation of the machines in the establishment, and with risks incident to the operation of the machines, and
capable of taking the necessary precautions.
B. Approval of Plans: Any person establishing a dry cleaning establishment of the coin-operated self-service type shall be required to submit to the
Building Director for his approval a complete set of plans and specifications of the building in which any such dry cleaning establishment is to be
located and also a complete diagram of the floor plan of each room to be occupied by such dry cleaning establishment, correctly showing the
arrangement or setting of all machinery and equipment to be installed therein. Each such plan shall be explicit and complete.
3-5-2: SELF-SERVICE COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRY ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. Attendant Requirements: There shall be present in every self-service coin-operated laundry during all operational hours of the establishment an
attendant who is at least eighteen (18) years old. The attendant shall not permit any person under the age of fifteen (15) years to operate any such
machine.
The attendant shall be familiar with the operation of the machines in the establishment, and with risks incident to the operation of the machines, and
capable of taking the necessary precautions.
Where a self-service coin-operated dry cleaning establishment and a self-service coin-operated laundry establishment are operated on the same
premises, only one attendant shall be required.
B. Approval of Plans: Any person establishing a laundry of the coin-operated self-service type shall be required to submit to the Building Director for his
approval a complete set of plans and specifications of the building in which such establishment is to be located, and also a complete diagram of the
floor plan of each room to be occupied by such establishment, showing the arrangement or setting of all machinery and equipment to be installed
therein. Each such plan shall be explicit and complete. (1984 Code)
Chapter 6
MOTELS AND AUTO COURTS
3-6-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license to operate a "motel or auto court" shall, in addition to the information required in Section 3-1-3, specify the maximum number of
persons and vehicles to be accommodated. The application shall be accompanied by plans of the toilet, bath and wash basin facilities, slop sinks, water
faucets, sewer connections, driveways and other improvements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 87/702
3-6-2: BUILDING AND PREMISES REGULATIONS:
A. Fire Walls: No parking space shall be provided for motor vehicles within ten feet (10') of any building or structure used for housing accommodation in an
auto court unless the wall facing such parking space is constructed of fireproof construction materials and unless the windows in such wall, if any, are
equipped with reinforced fire-resistant glass.
B. Lights: Any area or premises of an auto court open to use by the public or by all persons staying in or being accommodated in such court shall be kept
adequately lighted at nighttime; provided, that such lights must be so shaded or otherwise regulated as to prevent them from shining upon any adjacent
premises.
C. Sanitary Requirements: No such premises shall be operated as an auto court unless they are equipped with adequate toilet and other sanitary facilities
to serve the total number of persons accommodated therein. All such sanitary facilities shall be properly connected with the sanitary sewer system of
the Village.
D. Regulations: It shall be unlawful to permit any violation of any ordinance or law on or in any auto court; such premises must be kept clean and sanitary
at all times, and all waste material must be removed therefrom at least once every twenty four (24) hours. (1984 Code)
Chapter 7
STABLES
3-7-1: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
No person being the owner, manager, agent, operator or employee of a stable or other business where horses, ponies, donkeys, mules or other animals
ordinarily used for riding are kept, boarded or otherwise maintained for public hire or for any remuneration shall permit or suffer any such animal kept,
boarded or otherwise maintained at said stable or other business as aforesaid to run at large in the Village in any public place or upon private property not
owned or controlled by the licensee; provided, however, that any such animal under the direct physical control of a rider may be ridden or walked upon a
public highway so as not to interfere with traffic. (1984 Code)
Chapter 8
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
3-8-1: RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The rules and regulations relating to storage stations heretofore promulgated by the State of Illinois, Department of Law Enforcement, Division of Fire
Prevention, as revised August 15, 1971, are hereby expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
3-8-2: BULK SALES PROHIBITED:
No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any service station except into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles when such tanks are connected with the carburation
system of such vehicles; except as provided in Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter 1271/2, section 151. (1984 Code)
Chapter 9
PARKING LOTS
3-9-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
In addition to the information required under Section 3-1-3, the application shall include a description of the location, size, number of cars to be
accommodated, and a statement of any various services other than parking, or of any commodities for sale, offered to patrons of the parking lot.
3-9-2:PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Comply With Zoning: No license shall be issued for the operation of a parking lot which does not meet the requirements of the Bartlett Zoning
Ordinance.
B. Driveways: No driveway to a parking lot shall be constructed excepting in full compliance with the ordinances relative to the issuance of permits for
driveways; and it shall be the duty of the operator of each parking lot to maintain the sidewalk and parkway over which such driveway passes in good
condition. Provided, however, that no driveway fee need be paid by the holders of a parking lot license.
C. Surface: It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot unless the surface thereof is covered with concrete, asphalt, macadam or similar paving; and such
parking lot shall at all times be kept clean and free from dust or refuse.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 88/702
D. Buildings: Any buildings constructed on a parking lot shall be constructed in full compliance with the ordinances pertaining thereto, and shall have
exterior walls of nonflammable material; provided, that any structure used or to be us ed for office purposes only may have less than the minimum area
requirements prescribed for residences or commercial buildings.
3-9-3:CONDITION OF VEHICLES:
A. It shall be unlawful to park or store, in any parking lot, any vehicle which is not in a condition ready for use, or to permit the parking of any abandoned,
junked or partially disabled vehicle in any such lot. It shall also be unlawful to use any parking lot for storage or parking of any vehicle for the primary
purpose of displaying the same for sale, or to use any parking lot or portion thereof as an automobile repair shop or for the purpose of repairing
vehicles.
B. Intoxicating Liquors: It shall be unlawful to serve intoxicating liquor for consumption in any car parked in a parking lot, and it shall be unlawful for any
person in a car parked in a parking lot to drink any intoxicating liquor while therein. (1984 Code)
Chapter 10
PUBLIC GARAGES
3-10-1: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Building: It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any public garage in a frame building, or in any building or structure used for school, church or
theater purposes, or in any building which does not conform to the requirements of the Bartlett Building Code. The premises of every garage must be
kept clean and free from flammable waste.
B. Driveway Locations: No driveway for a public garage shall be within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the external boundary of any premises used for
church, school, place of public assembly, Village Hall or fire station purposes.
3-10-2:PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Smoking: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or light a cigar, cigarette or pipe in any public garage.
B. Changing Identification Marks: It shall be unlawful for any person to change the identification marks on the engine of any car or automobile in any public
garage. It shall also be unlawful to change the license tags on such cars, excepting to accord with the register of motor vehicles kept by the Secretary
of the State of Illinois. (1984 Code)
Chapter 11
TAXICABS
3-11-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
In addition to the information required under Section 3-1-3 of this Title, the application shall include the number of cabs or vehicles to be operated in the
Village reasonably required to determine whether the applicant meets the insurance requirements of Section 3-11-2 below, a complete description of each
vehicle for which a license is requested, including the manufacturer of such vehicle, its motor number, serial number and seating capacity, excluding the
driver's seat or any part thereof, State license number, cab number, color of vehicle and horsepower. (1984 Code)
3-11-2: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
No person or entity shall operate a taxicab service in the Village unless he maintains in effect at all times insurance coverage as follows:
Any licensee operating a taxicab service under this Chapter shall defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless the Village, its officials, officers,
employees, agents, consultants and volunteers working on behalf of the Village, from and against liability, losses, physical damage to property, and bodily
injury or death to persons, including payments made under any worker's compensation law, which may arise out of the licensee's operation of its taxicab
service within or without the limits of the Village. Each licensee shall further indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officials, officers, employees,
agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, from and against any liability or losses sustained as a direct or indirect result of
the action of the licensee's agents or employees or in any way arising out of the granting of his license. Each licensee shall carry commercial general
liability insurance and business automobile liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State and having a rating of B+:VII
or better in the latest edition of the Best & Co. Insurance Guide. The policy limits for the commercial general liability insurance shall be not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage with a general aggregate limit of
no less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00). The limits for the business automobile liability insurance shall be not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage. Such insurance to be utilized to protect the licensee and the
Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, as their interests may appear, from and
against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities, including without limitation attorney's fees which may arise or result
directly or indirectly from or by reason of any such liability, loss, injury or damage. Said policy shall contain a provision requiring the insured to notify the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 89/702
Village not less than ten (10) days prior to cancellation or change of any policy. The Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and
volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, shall appear as additional named insureds under each policy. At least ten (10) days prior to commencing
any operations in the Village, the licensee shall provide the Village with certificates of insurance for each policy. Each licensee shall also carry such
insurance as may be necessary to protect it and the Village from all claims under the worker's compensation laws from time to time in effect that may be
applicable to the licensee. All insurance required by this Chapter shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire period of the license. The
certificate(s) of insurance, and, if requested, the policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof, shall be approved by the Village Attorney and
shall be deposited with and kept on file by the Village Clerk. (Ord. 96-14, 2-6-1996)
3-11-3: CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE:
No person shall drive a taxicab in the Village unless he has a currently valid chauffeur's license issued by the State. (1984 Code)
3-11-4: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. No taxicab shall be operated in the Village unless it is equipped with all of the safety equipment required under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle
Code expressly incorporated herein by reference and the driver has in his possession a certificate issued by a State approved testing facility certifying
all of such equipment is in proper operating condition.
B. No taxicab shall be operated in the Village unless it bears on each side in letters not less than four inches (4") high the name of the taxicab company,
and, if it is not the same as the name of the cab company, the name of the licensee. If more than one taxicab is operated in the Village by a licensee,
each taxicab shall be designated by a different number and such number shall also appear on each side of such cab in letters not less than four inches
(4") high. (1984 Code)
3-11-5: OPERATION OF TAXICABS:
A. Taxicab Operation: No taxicab shall be operated in the Village in violation of the provisions of chapter 11, Rules of the Road, of the Illinois Vehicle
Code1 expressly incorporated herein by reference.
B. Unlawful Use: It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor.
C. Passengers: It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as passenger any person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person
conducts himself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger.
D. Direct Route: The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters the
cab. (1984 Code)
3-11-6: RATES OF FARE:
Rates of fare shall not exceed eighty five cents ($0.85) for the first half (1/2) mile, and sixty cents ($0.60) for each succeeding half (1/2) mile or portion
thereof. It shall be unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay lawful fare at the termination of a trip.
No extra charge shall be made for baggage or parcels the size of which permits them to be carried in the cab. (1984 Code)
3-11-7: CAB STANDS:
The President and Board of Trustees, from time to time hereafter, may designate certain locations as cab stands.
Each cab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected under the supervision of the Chief of Police. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, other
than a licensed taxicab, in any cab stand.
A licensed taxicab may be parked in any cab stand while such taxicab is in the charge of its driver on duty awaiting a fare. (1984 Code)
3-11-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In addition to the grounds for revocation set forth in Section 3-1-15 of this Title, a taxicab operator's license may be revoked for:
A. Three (3) or more violations of the provisions of chapter 11, Rules of the Road, of the Illinois Vehicle Code2, or for any violation of sections 5/11-501 or
5/11-503 of the Illinois Vehicle Code expressly incorporated herein by reference.
B. The operation in the Village of any vehicle which has not been certified by a State approved testing facility to be in compliance with all of the safety
requirements of chapter 12 of the Illinois Vehicle Code3. (1984 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 90/702
Chapter 12
BUS SERVICES
3-12-1: LICENSE REQUIRED, EXCEPTIONS:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Section 3-1-1 of this Title, no license shall be required for the following:
A. The business of operating a scheduled school bus service within the corporate limits of the Village.
B. The business of operating a scheduled bus service for the transportation of persons within the corporate limits of the Village, where such business
service is otherwise being regulated by the Illinois Commerce Commission and/or the Interstate Commerce Commission. (1984 Code)
3-12-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
In addition to the information required under Section 3-1-3 of this Title, an application for a license under this Chapter shall contain the following
information:
A. A list of the names and addresses of all governmental units and all agencies or authorities organized thereunder that license and/or franchise the
applicant for the operation of a bus service for the transportation of persons.
B. A copy of the applicant's most recent financial statements, including but not limited to: balance sheet, profit and loss statement and statement of
changes in financial condition, for the most recent fiscal year available.
C. A listing of fares, routes, schedules and the location of all proposed boarding locations and stops under which the applicant proposes to operate,
including a map showing the proposed routes.
D. A list of the type of vehicles which the applicant proposes to utilize during the term of the license, including a full and complete description of such
equipment, and the certificate of safety for each vehicle as required in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13-101.
E. Each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the Village officials in the issuing of the license.
All applications shall be signed by the applicant or its duly authorized representative and verified by oath or affidavit. (1984 Code)
3-12-3: FEE PERIOD:
A. The license fee provided in Section 3-1-1 of this Title shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by this Title, including parking fees for parking in
the Municipal Commuter Parking Lot. The Village Clerk shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the number of buses covered by each license. Such tag
or sticker shall be displayed in the right front windshield on each bus while it is in use.
B. The licensee shall notify the Clerk of the motor number and State license number of each bus operated and of the corresponding Village tag or sticker
number. (1984 Code)
3-12-4: ROUTES:
A. The issuance of a license shall be deemed to be approval of those routes specified in the application for license. Upon the issuance of a license under
this Chapter, the licensee shall file with the Village Clerk a map or diagram showing the routes to be served. Each street, road or highway shall be
identified and any public transportation service within two (2) miles of the route(s) shall be shown or mentioned.
B. Should any licensee desire to make any changes in its routes, the licensee shall first submit a revised route plan to the Village Board and receive its
approval prior to placing said revised route plan into effect. Residents, carriers or other operators and interested individuals shall be given an
opportunity to voice approval or objections to the proposed route change. (1984 Code)
3-12-5: LOCATION OF STOPS:
The location of all bus stops shall be subject to regulation and approval by the President and Board of Trustees. (1984 Code)
3-12-6: REGULATION OF OPERATORS:
No person shall operate any bus unless such person has a valid license issued by the State with a proper classification to permit the operation of such
vehicle. (1984 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 91/702
3-12-7: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
Unless otherwise provided by the Village, operations conducted under the provisions of this Chapter shall be exempt from compliance with Village vehicle
or axle weight restrictions on Village streets. However, each licensee shall observe all speed restrictions and other traffic regulations imposed by the
Village within the Village. (1984 Code)
3-12-8: MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC WAYS:
The Village reserves the right to maintain the streets, alleys, public ways and facilities located within its corporate limits in such a manner as the Village
shall, in its exclusive discretion, determine. The Village shall not be liable to any licensee for any interruption in service or for interference with the
operation of any licensee's bus transportation system arising in any manner, directly or indirectly, out of the use or maintenance by the Village of the
streets, alleys, public ways and facilities located within the corporate limits of the Village. (1984 Code)
3-12-9: EMERGENCY ROUTE CHANGES:
A. In extraordinary circumstances and on a temporary basis, a licensee may deviate from its authorized routes without formal approval of a route change.
Deviations, however, shall be limited to:
1. A temporary closing of a road by virtue of construction, paving or weather conditions.
2. The temporary establishment of one-way traffic on any road.
B. In the event of a temporary deviation of a route, a licensee shall make every effort to notify passengers of the change and to resume the regular route
operations at the earliest practicable moment.
C. Whenever any licensee has cause to believe that any temporary route change will become permanent, the licensee shall apply for a permanent route
change as specified in subsection 3-12-4B. (1984 Code)
3-12-10: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No person or entity shall operate a bus transportation service in the Village unless he or it maintains in effect at all times insurance coverage as follows:
Any licensee operating a bus transportation service under this Chapter shall defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless the Village, its officials, officers,
employees, agents, consultants and volunteers working on behalf of the Village, from and against liability, losses, physical damage to property and bodily
injury or death to persons, including payments made under any worker's compensation law, which may arise out of the licensee's operation of its bus
transportation service within or without the limits of the Village. Each licensee shall further indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officials, officers,
employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village from and against any liability or losses sustained as a direct or indirect
result of the action of the licensee's agents or employees or in any way arising out of the granting of his license. Each licensee shall carry commercial
general liability and business automobile liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, said insurance company
having a rating of B+:VII or better in the latest edition of the Best & Co. Insurance Guide, with policy limits for the commercial general liability insurance of
not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage with a general
aggregate limit of no less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00). The policy limits for the business automobile liability insurance shall be not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. Such insurance to be utilized to protect the licensee and
the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, as their interests may appear, from
and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities, including, without limitation, attorney's fees which may arise or result
directly or indirectly from or by reason of any such liability, loss, injury or damage. Said policy shall contain a provision requiring the insured to notify the
Village not less than ten (10) days prior to cancellation or change of any policy. The Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and
volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, shall appear as additional named insureds under each policy. At least ten (10) days prior to commencing
any operations in the Village, the licensee shall provide the Village with certificates of insurance for each policy. Each licensee shall also carry such
insurance as may be necessary to protect it and the Village from all claims under the worker's compensation laws from time to time in effect that may be
applicable to the licensee. All insurance required by this Chapter shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire period of the license. The
certificate(s) of insurance, and, if requested by the Village Attorney, the policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof, shall be approved by the
Village Attorney and shall be deposited with and kept on file by the Village Clerk. (Ord. 96-14, 2-6-1996)
3-12-11: BUS FARES:
Bus fares shall not exceed the following rate limits without approval of the Village for service from the Village to downtown Chicago and return:
Monthly service $100.00
Weekly service 25.00
(1984 Code)
Chapter 13
ASPHALT PLANTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 92/702
3-13-1: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any such plant at any time between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or at any time on
Sunday. (1984 Code)
3-13-2: REQUIREMENTS:
No such plant shall be operated unless it is equipped with adequate devices in good working order to prevent the escape of dense smoke, noxious fumes,
soot or dust in accordance with the more stringent of: 1) the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, or 2) the rules and regulations of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. (1984 Code)
Chapter 14
FACTORIES, MACHINE SHOPS
3-14-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
In addition to the information required under Section 3-1-3, an application for a factory license shall include the number of employees of such factory on
every shift. If requested by the Village Clerk, the applicant shall furnish certified copies of all payroll records required by law to be furnished to the State of
Illinois; provided, however, that only those records need be furnished which indicate the number of employees of such licensee. (1984 Code)
Chapter 15
REDI-MIX PLANTS
3-15-1: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any such plant at any time between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or at any time on
Sunday.
3-15-2: REQUIREMENTS:
No such plant shall be operated unless it is equipped with adequate devices in good working order to prevent the escape of dense smoke, noxious fumes,
soot or dust in accordance with the more stringent of 1) the regulations of the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance, or 2) the rules and regulations of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. (1984 Code)
Chapter 16
QUARRIES, GRAVEL PITS AND MINING OPERATIONS
3-16-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
In addition to the information required under Section 3-1-3, the application shall state thereon the location of the quarry, gravel pit or mining operation and
shall contain a statement by the applicant that all of the requirements of this Chapter have been complied with.
3-16-2: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
Every person or other entity maintaining or operating a quarry, gravel pit or mining operation shall maintain records indicating:
A. The identity of every entity which hauls gravel, sand, clay, dirt or other materials ("gravel") from such quarry, gravel pit or mining operation ("gravel pit"),
the address of such entity.
B. The identity of the liability insurance carrier of such entity, the policy number, limits and expiration date of each policy.
C. The empty weight of each vehicle operated by such entity on the Village streets.
D. The gross weight of each such vehicle when it leaves the quarry, gravel pit or mining operation.
E. The number of trips made by each gravel truck operator each day.
3-16-3: GRAVEL TRUCK OPERATIONS, BOND REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 93/702
Every person or other entity maintaining or operating a quarry, gravel pit or mining operation shall:
A. Post a bond in such amount (in cash or with such sureties and on such forms as shall be approved by the corporate authorities) as the corporate
authorities determine from time to time to be required to guarantee the proper repair of Village streets damaged by such gravel truck operators on the
basis of the in formation supplied pursuant to Section 3-16-2 above, and pending determination of the proper amount of the bond to be required of
each individual gravel pit operator, the amount of bond required is determined to be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
B. Repair or cause to be repaired all damage to the Village streets caused by the gravel hauling activities of gravel truck operators hauling gravel from
such gravel pit.
C. No entity which fails to comply with the bond and record keeping provisions of this Chapter shall be permitted to haul gravel from any gravel pit.
3-16-4: COMPLY WITH ORDINANCES:
No license shall be issued to an applicant who fails to comply with the provisions of the Surface Mine Land Conservation and Regulation Act.1
3-16-5: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
Every person maintaining or operating a quarry, gravel pit or other mining operation shall equip the same with adequate safeguards both as concerns the
public and the employees of said quarry, gravel pit or mining operation. Each quarry, gravel pit or mining operation must be surrounded by a fence at least
four feet (4') high which will safeguard the public.
3-16-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No owner or operator of a quarry, gravel pit or mining operation shall permit the same to operate between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M., nor at any time between six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on a Saturday evening and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the following Monday morning.
3-16-7: CHILDREN:
No owner or operator of a quarry, gravel pit or mining operation, or foreman or watchman in charge of the work shall allow any child or children sixteen
(16) years or less to be in or around a quarry, gravel pit or mining operation at any time of the day or night.
3-16-8: RAILROAD SIDINGS:
All railroad sidings into a quarry, gravel pit or other mining operation shall be adequately marked and warning bells or signals placed at any intersection of
such siding with a public thoroughfare. (1984 Code)
Chapter 17
PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS AND DEALERS IN SECONDHAND
ARTICLES
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
BULLION: Precious metals in bulk form cast into bars, bricks, cubes, rounds, ingots and/or government minted and/or issued coins that are traded on
commodity markets which is valued by its mass and purity rather than by its face value as money or currency, and which does not have established
numismatic or collectible value which is greater than its value as a commodity.
COIN DEALERS: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or limited liability company engaged in the business of buying and/or selling coins for their
value as collector's items, for their value for gold content or silver content, or buying coins containing any gold or silver at a price above the face value of
the coin.
COVERED TRANSACTION: Any purchase or sale of bullion, jewelry or secondhand article made of or containing precious metal, or precious metal scrap,
by a coin dealer as defined in this section; any purchase or sale by a "gold buyer" as defined in this section; any purchase or sale by a "silver buyer" as
defined in this section; any purchase or sale by a "precious metal dealer" as defined in this section; any action by a "pawnbroker" as defined in this section
resulting in the pawnbroker obtaining possession of any bullion, coin with value above its face value, any gold, any object made of gold or gold alloy, any
silver, or any object made of silver, or of silvery alloy, any other precious metal or any object made of other precious metal.
ENGAGE IN OR CONDUCT BUSINESS: The purchase, sale, barter or exchange of any item of property, including the advertising therefor, and including
such business conducted by an established dealer in a permanent location and including any temporary, transient or itinerant business.
GOLD BUYER: Any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or limited liability company engaged in the business of buying gold or
objects made of gold or of gold alloy from the public.
ITINERANT DEALER: Any "precious metal dealer" as defined herein who engages in any temporary or transient business conducted in a shop, room,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 94/702
hotel room or other premises rented for any duration of one to thirty (30) consecutive days or used on a temporary basis.
MERCHANT: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or limited liability company engaged in the business of buying and selling anywhere in the village.
PAWNBROKER: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or limited liability company engaged in the business of lending money secured by the deposit
or pledge of physically delivered personal property (other than property the ownership of which is subject to legal dispute, securities, printed evidence of
indebtedness, or printed evidence of ownership of personal property) and taking possession of the personal property, or who deals in the purchase of such
personal property on the condition of selling it back at a stipulated price. A person, firm, partnership, corporation or limited liability company shall be
deemed to be a pawnbroker whether the transaction takes the form of a loan by the pawnbroker secured by the personal property, or a sale to the
pawnbroker of personal property with the right to repurchase within a stated period of time, but the business of pawnbroker does not include the lending of
money on deposit or pledge of title to property.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock company, corporation, limited liability company, association, or
combination of individuals or business entities of whatever form or character.
PRECIOUS METAL: A rare naturally occurring metallic chemical element of high economic value, including gold, silver, platinum and palladium.
PRECIOUS METAL DEALER: Any gold buyer, silver buyer, coin dealer, pawnbroker or person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, or merchant, and any principal thereof, regularly engaged for thirty (30) days or more from one location in or conducting business for the
purchase, sale, barter, exchange or the pawn of coins, bullion, precious metal, precious metal scrap, or secondhand articles or jewelry that is made out of
or which contains one or more precious metals for the purpose of purchasing, reselling, trading, bartering or pawning the precious metal scrap therefrom.
PRECIOUS METAL SCRAP: Any secondhand item, including jewelry, broken jewelry, watches, silverware or object made of, or containing one or more
precious metals, which is not in the form of bullion.
SECONDHAND ARTICLE: Any item of personal property or object of value, previously owned or used, which is not purchased or sold as new.
Secondhand articles do not include property purchased by one licensed, established merchant from another within or without the village in the normal
course of business.
SILVER BUYER: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or limited liability company engaged in the business of buying silver or objects made of silver
or silver alloy from the public.
VILLAGE: The village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage and Kane Counties, Illinois. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-2: BUSINESSES NOT COVERED BY PRECIOUS METAL DEALER LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND OTHER DEALERS OF
SECONDHAND ARTICLES:
A. This chapter shall not affect persons that sell items otherwise covered by this chapter to the public, but purchase the same from dealers, manufacturers
or wholesalers, and do not purchase such items from the public.
B. Except for charitable organizations, any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company operating, engaged in or conducting business
as a secondhand store that sells, purchases, barters or exchanges secondhand articles other than gold, silver, precious metals, or items made of or
containing gold, silver or other precious metal and which are not covered transactions as defined in this chapter, shall nevertheless keep a record of all
articles purchased, which records shall be, together with the articles themselves, open to inspection by any member of the police department at all
reasonable hours. Merchants of secondhand articles that occasionally purchase antiques or items such as household goods, costume jewelry or
antique jewelry that may be made out of or contain a precious metal, but which purchases and the resale thereof are incidental to its other operations,
meaning not more than thirty percent (30%) of its total gross receipts per calendar year are generated by the sale of such secondhand articles that are
made out of or which contain precious metals, are exempt from the recordkeeping requirements of section 3-17-8 of this chapter and the transmission
of report requirements set forth in section 3-17-9 of this chapter, but are required to comply with the recordkeeping requirements of this section. (Ord.
2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or limited liability company shall be engaged in the business of gold buyer, silver buyer, coin
dealer, or precious metal dealer anywhere in this village without complying with this chapter and obtaining a license therefor. Any pawnbroker accepting
any coins containing any gold or silver at a price above the face value and any pawnbroker accepting any secondhand article or object made of or
containing gold, silver or other precious metal as security for a loan or in a purchase with the seller having a right to repurchase within a period of time is
required to comply with this chapter and obtain a license therefor. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-4: FEES:
The fees for licenses hereunder shall be as provided in this section. One license, one license fee and one investigation fee shall entitle a merchant or
pawnbroker to engage in any one or all of the businesses of gold buyer, silver buyer, coin dealer or precious metal dealer. Such fee shall be in addition to
all other license fees for the pawnbroker business or other business engaged in by the applicant. The investigation fee and the license fee shall be
deposited with the village clerk at the time the application is made.
A. Nonrefundable investigation fee, due from each applicant for a precious metal dealer license or itinerant dealer license, of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
B. Annual license fee, to be refunded if license is not granted, of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
C. Temporary itinerant dealer license fee, to be refunded if the temporary license is not granted, of fifty dollars ($50.00) per week that the business will be
in operation, but not over one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 95/702
3-17-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applicants for a license under this chapter, whether a person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock company, corporation or limited
liability company shall file within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof and each year thereafter on or before May 1, a written, sworn application on a
form provided by the village clerk, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, by all joint venturers if a joint venture, by the
president if an association or joint stock company, and by all managers if a limited liability company, with the village clerk showing:
A. The name or names of the principals, agents, and employees of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in
the village; the local address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such
person or persons; the capacity in which such persons will act (as proprietor, principal, agent, employee or otherwise); the name and address of the
person, firm, corporation or limited liability company for whose account the business will be carried on if any; and if a corporation or limited liability
company under the laws of what state it is incorporated or organized. As used in this subsection, "principal" means the proprietor if a sole
proprietorship, the partners if a partnership, the joint venturers if a joint venture, the directors and officers of an association, the directors and officers
and each stockholder owning more than twenty percent (20%) of a joint stock company or corporation, and the managers and each member owning
more than twenty percent (20%) membership interest in a limited liability company.
B. The fingerprints of the principals, agents and employees of precious metal dealers.
C. Evidence provided by the applicant to the satisfaction of the chief of police that:
1. None of the principals, agents or employees of the applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor involving theft, receiving stolen goods,
burglary, robbery, money laundering, crime of deception or other fraud, sale of illegal drugs or narcotics, or any felony in the federal or state courts,
within the five (5) years immediately preceding filing the application;
2. No fraud, misrepresentation or false statement of material or relevant facts is contained in the application submitted by the applicant; or
3. The applicant has not engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise within the five (5) years immediately preceding filing the application.
D. The place or places in the village where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that said
business shall be conducted.
E. The place, or places if more than one location, including any other permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six (6)
months next preceding the date of said application conducted an activity subject to the regulations hereof, stating the nature thereof and giving the post
office, street addresses, and town, village, or city of any building or office in which said business was conducted.
F. A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers.
G. Whether or not the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted within the last five (5)
years of a felony, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal or state law, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor.
H. Credentials from the person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock company, corporation or limited liability company for which the
applicant proposes to do business, authority for the applicant to act as such representative.
I. Such other information as to the identity or character of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business or the
method or plan of doing such business as the chief of police may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in the protection of the public good.
J. The application shall state thereon that "It is unlawful for any person to make a false statement on this application". Any false statement made on the
application form will void the application and constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law and shall be grounds for the nonissuance,
suspension and/or revocation of a license required and/or issued under this chapter. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-6: STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
After the filing of an application accompanied by the required fees, the chief of police will conduct an investigation to be made of the applicant and the
applicable principals, agents and employees of the applicant. A precious metal dealer's license shall be issued by the village clerk unless the village clerk
finds, on the basis of the application and reports submitted by the chief of police, or his designee, that:
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for such establishment license; or
B. Based on the entry of a final, unappealable order by any court, administrative agency, or hearing officer finding that the applicant or other person or
entity employed by the applicant or owning an interest in the entity subject to the requirements of this chapter:
1. Is guilty of any felony; or
2. Is guilty of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to:
a. Theft; or
b. Possession or receipt of stolen property or dealing in the sale of stolen property; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 96/702
c. Robbery; or
d. Burglary; or
e. Crime of deception or fraud; or
f. Sale of illegal drugs or narcotics; or
g. Money laundering.
3. Has been engaged in acts constituting a nuisance in fact; or
4. Has been engaged in acts constituting a nuisance per se as enumerated in Illinois statutes or this code; or
5. Has been engaged in acts constituting a danger to the public, health, safety or morals; or
6. Has violated the consumer fraud laws of the state of Illinois, or any other state, or of the United States; or
7. Engaged in a business or profession in defiance of the state statute or local ordinance regulating or prohibiting the same, which includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
a. Theft; or
b. Possession or receipt of stolen property or dealing in the sale of stolen property; or
c. Robbery; or
d. Burglary; or
e. Crime of deception or fraud; or
f. Sale of illegal drugs or narcotics; or
g. Money laundering; or
h. The pawnbroker regulation act1.
8. Has been found to have violated any substantially identical provision of the ordinance of any other municipality by the final, unappealable order of
any court, hearing officer of administrative agency.
C. The premises upon or from which the proposed business activity is to be conducted does not comply with the requirements of this code, including the
building code, the property maintenance code, zoning ordinance, and all other applicable ordinances of the village and the rules and regulations of the
state fire marshal.
D. No license shall be issued or renewed to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or limited liability company that has repeatedly and wilfully violated
this chapter.
E. No license shall be issued or renewed if any officer, partner or owner of twenty percent (20%) or more of the shares or membership interest of the
applicant has repeatedly and wilfully violated this chapter. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-7: PROCESSING LICENSE APPLICATIONS AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The village clerk shall, within thirty (30) days following the date of the filing of the application for a precious metal dealer's license, or itinerant dealer's
license, and payment of the required fees, issue the applicant a license hereunder provided that the chief of police has first given his written report that the
applicant has qualified for said license. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-8: RECORD OF TRANSACTION:
A. Each merchant, pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, and itinerant dealer subject to this chapter shall keep the following contemporaneous record
concerning each item received in a covered transaction in the English language at the time of each covered transaction within the village in the course
of his business, an accurate account of each transaction:
1. A digital photograph of the item unless it is bullion.
2. An accurate description of the item or items purchased, bartered, exchanged or received, including any marking that is engraved, etched or written
upon any item bartered, exchanged or received.
3. The name, residence address, driver's license number and description of the person selling, bartering or exchanging any item in a covered
transaction, including, the hair color, sex, approximate height, weight, date of birth and any distinguishing features of such person.
B. This record shall be kept daily in one of the following ways:
1. Entered into a computerized recordkeeping system approved and designated by the chief of police; or
2. In a bound book, or on a continuous sheet of paper or tape, handwritten in ink or typed, so that it will be obvious that an entry has been removed.
Such information may be made on cards, individual sheets or order pads if such sheet or card is numbered, so that it will be obvious if an entry is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 97/702
removed.
C. With respect to pawnbrokers that take possession of bullion, jewelry, or secondhand articles made of or containing any precious metal, the
recordkeeping requirements and the other duties, obligations and requirements imposed by this chapter shall not in any manner alter or amend the
pawnbroker's duties, obligations and requirements under state law, including, but not limited to, the pawnbroker regulation act2, and the duties,
obligations, and requirements imposed on pawnbrokers by this chapter shall be in addition thereto. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-9: REPORTS TO POLICE:
Computerized recordkeeping entries containing the required information and digital photographs as required by section 3-17-8 of this chapter shall be
entered and transmitted by the precious metal dealer or pawnbroker to and received by the chief of police or his designee via the internet within the same
business day of the purchase, barter, exchange, or pawn of each item in a covered transaction, or alternatively, written records containing the information
and digital photographs as required by section 3-17-8 of this chapter shall be delivered by the precious metal dealer or pawnbroker to the chief of police or
his designee each day that a covered transaction occurs within the same day as the purchase, barter, exchange or pawn of each item in a covered
transaction. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-10: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Every precious metal dealer shall admit to his premises at any reasonable time any law enforcement officer to examine his computerized recordkeeping
system user interface or written record as required to be kept pursuant to section 3-17-8 of this chapter, as well as articles purchased or received which
are within such premises. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-11: ARTICLES TO BE RETAINED:
No precious metal dealer shall sell, melt, change the form of, or dispose of any jewelry, secondhand article or precious metal scrap received by him, of
which he is required to make record and report under this chapter, within five (5) business days after taking possession of such jewelry, secondhand article
or precious metal scrap, or within five (5) business days after entering the required information into the designated computerized recordkeeping system, or
physically delivering the written record to the chief of police or his designee, whichever period is longer. All such jewelry, secondhand articles and precious
metal scrap shall be retained in his possession at the location specified in the license required herein during the five (5) business day period. For purposes
of this section, "business days" shall mean Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays (except for recognized national holidays) and shall
not include Saturdays or Sundays. The five (5) day retention period shall not be applicable to bullion. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-12: PROHIBITIONS:
A. No precious metal dealer or pawnbroker shall have in his place of business or in his possession, or shall have acquired and resold, bartered or
exchanged, any item, article or property which is proved to have been stolen, the account and report of which he has not kept and reported as herein
prescribed.
B. It shall be unlawful for any precious metal dealer or pawnbroker in the course of his business or occupation to acquire, by purchase, barter, exchange or
otherwise, any secondhand articles, bullion or goods containing precious metal from any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
C. It shall be unlawful for any precious metal dealer or pawnbroker to acquire, by purchase, barter, exchange or otherwise, goods bearing evidence of a
serial number or other identifying mark which has been tampered with or scratched or obliterated in any manner unless such person immediately
contacts the police department of the village, and make a complete report thereof.
D. It shall be unlawful for any precious metal dealer and/or pawnbroker to accept, buy or exchange any item, article, or property prior to examining the
identifying credentials of the person pawning, selling or exchanging said item(s), article(s) or property. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-13: TRANSFER OF LICENSES:
No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be assignable or otherwise transferable. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-14: TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE:
All precious metal dealers or persons who engage in or conduct business involving the purchase, sale, barter, exchange or the pawn of bullion, precious
metal scrap or secondhand articles made of or containing precious metals in the village must file an application for a precious metal dealer's license and
applicable fees, and shall cause its principal(s), owner(s) and employees to submit his, her or their fingerprints to the police department as required by this
chapter within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-15: TERMINATION:
Every license issued under this chapter shall expire on April 30 of each year unless sooner suspended or revoked. Applications for renewal, together with
the annual license fee, shall be delivered to the village clerk on or before April 1 of each year. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 98/702
3-17-16: SUSPENSION:
Any licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days by the village administrator, who shall also be
authorized to summarily order the cessation of business operations and the closing of the premises where the business is carried on for said period of time
in the event the village administrator determines that the continued conduct or operation of the business constitutes a danger to the public health, safety,
morals or welfare, in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 3-1-15 of this title, which is hereby made applicable to licenses issued under this
chapter. Hearings on the suspension of a license under this chapter, and a business license issued under chapter 1 of this title may be held concurrently.
(Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-17: REVOCATION:
Any license issued under this chapter to any precious metal dealer, itinerant dealer, pawnbroker or other person that engages in a covered transaction
under this chapter during the term of such license, may be revoked by the village president and board of trustees for any of the following causes:
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for such license.
B. The entry of a final, unappealable order by any court, administrative agency, or hearing officer finding that the licensee, or any person or entity required
to procure a license under this chapter, or file evidence of exemption as a limited sales dealer under this chapter, or of any of said licensee's principals,
agents or employees involved in the operation of an establishment in the village regulated by this chapter:
1. Is guilty of a felony; or
2. Is guilty of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to:
a. Theft; or
b. Possession or receipt of stolen property or dealing in the sale of stolen property; or
c. Robbery; or
d. Burglary; or
e. Crime of deception or fraud; or
f. Sale of illegal drugs or narcotics; or
g. Money laundering; or
3. Has been engaged in acts constituting a nuisance of fact; or
4. Has been engaged in acts constituting a nuisance per se as enumerated in Illinois statutes or this code; or
5. Has been engaged in acts constituting a danger to the public health, safety or morals; or
6. Has violated the consumer fraud laws of the state of Illinois, or other state, or of the United States; or
7. Has been engaged in a business or profession in defiance of the state statute or local ordinance regulating or prohibiting the same, which includes,
but is not limited to, the following:
a. Theft; or
b. Possession or receipt of stolen property or dealing in the sale of stolen property; or
c. Robbery; or
d. Burglary; or
e. Crime of deception or fraud; or
f. Sale of illegal drugs or narcotics; or
g. Money laundering; or
8. Has violated the pawnbroker regulation act3.
C. Failure of the licensee to pay any fine, penalty, license fee or alarm service fee owed the village.
D. Refusal by the applicant, licensee or any precious metal dealer or other person or entity who engages in or conducts business in secondhand articles
containing precious metals to permit any inspection by a duly authorized police officer or enforcement officer or employee of the village while in the
performance of their duties in making any inspection required under this chapter or any village ordinance.
E. The third violation by the licensee of any one or more of:
1. The general regulations applicable to all licensees set forth in chapter 1 of this title; or
2. The special regulations governing the licensee's business, trade or occupation set forth in chapter 1 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 99/702
3. Any violation of this chapter other than as provided in subsection F of this section.
F. Any single violation of section 3-17-11 of this chapter, where said violation is committed by a licensee, or by any principal, agent or employee of
licensee, occurring within the village.
G. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
H. No license revocation shall be effective until after the licensee has had an opportunity to have hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in
subsection 3-1-15D of this title, which section is hereby made applicable to licenses issued under this chapter.
I. Hearings on the revocation of a license issued under this chapter and the revocation of a business license may be held concurrently. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-
2012)
3-17-18: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or limited liability company violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
3-17-19: SAVING CLAUSE:
The provisions set forth in chapter 1 of this title are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter; provided, however, that in the event of any
conflict between the provisions set forth in chapter 1 of this title and the provisions set forth in this chapter, the provisions set forth in this chapter shall
control to the extent of such conflict or inconsistency. (Ord. 2012-50, 7-3-2012)
Chapter 18
SOLICITORS
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
CONTRIBUTION: The promise or grant of any donation, money, alms, food, clothing or property of any kind or value.
OBSCENITY: Any material that: a) the average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to
the prurient interest; and b) the average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions
or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and c) taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
SOLICIT: To go to any premises in the village without prior appointment or prearrangement with the occupant of such premises or to go upon any public
street, sidewalk or other property owned by the village: a) to ask for a contribution, or b) to sell, offer for sale, barter or exchange, or to take orders for the
present or future delivery of any good, service, ware, merchandise or other article or thing whatsoever.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes to any premises in the village without prior appointment or prearrangement with the occupant of such premises, or
goes upon any public street, sidewalk or other property owned by the village: a) to ask for a contribution, or b) to sell, offer for sale, barter or exchange, or
to take orders for the present or future delivery of any good, service, ware, merchandise or other article or thing whatsoever. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-2: DECLARATION OF VILLAGE POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village president and board of trustees that the occupants of premises in the village shall have the opportunity
to determine whether solicitors: a) will be invited to solicit at such premises, or b) will be prohibited from soliciting at such premises under any
circumstances. Such election shall be made by posting a notice in the manner set forth in section 3-18-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-3: FORM OF NOTICE PROHIBITING SOLICITORS:
A. Each resident who desires to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations pertaining to solicitors contained in this chapter may elect
to prohibit solicitors at his or her residence or place of business by posting upon or within thirty inches (30") of the main entrance door to his or her
residence or place of business a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size as follows:
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
B. Such notice shall be printed with letters at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. For the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the village
clerk to persons requesting them, at the cost thereof.
C. Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of such premises to prohibit solicitation as
therein stated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 100/702
D. If no such card is posted, it shall be presumed that the occupant has elected not to prohibit solicitors. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-4: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
A. It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the village to first determine whether the notice specified in section 3-18-3 of this
chapter is exhibited as therein set forth, and to be governed by any prohibitions contained in such notice.
1. If the notice states "NO SOLICITORS INVITED" then the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully leave the premises.
B. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any premises, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from such premises when
requested to do so by its occupant. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-5: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with
the occupant thereof in order to "solicit" as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at such premises in accordance with section 3-18-3 of this
chapter or oral notice given in accordance with the provisions of section 3-18-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-6: LIMITATIONS ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door or
rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose
of securing any audience with the occupant thereof and to "solicit", as herein defined, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
(local time) of any weekday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-7: FRAUD:
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to cheat or deceive any person or to make any fraudulent misrepresentation, whether through himself or herself or
through an employee or agent, while acting as a solicitor in the village. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-8: LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES:
No solicitor, nor anyone on his or her behalf, shall, for the purposes of attracting attention to his or her solicitation or to any goods, wares or merchandise
which such solicitor proposes to sell, blow a horn or use any other sound device, including any loudspeaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the village, or upon any private premises in the village, where the volume of sound emitted or produced
therefrom and reaching any portion of such public places or private premises unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life by any resident of Bartlett.
(Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-9: SOLICITING ON HIGHWAYS AND STREETS RESTRICTED:
No solicitor shall stand upon any highway or public street for the purpose of soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle in violation of section
11-1006 of the Illinois vehicle code1. Solicitation on public highways or streets in Bartlett shall be permitted only at the following intersections:
Devon Avenue and South Main Street;
Oak Avenue and North Avenue;
On Schick Road at Route 59;
On South Bartlett Road at Stearns Road;
On Struckman at Route 59;
On West Bartlett Road at Route 59;
On Westridge at West Bartlett Road;
Prospect Avenue and Devon Avenue;
Schick Road and South Bartlett Road;
Struckman Boulevard and South Bartlett Road;
and only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. daily, upon the following conditions:
A. Any solicitor engaged in solicitation upon a public street shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall wear a high visibility vest. Solicitors shall
stand on or so near to the curbside of the street as to avoid creating a traffic hazard. In no event shall solicitors stand at or near the center of any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 101/702
street.
B. The soliciting agency shall be registered with the Illinois attorney general as a charitable organization as provided by "an act to regulate solicitation and
collection for funds for charitable purposes, provide penalties for violations thereof, and making an appropriation therefor", approved July 26, 1963, as
amended.
C. The soliciting agency shall be liable for any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is causally related to any act of ordinary
negligence of the soliciting agent.
D. Prior to soliciting on any highway or public street in the village of Bartlett as provided in this section, the soliciting agency shall obtain a highway
solicitation permit and shall file with the village clerk at the time of application for such permit, the date or dates on which said highway solicitation will
occur within the village. Prior to issuance of the highway solicitation permit, the soliciting agency shall file with the village clerk: 1) a release and
indemnification agreement in the form on file with the village clerk as exhibit A from the soliciting agency agreeing for itself and its successors to
release the village from liability and to indemnify, defend and hold the village, its president and board of trustees, and its officials, officers, employees,
agents and volunteers, harmless from and against any and all liability arising out of claims for bodily injury, including personal injury and accidental
death and property damage or any such claim for damage arising out of the acts or omissions of the soliciting agency and any of the individuals
soliciting on its behalf in connection with solicitation upon any public streets or highways; and 2) a certificate of insurance to the village clerk evidencing
that the soliciting agency has commercial general liability and property damage insurance in full force and effect covering the days on which the
soliciting agency intends to solicit on the said highways or public streets in the village to protect it from claims for bodily injury, including personal injury
and accidental death, as well as claims for property damage, in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury on account
of any one occurrence, and property damage of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) on account of any one occurrence, with
combined aggregate limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Said certificate of insurance shall name the village as additional insured
thereon and shall provide the insurance policy is noncancelable unless the village is given thirty (30) days prior written notification. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-
19-2002)
3-18-10: USE OF STREETS:
No solicitor shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, right of way, or other public property, nor shall he or she be permitted to
operate in any congested area where his or her operations unreasonably impede or obstruct use of same by the public. For the purpose of this section, the
judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public unreasonably impeded
or obstructed. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-11: OBSCENE MATERIALS:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with
the occupant thereof in order to "solicit" any "obscene" writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment of "obscenity" as defined in section
3-18-1 of this chapter; provided, however, that said solicitor has knowledge of the nature of the content thereof, or recklessly fails to exercise a reasonable
inspection thereof which would have disclosed the nature of the content. Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing the prior restraint of the
solicitation of any allegedly obscene materials. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-12: UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the corporate limits of the village if he or she has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude or has been found to have violated any consumer fraud law of the state, or any other state or of the United States by any court or
administrative agency within the last five (5) years. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-13: PROHIBITION OF FURTHER SOLICITATION:
The village clerk shall notify a solicitor by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the village attorney shall be and he is hereby authorized to apply to
either the United States district court for the northern district of Illinois or the circuit court of Cook, DuPage, or Kane County, Illinois, for a judicial
determination as to whether further solicitation in the village by such solicitor may be prohibited if any of the following occur:
A. A violation of any of the provisions of sections 3-18-4 through 3-18-11 of this chapter; or
B. The village clerk or any other agent or employee of the village receives ten (10) or more bona fide, sworn complaints setting forth facts showing a
violation and harm of any provision of this chapter or any of the laws of this state; or
C. The solicitor has engaged in fraud or misrepresentation to obtain money or property; or
D. Promising any person that the proceeds of a solicitation of funds will be refunded upon request and thereafter wilfully failing to make a written refund
request within sixty (60) days; or
E. Promising any person that he or she will receive a refund upon request without providing a written statement of the refund terms and conditions; or
F. Knowing misrepresentation that a donor will obtain a federal tax deduction; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 102/702
G. Wilful use of solicited funds to commit a crime. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-2002)
3-18-14: PENALTIES:
Any person who solicits within the corporate limits of the village in violation of this chapter is subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each act of solicitation in violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 2002-117, 11-19-
2002)
Chapter 19
RAFFLES
3-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have
the meanings indicated by common dictionary definition.
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial
and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered
to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in taxsupported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its
members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would
be cared for by the government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such
pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
LOTTERY: Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for
a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any one
as a result of the operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances are to be designated the winning chance;
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or sets of acts on the
part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS' ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general
public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. (1984 Code; amd. Ord. 98-11, 2-3-1998)
3-19-2: LICENSING OF RAFFLES:
A. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 98-11, 2-3-1998)
B. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license
and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a nonprofit fundraising
organization that the village administrator or her designee determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified
individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. (Ord. 2002-12, 2-5-2002)
C. A license shall authorize the licensee to conduct raffles, as defined herein, and each license shall be valid for: 1) one raffle, or 2) for a specified number
of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one year. A license may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this chapter or
for any violation of the raffles act1. (Ord. 98-11, 2-3-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 103/702
D. Licenses issued by the village administrator, or her designee, are subject to the following restrictions: (Ord. 2002-12, 2-5-2002)
1. The license and application for license must specify the number of raffles to be conducted by the licensee/applicant and the specified time period in
which the license will be in effect (not to exceed 1 year). For each raffle to be conducted by the licensee/applicant, the license and application for
license must specify the area or areas within the corporate limits of the village in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during
which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances, and the location or locations at which winning chances will
be determined.
2. The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by
the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.
3. The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
a. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
b. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
c. Any person who is not of good moral character;
d. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection D3a, D3b or D3c of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such a person is active or employed;
e. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection D3a, D3b or D3c of this section is an officer, director or employee whether compensated
or not;
f. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection D3a, D3b or D3c of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
"raffle" as defined herein. (Ord. 98-11, 2-3-1998)
3-19-3: LICENSING LIMITATIONS:
All licenses granted for the purpose of operating raffles within the village shall be subject to the following limitations: (1984 Code)
A. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
B. The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). (Ord. 2002-12, 2-5-
2002)
C. The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
D. The maximum days during which chances may be issued or sold for a single raffle shall not exceed three hundred (300) days. (1984 Code)
3-19-4: LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
A. All applicants for a raffle license must complete and sign an application, which will be available at the village hall during regular business hours.
B. Each application shall include a license fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) before said application shall be considered complete.
C. Upon receipt of a completed application and application fee by the village clerk, the village administrator, or her designee, shall act upon the license
application within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of said completed application and application fee. The village administrator, or her designee,
shall direct the village clerk to issue the raffle license within said thirty (30) day period if the applicant meets the standards set forth in this chapter and
has paid the application fee and furnished the fidelity bond or waiver required under section 3-19-6 of this chapter, and is not ineligible for a raffle
license pursuant to subsection 3-19-2D3 of this chapter. In the event the village administrator denies a raffle license application, and/or directs the
village clerk not to issue a raffle license, the village administrator shall issue the applicant a written notice of denial within said thirty (30) day period
expressly referring to the specific requirement or requirements of this chapter that the applicant failed to meet.
D. The applicant may appeal the decision of the village administrator, or her designee, denying the raffle license application within thirty (30) days after
notice of denial is mailed to the applicant, by submitting to the village clerk a written request for a hearing before the village president and board of
trustees. The clerk shall give the applicant at least ten (10) days' prior notice of the time and place of such hearing. The village president and board of
trustees shall consider the application and shall hear evidence regarding the license denial and the basis for said denial. The applicant or his or her
attorney shall have the right to examine witnesses and present evidence on behalf of the applicant. At the conclusion of the hearing, the village
president and board of trustees shall affirm or reverse the denial of such application, and at its next succeeding regular meeting of the corporate
authorities shall make findings of fact and approve of a formal written order affirming or reversing the denial of the raffle license application.
E. Any raffle license issued in violation of the provisions of this section shall be null and void. (Ord. 2002-12, 2-5-2002)
3-19-5: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 104/702
A. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
B. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
C. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
D. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed under
this chapter. (1984 Code)
E. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license. (Ord. 98-11, 2-3-1998)
F. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. (1984 Code)
3-19-6: RAFFLE MANAGER AND BOND:
The operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the licensee organization. Unless the
applicant executes a waiver and all of the members of the organization applying for the raffle license vote unanimously to waive the requirement that the
raffle manager shall post a fidelity bond as evidenced by a list of all of the members of the organization and a certified copy of a resolution, minutes of a
meeting of said members and/or other written documentation indicating said unanimous vote and/or consents to the waiver by all such members, the
manager shall give a fidelity bond in an amount equal to the greater of: a) one hundred ten percent (110%) of its estimate of the gross receipts it
anticipates that will be received by the licensed organization for the raffle or raffles for which the license is being applied for, or b) one hundred ten percent
(110%) of the estimated aggregate value of all of the prizes for the raffle or raffles being applied for; in favor of the licensee organization, conditioned upon
the raffle manager's honesty in the performance of his or her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the licensing
authority not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. An applicant may request that the amount of said bond be reduced, but only the president
and board of trustees shall have the authority to determine a different amount of the fidelity bond, based on good cause shown by the applying
organization. (Ord. 2002-12, 2-5-2002)
3-19-7: RECORDS OF LICENSEE:
A. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering
or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
B. Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if
bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization, pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state, and
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and
net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
C. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership, and to the licensing local unit of government, its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
D. Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (1984 Code)
3-19-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Any law enforcement agency that takes action relating to the operation of a charitable game shall notify the department of revenue and specify the extent
of the action taken and the reasons for such action. (Ord. 98-11, 2-3-1998)
3-19-9: GAMBLING; OTHER ACTIVITIES:
Nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize the conducting or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than raffles as
provided herein. (Ord. 98-11, 2-3-1998)
Chapter 20
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
3-20-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 105/702
In addition to the information required under section 3-1-3 of this title, an application for an auction and auctioneer's license shall state the names of any
employees, not to exceed two (2), who are to be authorized to conduct auctions under the authority of the license. The chief of police shall investigate the
character of every applicant for an auctioneer's license, and no such license shall be issued to any person who has a criminal history reflecting violence or
immorality. (1984 Code)
3-20-2: STREET AUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell or attempt to sell at public auction any personal or real property upon the public streets or sidewalks of the village. (1984 Code)
3-20-3: DISINFECTION OF SECONDHAND ARTICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer to sell or offer for sale any article of secondhand clothing, wearing apparel or other articles by means of which
disease may be conveyed, unless the same has first been thoroughly disinfected. (1984 Code)
3-20-4: INSURANCE:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of an auction on any property owned or controlled by the village, or occurring within the corporate limits of the
village, unless the licensee shall provide the village with insurance coverage in accordance with the following requirements:
Any licensee operating an auction under this chapter shall defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless the village, its officials, officers, employees,
agents, consultants and volunteers working on behalf of the village, from and against liability, losses, physical damage to property, and bodily injury or
death to persons, including payments made under any worker's compensation law, which may arise out of the licensee's operation of an auction within the
limits of the village. Each licensee shall further indemnify and hold harmless the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and
volunteers while acting on behalf of the village from and against any liability or losses sustained as a direct or indirect result of the action of the licensee's
agents or employees or in any way arising out of the granting of his license. Each licensee shall carry commercial general liability insurance with an
insurance company licensed to do business in the state having a rating of B+:VII or better. The policy limits for the commercial general liability insurance
shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage with a
general aggregate shall be no less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) or there shall be an event specific aggregate of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00). Such insurance to be utilized to protect the licensee and the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers
while acting on behalf of the village, as their interests may appear, from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and
liabilities, including without limitation attorney fees which may arise or result directly or indirectly from or by reason of any such liability, loss, injury or
damage. Said policy shall contain a provision requiring the insured to notify the village not less than ten (10) days prior to cancellation or change of any
policy. The village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the village, shall appear as additional
named insureds under each policy. At least ten (10) days prior to commencing any operations in the village, the licensee shall provide the village with
certificates of insurance for each policy. Each licensee shall also carry such insurance as may be necessary to protect it and the village from all claims
under the workers' compensation laws from time to time in effect that may be applicable to the licensee. All insurance required by this chapter shall be and
remain in full force and effect for the entire period the license is in effect. The certificate(s) of insurance, and, if requested by the village attorney, the
policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof, shall be approved by the village attorney and shall be deposited with and kept on file by the
village clerk. (Ord. 96-14, 2-6-1996)
Chapter 21
GARAGE, YARD AND RUMMAGE SALES
3-21-1: APPLICATION:
No garage, yard or rummage sale shall be conducted in the Village without first applying for and obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Clerk. (1984
Code)
3-21-2: LIMIT PER YEAR:
Not more than three (3) permits shall be issued for garage sales to any applicant, or to any one applicant or for any one premises in the Village during any
calendar year. (1984 Code)
3-21-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A garage, yard and/or rummage sale may be conducted only on any three (3) consecutive days of the week between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (1984 Code)
3-21-4: SIGNS:
Garage, yard and/or rummage sale signs may be posted only in accordance with the provisions of the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance1. In no event shall any
such sign be posted on any private property without the permission of the owner, and in no event upon any Village or other public property. (1984 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 106/702
Chapter 22
AMPLIFIERS
3-22-1: OPERATION IN THE VILLAGE:
No person or entity shall operate a device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or public place without first having
secured an amplifier permit issued by the Community Development Director or designee. (Ord. 2017-19, 3-7-2017)
3-22-2: AMPLIFIER REGULATIONS:
A. No permittee shall use or operate or employ any such device within the radius of two (2) blocks from any hospital or within the radius of two (2) blocks
of any religious institution while services are being held therein.
B. The hours to use, operate or employ any such amplified device within the Village limits shall be between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to the
hour of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Monday through Saturday and between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
on Sunday.
C. This section shall not apply to radios in homes or in private vehicles, when the same are operated in such a manner as not to be audible at a distance
of fifty feet (50') from such vehicle, nor to noise devices, bands or other musical devices used in any public parade or procession which is operated
under a permit in accordance with the ordinances of the Village.
D. Whenever the Community Development Director or designee determines that it is in the public interest, an extended amplifier permit may be issued
authorizing a permittee to use such devices in the Village for not more than five (5) days at a time during such hours as the Community Development
Director or designee may establish in such an extended amplifier permit, not before six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
E. No permittee shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted from any such device any lewd, obscene, profane or indecent language, sounds, or any
false representation of any matter, product or project advertised thereby, the sale of which is prohibited by any law, ordinance or statute.
F. An amplifier permit may be denied by the Community Development Director or designee from an applicant who has previously received documented
complaints by the Police Department or Code Enforcement of excessive noise or extending the amplification beyond the permitted hours of operation.
(Ord. 2017-143, 11-7-2017)
Chapter 23
BARBER SHOPS
3-23-1: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
A. General: It shall be the duty of the licensee at all times to keep the licensed premises in a clean and proper sanitary condition. All persons employed or
working in the licensed premises as barbers shall keep themselves and their clothing clean, and shall be required to wash their hands immediately
before serving a customer. All towels and washcloths shall be washed with soap and water and boiled before being used. All receptacles, finger bowls,
utensils, vessels and appliances shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Separate receptacles shall be provided for soiled towels and separate
receptacles for receiving discarded shaving and other paper.
B. Precautionary Measures: It shall be the duty of every person licensed to conduct a barber shop to at all times keep the licensed premises in a clean and
proper sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be taken to properly safeguard the life and health of patrons and all persons engaged therein
against communicable and contagious diseases. No person who is afflicted with any communicable or contagious disease shall be permitted to be
employed or engaged in shaving, haircutting or other tonsorial work on patrons.
3-23-2: LIMITATION ON LOCATION:
No barber shops shall be located or conducted except as an independent unit, completely equipped as such and separated from any living, dining or
sleeping apartment, restaurant or food establishment, and such premises shall be adequately ventilated. (1984 Code)
Chapter 24
ALARMS
3-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the singular number include the plural number.
ALARM AGENT: Any person working for an alarm business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 107/702
ALARM BUSINESS: See section 3-24-3 of this chapter, private alarm contractor.
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the police are expected
to respond.
ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the village limits, except for alarm systems on a motor vehicle.
ANSWERING SERVICE: A service which receives on a continuous basis through trained employees emergency signals from alarm systems and
thereafter immediately relays the message by live voice through a telephone system to the village's communication center.
CENTRAL STATION: A system in which the operation of electrical protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in, maintained
and supervised from a place of business having trained operators and guards in attendance at all times.
DIGITAL COMMUNICATORS (Also Called AUTOMATIC DIALING ALARM EQUIPMENT): An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system
signals which are received at the village's communication center or DU-COMM or any communication center and in which the alarm user uses his existing
telephone lines instead of a dedicated line.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the
owner or lessee of an alarm system or his employees or agents, except that the following shall not be considered false alarms:
A. Alarms caused by the failure or malfunction of equipment located in the village's communication center.
B. Alarms occurring on a repeated basis without apparent cause, but where a continuous good faith effort is being made jointly by the alarm user, the
alarm business and any other concerned person to correct the malfunction expeditiously with written verification as determined by the alarm review
officer.
C. Alarms caused by an attempted illegal entry, of which there is visible evidence.
D. Alarms caused by an on premises fire.
E. Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a reasonable belief that a need exists to call the police department.
HARD WIRED ALARMS: An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals which are received at the village's communication center
over dedicated lines.
MODIFIED CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM: An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise
the circuits.
ON PREMISES ALARM: An alarm system installed for the purposes of alerting people on premises to an emergency condition. Police personnel do not
respond to this alarm unless notified further by persons on the affected premises.
ON PREMISES ALARM WITH OUTSIDE RINGER: An alarm system that audibly announces an emergency condition to which police personnel are
required to respond.
VOICE DIALING ALARM EQUIPMENT: An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of an emergency situation which the alarm system is designed to detect. (1984 Code; amd. Ord. 94-
89, 9-20-1994)
3-24-2: POLICE CHIEF AS ADMINISTRATOR:
The police chief, or his designee, shall be charged with the administration within the village of the appropriate provisions of this chapter. (1984 Code)
3-24-3: PRIVATE ALARM CONTRACTOR:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as licensing private alarm contractors. (1984 Code)
3-24-4: CENTRAL STATIONS; MODIFIED CENTRAL STATIONS; ANSWERING SERVICES:
A. No person or entity shall cause or permit any central station, modified central station, answering service, digital communicator, automatic dialing alarm
equipment or voice dialing alarm equipment to transmit any alarm over the existing telephone lines of DU-COMM or the Bartlett police department.
B. Any central station, modified central station or answering service shall also meet the following minimum requirements:
1. The premises from which its business is to be conducted shall: a) meet the requirements of the Bartlett building code and the regulations of the
Bartlett fire protection district; and b) be reasonably secure.
2. A sufficient number of operators shall be on duty at all times to assure that all emergency messages received will be relayed immediately to DUCOMM.
3. As soon as possible after notifying DU-COMM, the operator concerned shall notify the subscriber involved of such action and the nature of the
emergency.
4. Each alarm user shall be required to cooperate in a test of its alarm equipment at least once a year to determine if each device is working properly
and shall submit the results of such test to the chief of police.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 108/702
5. When any test result indicates that any alarm system is not functioning in accordance with the standards set forth in section 3-24-5 of this chapter,
the chief of police shall be notified within twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 2001-07, 1-16-2001)
3-24-5: ALARM USERS:
No person or entity under any circumstances shall use an alarm system which uses voice dialing alarm equipment connected to the telephone system of
DU-COMM or the Bartlett police department. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting any person or entity from using an alarm system,
which is connected directly to an alarm panel at DU-COMM or the Bartlett police department, activating an alarm system there without using the telephone
lines of DU-COMM or the Bartlett police department.
A. Standards:
1. All alarm systems installed in commercial, residential or public buildings after the effective date hereof shall utilize equipment and methods of
installation substantially equivalent to or exceeding applicable Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) and American national standards institute (ANSI)
standards and all applicable village codes.
2. New installations shall be inspected by the village's building inspector or electrical inspector to ascertain compliance with both UL and ANSI
standards and applicable village codes.
3. The alarm user shall be responsible for: a) maintaining the system in good repair to assure reliability of operation; and b) having the alarm system
repaired as quickly as possible after any malfunction is detected.
4. Each alarm user who has an on premises alarm with an outside ringer shall cause such outside ringer to be turned off within thirty (30) minutes after
it is activated.
5. Alarm users with voice dialing systems shall disconnect them within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-07, 1-16-2001)
B. False Alarm Charges: Any alarm user shall be charged a service charge for false alarms emanating from his, her or its alarm system and transmitted to
the police department or its designee, during the calendar year starting January 1 through December 31, in accordance with the following schedule:
0 - 4 false alarms No charge
5 - 8 false alarms $ 50.00 for each false alarm
9 - more 100.00 for each false alarm
The same schedule of charges for false alarms shall apply to any outside ringer alarm system which causes a false alarm.
C. Notice: After the police department has recorded four (4) alarm occurrences in any calendar year, it shall notify the alarm user, in writing, by first class
mail of such fact and that additional false alarms will result in service charges in accordance with the schedule set forth in subsection B of this section.
Upon additional alarm occurrences, the village of Bartlett crime prevention unit will notify the village of Bartlett finance department and the licensee
and/or alarm owner will be invoiced by the finance department for the service charge(s) which have been imposed in accordance with subsection B of
this section. The finance department will be provided with names, addresses, the number of violations, the date and time of each such violation and the
applicable fines, penalties and/or alarm service charges to be assessed to each violator. The licensee and/or owner of the offending alarm shall have
thirty (30) days from the date said invoice is mailed to appeal the charges to the alarm review officer designated by the police chief to hear said
appeals. The finance department shall notify the licensee and/or the owner of the offending alarm in writing by mailing a written notice setting forth the
date and time of each such violations and an invoice setting forth the fines, penalties and/or alarm services charges imposed in accordance with the
schedule set forth in subsection B of this section, and shall further apprise the licensee and/or the owner that he, she or it has thirty (30) days from the
mailing of said notice to pay the fines, penalties and alarm service charges or to appeal the imposition of such fines, penalties and alarm service
charges. Failure to appeal fines, penalties and/or alarm service charges involved within said thirty (30) days of the mailing of said notice by the finance
department shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal said fines, penalties and/or service charges. (Ord. 94-89, 9-20-1994)
3-24-6: INSPECTION OF ALARM DEVICES AND BUSINESSES:
A. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the police chief or his designee shall have the authority with the permission of the occupant,
at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any premises in the village in or upon which an alarm system or an alarm business in
which an alarm system or a central station, modified central station or answering service is located to inspect the installation and/or operation of such
alarm system or business.
B. If such inspection reveals any violation of the provisions of this chapter, a written report detailing such violation shall be promptly sent to the alarm user.
Such report shall require corrections to be accomplished within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of the violation. The alarm user and/or owner
shall be granted a reasonable extension of time to correct such violations upon good cause shown. (Ord. 2001-07, 1-16-2001)
3-24-7: TESTING OF EQUIPMENT:
Nothing contained herein shall be construed as a contract or agreement by the village to provide any special services to alarm users or to respond to
alarms other than in the ordinary course of police operations on the basis of available manpower and patrol cars. No alarm system designed to transmit
emergency messages directly by telephone to DU-COMM or the police department shall be tested or demonstrated without permission from the police
chief. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages directly by telephone to the police department
unless the messages are to be relayed to the police department. (1984 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 109/702
3-24-8: NONLIABILITY OF THE VILLAGE:
The village shall not be liable for any defects in operation of the alarm systems or signal line systems, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately to
an emergency call from any establishment with a license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter. In the event that the village finds it necessary to
disconnect any emergency alarm system, the village shall incur no liability by such action. (1984 Code)
3-24-9: DISCONNECTION OF ALARM SYSTEM AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
A. An alarm user's alarm system shall be disconnected from DU-COMM and/or the police department and service terminated as provided in subsection C
of this section for any of the following causes:
1. Violation of this chapter or any of its provisions;
2. Fraudulent information provided by the alarm user;
3. More than twelve (12) false alarms in any one calendar year (January 1 through December 31);
B. In the event an alarm user's alarm system shall be disconnected from DU-COMM and/or the police department, the police department shall have no
responsibility or obligation to respond to any alarm transmitted by said alarm system.
C. 1. The chief of police shall designate an alarm review officer in all cases where an alarm user's alarm system is sought to be disconnected from the
police department and/or DU-COMM and service terminated. An alarm review officer designated by the chief of police shall notify the alarm user in
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the village intends to disconnect his, her or its alarm system from the police department, its
designee and/or DU-COMM, and/or terminate service for a violation of subsection A of this section and that said alarm user has a right to a hearing
before a designee of the chief of police to determine whether or not the alarm system should be disconnected from the police department, its designee
and/or DU-COMM and/or services terminated. Said notice shall further inform the alarm user that he, she or it must request said hearing in writing
within thirty (30) days of the date of said notice, and that failure of said alarm user to request a hearing within said thirty (30) day period will result in the
alarm user waiving his, her or its right to a hearing.
2. If a hearing is requested within said thirty (30) days, a hearing will be convened within fifteen (15) days of receipt by the police chief or the police
chief's designee. At such hearing, the alarm review officer shall present evidence of the violation or cause on the basis of which the alarm system
should be disconnected and services disconnected and the alarm user or his/her or its attorney shall have the right to examine witnesses and
present evidence on behalf of the alarm user. After conclusion of the hearing, the designee of the chief of police presiding over such hearing shall
make a finding of fact and conclusion of law as to whether or not there is cause for the alarm system to be disconnected and/or services
discontinued, and shall submit such findings and conclusions to the village clerk within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of said hearing. If no
hearing is requested within said thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice, the alarm review officer shall so notify the chief of police.
D. If the alarm user fails to request a hearing, or at the conclusion of a hearing conducted pursuant to subsection C of this section, the alarm review officer
determines that said alarm system should be disconnected and/or service terminated, then the chief of police or his designee shall cause the alarm
system to be disconnected from the police department, its designee and/or DU-COMM and service terminated. (Ord. 2001-07, 1-16-2001)
3-24-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each
day a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 2001-07, 1-16-2001)
Chapter 25
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
3-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the
meaning indicated by common dictionary definition.
BACTERICIDAL TREATMENT: The application of any method or substance for the destruction of pathogens and all other organisms, so far as practicable,
and which, in the opinion of the Health Officer, is effective and does not adversely affect the food, drink or equipment with which it comes in contact, or the
health of the consumer of such food or drink.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who handles food or drink during preparation, processing, packaging, storing, handling, transporting or serving, or who comes in
contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
UTENSILS: Any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during storage,
transportation, preparation or serving.
3-25-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
In addition to the matters set forth in Section 3-1-3, an application for a food establishment license shall specify the kinds of foods and beverages intended
to be sold by the licensee, and shall contain such information as may be required by the Health Officer in order to inform him fully as to the size and nature
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 110/702
of the food establishment, the conditions, equipment and facilities for conducting the business therein, the health of the persons to be employed and the
regulations and facilities provided for them.
3-25-3: MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
An application for a mobile food establishment license shall be submitted on a form provided by the Village Clerk and shall include, in addition to the
information required under Sections 3-1-3 and 3-25-2, the following information: Number of vehicles to be used in Bartlett, license plate numbers of
vehicles to be used in Bartlett, location of stops, schedule of stops, and food source information. Each application shall be accompanied by 1) certified
copy of health certificate, 2) authorization for investigation, and 3) safety inspection sheet for each vehicle to be used in Bartlett. (1984 Code)
3-25-4: SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS:
A. The Food Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Director of Public Health of the State of Illinois in December, 1975, and
amendments thereto, in accordance with the Sanitary Inspection Act,1 the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act,2 subparagraph (c) of section 2 of "An
Act in Relation to Public Health"3 and chapter 10 "Compliance Provisions" of the 1976 and subsequent editions of the Food and Drug Administration
"Food Service Sanitation Ordinance", except sections 10-601 and 10-602, are hereby adopted by reference. In addition, each licensee shall comply
with the provisions of: (Ord. 85-42, 4-23-85)
1. "An Act to prevent the preparation, manufacture, packing, storing or distribution of food intended for sale or sale of food, under unsanitary,
unhealthful or unclean conditions or surroundings, to create a sanitary inspection, to declare that such conditions shall constitute a nuisance, and to
provide for the enforcement thereof."4
2. "An Act regulating the handling, processing, labeling, sale and distribution of pasteurized milk and pasteurized milk products."5
3. "An Act in relation to Grade A Milk and Grade A Milk Products, and to repeal a certain Act named herein."6
4. "An Act in relation to milk and milk products for human consumption."7
5. "An Act in relation to the wholesomeness and safety of milk and milk products."8 (1984 Code)
6. The issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate retail food establishments, the prohibiting of sale of unsound or mislabeled food or
drink and the enforcement of this Ordinance shall be regulated in accordance with chapter 10 compliance procedures of the 1976 and subsequent
editions of the Food and Drug Administration "Food Service Sanitation Ordinance"; the inspection of food service establishments shall be regulated
in accordance with the current and subsequent Illinois Department of Public Health, "Food Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations" on file with the
Secretary of State; the inspection of retail food stores shall be regulated in accordance with the Illinois Department of Public Health "Retail Food
Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations" on file with the Secretary of State. One certified copy of the Food and Drug Administration "Food Service
Sanitation Ordinance", Illinois Department of Public Health "Food Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations" and the Illinois Department of Public
Health "Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations" shall be on file at the office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 85-42, 4-23-85)
B. All bottles, cans, packages and other containers enclosing milk or any milk pro ducts shall be plainly marked or labeled with the following and only such
other information as may be designated by the Health Officer:
1. On all cans, bottles and other containers of pasteurized or certified milk, the words "not to be sold after" and thereafter the date on which the milk or
milk product is to be sold to the final consumer, the height of the letters of the day of the week to be not less than three-sixteenths inch (3/16") on the
label of single service paper containers or on bottle caps where such are used, and not less than five-eighths inch (5/8") on tags attached to each
container when (contained in cans) the product is marketed in bulk containers.
2. On all cans and other containers of milk and milk products received by pasteurization plants from receiving stations, the day of the week received by
the receiving station.
3. The word "milk" shall not appear or be used on any label, cap, receptacle or container for any products except milk, skimmed milk, buttermilk,
cultured buttermilk, vitamin D milk and any other products designated by the Health Officer.
C. All pasteurized milk, cream, half and half, low fat and skimmed milk shall be sold not later than nine (9) days from the date of pasteurization, and such
maximum time limit shall be designated on the label in accordance with the provisions of subsection B1 above.
D. Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue, and shall be punishable hereunder as such.
3-25-5: INSPECTION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND RESTAURANTS:
At least every six (6) months the Health Officer shall inspect every food establishment and restaurant located within the Village. In case the Health Officer
discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he shall make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be
remedied, and the second inspection shall be used in determining compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. If the Health Officer finds, on such
second inspection, the violation to be a serious menace to public health, he may immediately suspend the license. The person operating the food
establishment shall, upon request of the Health Officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment or restaurant, and shall permit copying any or all
records of food purchased.
3-25-6: GENERAL PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 111/702
A. All food which is received and which is intended to be used and prepared for human consumption, upon being received by any person in any fooddispensing
establishment, shall be so stored, displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents,
unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and other contamination.
B. No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or served. This applies to all dogs, except dogs known and
used as seeing-eye dogs.
C. All means necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall be used. Evidence of the presence of rodents, roaches, ants or other vermin
shall be considered as a violation of this Section.
D. Food or drink shall not be stored beneath overhead sewer or drain pipes. Food or drink shall not be stored in areas of the building which are subject to
flooding from sewage backflow.
E. The pouring lips of bottles containing milk or other beverages shall not be submerged in water for cooling.
F. All food and drink shall be handled in such a manner as to minimize the opportunities for contamination.
G. All unwrapped or unenclosed food and drink on display shall be protected by glass or otherwise from public handling or other contamination, except that
approved hand openings for self-service may be permitted on counter fronts.
H. Food dispensers' establishments shall be effectively rodent-proofed.
3-25-7: DISEASE CONTROL:
A. Every person connected with a food establishment or restaurant, whose work brings him in contact with the handling of food, drink, utensils or
equipment, shall, prior to commencing his employment, and at least annually thereafter, obtain a tuberculin test, or a chest X-ray, and a VDRL blood
test taken by an approved laboratory.
B. Any other examination or test which may be deemed necessary by the Health Officer to assure him that the food handler is free from any communicable
disease, or is not a carrier of any disease likely to be transmitted through food, drink or utensils, shall be submitted to by the food handler as requested.
C. No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or is a carrier of such disease, shall work in any food establishment or restaurant.
No food establishment or restaurant shall employ any such person or any persons suspected of being affected with any disease in a communicable
form or of being a carrier of such disease. If the person in charge of any food establishment or restaurant suspects that any employee has contracted
any disease in a communicable form, or has become a carrier of such disease, he shall notify the Health Officer immediately. Any food handler finding
it necessary to blow his nose shall use disposable tissues and wash his hands immediately thereafter and before returning to work.
D. When suspicion arises as to the probability of transmission of infection from any food establishment or restaurant employee, the Health Officer is
authorized to require the following measures:
1. The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food establishments and restaurants.
2. The immediate closing of the food establishment or restaurant concerned until no further danger of disease outbreak exists in the opinion of the
Health Officer.
3. Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be deemed necessary under the
circumstances.
3-25-8: SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ITINERANT FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS:
The Health Officer shall approve an itinerant food establishment only if it complies with the following sanitary requirements:
A. It shall be located in clean, sanitary surroundings and be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. It shall be so constructed and arranged that food, drink,
utensils and equipment will not be exposed to insects or to dust or other contamination. Only food and drink which is clean, wholesome and free from
adulteration shall be sold or served. An adequate supply of water of a safe, sanitary quality shall be easily available and used for drinking and for
cleaning of utensils and equipment. Only single-service containers and utensils such as plates, cups, knives, forks and spoons shall be used to serve
food or drink. Hot water with a proper detergent shall be used to thoroughly wash all other utensils and equipment, after which the utensils and
equipment shall be subjected to an approved bactericidal process and be so handled and kept as to be protected from contamination. Adequate
provisions shall be made for refrigeration of perishable food and drink. Ice used in or with food or drink shall be from a source approved by the Health
Officer and so handled as to avoid contamination.
B. Garbage and refuse shall be kept in watertight containers, tightly covered until removed, and shall be disposed of in a place and manner approved by
the Health Officer. Liquid wastes shall be so disposed of as not to create a nuisance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 112/702
C. No person suffering from any disease transmittable by contact or through food or drink, or who is a carrier of the terms of such a disease, shall be
employed in any capacity. Adequate and satisfactory toilet and hand-washing facilities shall be readily accessible to employees. No person engaged in
handling or serving food or drink shall return to his work after using the toilet without first thoroughly washing his hands.
3-25-9: SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS:
Any food sold from an ambulatory vehicle shall be in the original container or packaged in a sanitary manner and shall be prepared and processed under
regulations of the Health Officer, with the exception of fruits and vegetables in their natural state. No food shall be prepared, packaged or processed in the
vehicle. If necessary, proper refrigeration shall be provided. The vehicle must be constructed and maintained to meet all sanitary requirements of the
Health Officer.
3-25-10: VEGETABLE AND FRUIT STANDS:
All establishments selling fresh vegetables and fruits from stands during the warm months when vegetables and fruits are in season will be given
permission to operate under the following regulations to sell vegetables and fruits in their natural state only:
A. The stands must have a roof, backwall and two (2) end walls, the front of which must be screened with sixteen inch (16") mesh.
B. The floor must be of cement and must be kept clean.
C. A sink with running water must be on the premises for washing fruits and vegetables. A toilet and lavatory with adequate hand-washing facilities must
be available.
3-25-11: UNWHOLESOME OR ADULTERATED FOOD AND DRINK:
A. Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined by the Health Officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of
unwholesomeness or adulteration. The Health Officer may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink
which is unwholesome or adulterated.
B. No person shall vend or attempt to vend in the Village any fruit, vegetable or other article of food that may be decayed or partially rotten, or that may
have been taken from any barrel, box or other receptacle for the same, or from any public way in the Village.
3-25-12: UTENSILS AND EQUIPMENT:
A. Construction: All multi-use utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other
equipment or utensils used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept in good
repair.
B. Cleaning and Bactericidal Treatment: All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and
sinks shall be kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall
be clean. Single-service containers shall be used only once.
All multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each usage.
All multi-use utensils used in the preparation or serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved
bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and used for no other purpose.
No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous materials shall be used for the cleaning or polishing of
utensils.
C. Storage And Handling: After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies, dust and other contamination, and
shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single-service utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary
containers, and shall be stored therein in a clean, dry place until used, and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. (1984 Code)
Chapter 26
SCAVENGERS
3-26-1: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No person or entity shall operate a scavenger service in the Village unless he maintains in effect at all times insurance coverage in accordance with the
following requirements:
Any licensee operating a scavenger service under this Chapter shall defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless the Village, its officials, officers,
employees, agents, consultants and volunteers working on behalf of the Village, from and against liability, losses, physical damage to property, and bodily
injury or death to persons, including payments made under any worker's compensation law, which may arise out of the licensee's operation of its
scavenger service within or without the limits of the Village. Each licensee shall further indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officials, officers,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 113/702
employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, from and against any liability or losses sustained as a direct or indirect
result of the action of the licensee's agents or employees or in any way arising out of the granting of his license. Each licensee shall carry commercial
general liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, said insurance company having a rating of B+:VII or better in
the latest edition of the Best & Co. Insurance Guide. The policy limits for the commercial general liability insurance shall be not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage with a general aggregate not less than two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00). The policy limits for the business automobile liability insurance shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
combine single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage. Such insurance to be utilized to protect the licensee and the Village, its officials,
officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, as their interests may appear, from and against all claims,
demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities, including, without limitation, attorney's fees which may arise or result directly or indirectly
from or by reason of any such liability, loss, injury or damage. Said policy shall contain a provision requiring the insured to notify the Village not less than
ten (10) days prior to cancellation or change of any policy. The Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on
behalf of the Village, shall appear as additional named insureds under each policy. At least ten (10) days prior to commencing any operations in the
Village, the licensee shall provide the Village with certificates of insurance for each policy. Each licensee shall also carry such insurance as may be
necessary to protect it and the Village from all claims under the worker's compensation laws from time to time in effect that may be applicable to the
licensee. All insurance required by this Chapter shall remain in full force and effect for the entire license period. The certificate(s) of insurance, and, if
requested by the Village Attorney, the policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof, shall be approved by the Village Attorney and shall be
deposited with and kept on file by the Village Clerk. (Ord. 96-14, 2-6-1995)
3-26-2: SPECIAL REGULATIONS AFFECTING SCAVENGERS:
Any person or entity engaged in the business of collecting garbage in the Village shall provide not less than the following services and employ equipment
and personnel in accordance with the standards hereinafter set forth:
A. Materials: Materials to be collected shall include:
1. All kitchen wastes including cans, bottles, household food, accumulation of animal food and vegetable matter attendant on the preparation, use,
cooking and serving of foods.
2. General household trash and refuse, including ashes, empty cartons, crates, boxes, wrapping materials, newspapers and magazines when securely
and neatly bound in convenient size bundles, cloth materials, empty cans and discarded toys, discarded clothing and similar materials.
3. Discarded furniture including beds, springs, mattresses, overstuffed furniture and other furniture, appliances, bicycles, sleds, swing sets, tools and
comparable items.
4. Yard refuse materials, including leaves, grass clippings, weeds, Christmas trees, bushes, brush clippings and branch clippings (when securely
bound in bundles not exceeding 4 feet in length).
5. Materials to be collected weekly shall be limited to twelve (12) bags, or one cubic yard, whichever is greater, with the exception of small branches
bundled as provided in subsection A4 above. This does not include small amounts of earth and sod when placed in cans and not exceeding twenty
five percent (25%) of the capacity of the can. Building materials resulting from "do it yourself" projects not exceeding one cubic yard in capacity will
be collected when placed at the curb in a neat and orderly manner. (1984 Code)
B. Service:
1. Definitions:
GARBAGE COLLECTOR: A person, firm, corporation or entity who collects garbage for hire in Bartlett.
RECYCLING CONTAINER: A container furnished by the Village of Bartlett for the recycling of garbage and bearing the identification label of a
garbage collector.
2. Curbside Collection Service For Recyclables:
a. No garbage collector shall collect garbage in the Village unless such garbage collector shall provide a special curbside collection service for
aluminum and bi-metal cans, newspapers and glass bottles on the same day as such garbage collector's regular collection.
b. Each garbage collector shall be required to provide curbside recycling pick up service for all of its customers in Bartlett who voluntarily participate
in such recycling program regardless of whether such customers are located in an area of the Village where such garbage collector provides
garbage collection service for a substantial group of customers whose properties are contiguous to, or located near, each other.
c. Garbage collectors shall be entitled to charge all of the customers in the Village for whom they currently provide service an additional fee not to
exceed one dollar forty five cents ($1.45) per month to pay for the cost of providing such recycling service, regardless of whether such residents
participate in the voluntary recycling program. (Ord. 88-108, 11-15-1988)
3. Collection And Removal Of Garbage: Garbage shall be collected and removed from every residential unit in the Village at least once weekly.
Residents shall place containers at curbs, or at rear entrance to dwellings, depending on each resident's choice of service, no earlier than six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. on the day preceding the day of scavenger pickup and the empty garbage containers shall be removed not later than nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. on the day following the day of scavenger pickup. However, residents desiring rear door service shall place all items described in subsections
A2, 3 and 4 above at the curb, unless the garbage truck can be driven to within ten feet (10') of such items over a hard surface driveway at least ten
feet (10') wide. Residents need not segregate residential trash and refuse, but all food waste shall be wrapped in paper and no liquids may be placed
in trash containers. All other items that do not fit in the containers as well as the containers shall be placed neatly at the curb line, except for rear
door service, subject to the conditions aforesaid. Lids shall be kept on containers when placed outside for collection. In the event the regularly
scheduled pickup falls on a legal holiday, the scavenger shall make garbage pickup on the day following said legal holiday, except when such
holidays falls on Saturday, in which case the garbage pickup shall be made on the day previous to said legal holiday.
4. Office Of Scavenger: The scavenger shall maintain an office and telephone for the receipt of service calls or complaints and shall be available for
such calls on all business days from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. All complaints shall be given prompt and courteous
attention and in the case of alleged missed scheduled collections, the scavenger shall investigate and if such allegations are verified, shall arrange
for the pickup of all disposal materials not collected within a reasonable time after the complaint is received.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 114/702
C. Equipment: The scavenger shall use exclusively: enclosed leakproof packer-type disposal truck bodies, equipped with airtight covers for such portions
as are used for the transportation of garbage.
D. Disposal Facilities: The scavenger shall own, or have a minimum five (5) year lease securing availability of, a suitable garbage incinerator or sanitary
landfill dump site, at which all refuse collected in and removed from the Village may be disposed of and shall stipulate the location and size thereof, in
the license application. The scavenger shall also own and have available for use within the Village, immediately upon issuance of the license, sanitary
refuse disposal truck bodies and equipment as herein specified.
E. Disposal Services: The scavenger shall furnish capable employees for use in the crews of the scavenger performing the disposal service specified in
the agreement. The scavenger shall prohibit any drinking of alcoholic beverages by its drivers and crew members while on duty, or in the course of
performing their duties under said contract. The scavenger shall also cover all such employees with workmen's compensation insurance coverage, with
the Village as an additional named insured, and thereon provide the Village with a certificate or other evidence of insurance.
F. Compliance With Laws: The scavenger shall comply at all times with all applicable State statutes and Village ordinances and regulations. (1984 Code)
3-26-3: FINDINGS OF FACT CONCERNING RECYCLING OF CERTAIN WASTE PRODUCTS:
The corporate authorities have made the following findings of fact:
A. The recycling of certain waste products, including, but not limited to, aluminum and bi-metal cans, newspapers and glass bottles is vital to the
conservation of America's natural resources.
B. The inclusion of aluminum and bi-metal cans, newspapers and glass bottles in the garbage generated by the residents of the Village and other villages
increases the volume of garbage which must ultimately be disposed of in sanitary landfills.
C. The continued disposal of aluminum and bi-metal cans, newspapers and glass bottles generated by residents of the Village and other villages will
exacerbate the shortage of landfills.
D. The Village has determined that the proliferation of sanitary landfills in the Bartlett area will endanger the health, welfare and safety of the residents of
the Village, their children and grandchildren for many years to come.
E. By eliminating aluminum and bi-metal cans, newspapers and glass bottles from the stream of garbage, the capacity of existing landfills to serve the
needs of the Village for the disposal of nonrecyclable garbage will be increased and extended for several years.
F. In the interim, science may find new technological methods for the safe disposition of household garbage without threatening the pollution of our air and
our water supplies.
G. The Village has called upon the private contractors who collect garbage from residences in the Village to provide the Village with a curbside recycling
program for aluminum and bi-metal cans, newspapers and glass bottles on the same day as their regular garbage pickup.
H. The private disposal contractors who provide garbage pickup service in the Village have offered to provide such special recycling service upon the
condition that all of the private contractors who collect garbage in the Village shall provide such recycling service.
I. If some of the private contractors who collect garbage in the Village do not participate in the recycling program, the contractors who do participate in the
recycling program will be at a competitive disadvantage as the result of which they will not be able to provide this vitally needed recycling service. (Ord.
88-108, 11-15-1988)
Chapter 27
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
3-27-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the
meaning indicated by common dictionary definition:
THE ACT: The Mobile Home and Mobile Home Park Act.1
APPLICANT: Any person or entity making application for a license or permit.
BUILDING DIRECTOR: The Building Director of the Village of Bartlett.
CARETAKER: The person in charge of and responsible for the operation and maintenance of a mobile home park.
CLERK: The Village Clerk of the Village of Bartlett.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 115/702
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett.
IEPA: Illniois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supply.
LICENSE: A license issued by the Village allowing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this Chapter.
LOT: A zoning lot unless the context shall indicate a lot of record.
OWNER or OPERATOR: The licensee.
PARK: A mobile home park.
PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village permitting the construction, alteration or reduction in number of spaces of a mobile home park under the provisions
of this Chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust, partnership, corporation, person doing business under an assumed name, county,
municipality, the State of Illinois, or any political subdivision or department thereof, or any other entity.
SITE: The zoning lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent habitation.
SPACE: Site.
VILLAGE: The Village of Bartlett.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The Village Engineer of the Village of Bartlett.
The definitions contained in sections 2.1 through 2.9 of section 3 of The Act are incorporated herein by reference.
3-27-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a mobile home park in the Village after the effective date of this Chapter, without first obtaining a
license therefor from the Village. Applications for mobile home park licenses shall be made in writing under oath to the Village Clerk, and shall contain the
information set out in the following sections.
3-27-3: ANNUAL LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
The annual application for renewal of a mobile home park license shall contain the following information:
A. Applicant's name, including any business or assumed name used or proposed to be used by applicant.
1. If the applicant is a corporation, the information requested in subsection A must be furnished for each officer, director and shareholder who owns or
controls, directly or indirectly through any other person or entity, twenty five percent (25%) or more of the outstanding stock of such corporation.
2. If the applicant is a partnership, the information requested in subsection A must be furnished for each general and limited partner, indicating which
partners are general and which are limited.
3. If the applicant is a joint venture, the information requested in subsection A must be furnished for each joint venturer.
4. If the applicant is a trust, the information requested in subsection A must be furnished for each trust beneficiary.
B. The name and address of the mobile home park and the telephone number at which its manager, attendant, caretaker or other responsible person in
charge may be contacted at all times in case of emergency.
3-27-4: ORIGINAL LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
In addition to the information specified in Section 3-27-3, the original application for a license to operate a mobile home park shall contain all of the
information required under section 4 of The Act, incorporated herein by reference.
3-27-5: LICENSE FEES:
Each application shall be accompanied by the annual license fee set out in Section 3-1-1 of this Municipal Code.
3-27-6: TERM, RENEWAL:
Licenses will be valid until May 1 of the year following the date of issuance, but will be extended for additional periods of not to exceed one year by the
corporate authorities, provided the licensee is not then in violation of this Chapter.
3-27-7: NONTRANSFERABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 116/702
No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferable without the approval of the corporate authorities, which approval will not be refused if the mobile
home park and the transferee are in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
3-27-8: CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Mobile Home Construction Standards: Every mobile home placed upon a site in the Village after the effective date of this Chapter shall meet the
minimum requirements of the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act (24 CFR Part 3280, effective March 30, 1979), incorporated herein
by reference.
B. No licensee shall cause or permit a mobile home to be placed on a site in a mobile home park without first filing with the Village Clerk a written
certification from the manufacturer of such mobile home that it meets the minimum requirements of the Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act.
C. Securing the Mobile Home to the Site: Each mobile home shall be so placed upon a mobile home lot as to secure the superstructure against uplift,
sliding, rotation and overturning, in accordance with the following standards:
1. The mobile home stand shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home due to frost action, inadequate drainage,
vibration or other forces acting on the structure.
2. The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men", eyelets imbedded in concrete
foundations or runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other device securing the stability of the mobile home.
3. Anchors and tie-downs shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home stand and each shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile
strength of two thousand eight hundred (2,800) pounds.
3-27-9: FIRE PROTECTION:
No license shall be issued authorizing the operation of a mobile home park which is not located within the corporate limits of the Bartlett and Countryside
Fire Protection District, or other fire protection district which has fire fighting capabilities equal to or greater than the Bartlett and Countryside Fire
Protection District.
A. The licensee shall grant a license to members of all fire departments which respond to emergency calls in the Village to go upon any part of the
licensee's mobile home park for the purpose of fighting and preventing the spread of fire.
B. Fire Extinguishers, Inspections and Report: The licensee shall cause each mobile home to be inspected at least annually to assure compliance with the
requirements of section 9.9 of The Act, incorporated herein by reference, requiring mobile homes to be equipped with fire extinguishers in working
order, one in each end of the mobile home, and shall report the results of such inspection to the Village Clerk annually with the license renewal
application.
3-27-10: POLICE PROTECTION:
The licensee shall grant a license to members of the Bartlett Police Department to go upon any part of the licensee's
mobile home park for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the Criminal Code of 1961.2
3-27-11: WATER SUPPLY:
Each mobile home park, and each mobile home, shall be served by a water supply which meets the requirements of the IEPA Division of Public Water
Supply. The Village hereby adopts by reference the Illinois Pollution Control Board Rules and Regulations, chapter 6, Public Water Supplies.
A. Copies of each report required to be made by the licensee to IEPA, and all test results and laboratory results required to be filed by the licensee with
IEPA, shall be filed with the Village Clerk at the same time they are required to be filed with IEPA. Copies of all notices and correspondence from IEPA
shall be filed with the Village Clerk within two (2) business days after they are received by the licensee or the custodian.
B. Copies of any of the above materials which indicate that the water supply which serves a mobile home park constitutes an immediate danger to the
health of occupants of such mobile home park shall be delivered to the Village Clerk within one hour after such materials are received by the licensee
or the caretaker.
C. Any mobile home park constructed, developed or expanded after the effective date of this Chapter shall be provided with a water distribution system
which meets the requirements of the Bartlett Subdivision Ordinance. In addition:
1. The diameter of the pipe required shall be proportional to the length of main in accordance with Table I.
Table I
Size of Main Maximum Number of Maximum Length
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 117/702
(Inside Diameter) Mobile Homes That
May Be Served
Main Installed
2" 20 600 linear feet
3" 60 1,800 linear feet
4" 120 3,600 linear feet
6" 400 12,000 linear feet
8" 1,500 40,000 linear feet
2. The water distribution system shall be capable of supplying water at a minimum pressure of twenty pounds per square inch (20 psi) during periods of
peak demand and usage.
3. All plumbing shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois State Plumbing Code.
3-27-12: DISPOSAL OF SEWERAGE AND WASTE WATER:
A. All sewerage and waste water from a mobile home park, and from every mobile home, shall be discharged into a sanitary sewer system which is
connected to the waste water treatment facilities of the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago (MSD) if the mobile home or mobile home
park is located in Cook County, or the Village of Bartlett Waste Water Treatment Facility if the mobile home park or mobile home is located in DuPage
County.
B. Sewer connections for each mobile home shall be provided in accordance with section 9.6 of The Act.
C. Any mobile home park constructed, developed or expanded after the effective date of this Chapter shall be provided with a sanitary sewer system which
meets the requirements of the MSD or the Bartlett Subdivision Ordinance, whichever are more stringent, if the mobile home park is located in Cook
County; otherwise, the requirements of the Bartlett Subdivision Ordinance. In addition:
1. Minimum design and slope shall be determined in accordance with Table II.
Table II
Minimum Size and Slope of Sewers*
No. of Spaces
Sewer Inside
Diameter (inches)
Slope per 100
Feet (inches) Uses
1-125 6 9 Laterals and Mains
More than 125 8 6 Mains
*Exclusive of laterals serving individual mobile homes.
2. Manholes shall be provided at every change in direction or grade, at the upper end of every main sewer line, at every junction of two (2) or more
branch sewers, and at intervals of not more than four hundred feet (400'). Cleanouts extending to grade may be used instead of manholes on sewer
lines no greater than eight inches (8") in diameter, and shall be at intervals of not more than one hundred feet (100').
3-27-13: DRAINAGE:
A. Adequate drainage shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 9.2 of The Act.
B. Mobile home parks constructed, developed or expanded after the effective date of this Chapter shall meet the drainage, detention, retention and storm
sewer construction standards of the Bartlett Subdivision Ordinance.
3-27-14: MINIMUM LOT SIZE, DIMENSIONS, SITING:
Minimum lot size and lot dimensions and the location of a mobile home on an individual zoning lot or site shall be in accordance with the requirements of
Article J of the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance.
No licensee shall cause or permit a mobile home to be placed on a site without first filing with the Village Clerk written notice specifying the lot number and
address of the site on which such mobile home is to be placed.
3-27-15: GARBAGE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 118/702
Provisions for garbage storage and disposal shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 9.7 of The Act, incorporated herein by reference.
3-27-16: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL:
Insect and rodent control shall be provided in accordance with section 9.9 of The Act, incorporated herein by reference.
3-27-17: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION:
Any mobile home park constructed, developed or expanded after the effective date of this Chapter shall be provided with an electrical distribution system
which meets the requirements of the Bartlett Subdivision Ordinance and the Bartlett Building Code. Electrical outlets for each individual site shall be
provided and installation shall be in accordance with State Code requirements.
3-27-18: FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE:
All handling and storage of natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), fuel oil or other flammable liquid or gases should be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable State and local government codes and regulations. The Illinois Department of Law Enforcement (Division of Fire Prevention) is
the regulatory State agency for safe fuel storage and handling systems and the applicable regulations are the National Fire Protection Association
Standards, NFPA-31 "Installation of Oil Burning Equipment-1968", NFPA-54 "Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping-1969", and NFPA-58 "Storage
and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases-1969". No LPG or fuel oil container shall be placed in side or beneath any mobile home, storage cabinet,
carport or any other structure. Containers of fuel shall be at least five feet (5') from any mobile home door or exits, and placed on stands constructed of a
noncombustible material.
3-27-19: SERVICE BUILDINGS:
Any service building constructed or altered after the date of this Chapter shall meet the requirements of the Bartlett Building Code.
3-27-20: STREETS:
All streets and driveways in every mobile home park shall be maintained in a passable and reasonably dustproof condition in accordance with section 9.11
of The Act, incorporated herein by reference.
3-27-21: MOBILE HOME PARK MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION REGULATIONS:
A. Caretakers, Duties: Every mobile home park shall comply with the attendant and caretaker requirements of section 9.1 of The Act, incorporated herein
by reference. The caretaker or an assistant caretaker, shall be available to assist police, fire, paramedic and other emergency personnel twenty four
(24) hours a day and a schedule and list of phone numbers of the manager and each assistant manager shall be furnished to the Village Clerk, the
Chief of Police and the Chief of the Bartlett and Countryside Fire Protection District so that immediate communication can be established in case of
emergency.
B. Each licensee shall provide adequate supervision to maintain his, her or its mobile home park in compliance with the Illinois Mobile Home Park Law and
Rules and Regulations for Illinois Mobile Home Parks.
C. Each mobile home park shall be provided with a custodian's office where each mobile home entering such park shall be assigned to a site, given a copy
of the park rules and registered according to any form prescribed by the Department. Such registration shall include the name and address of the
owner and every occupant of such mobile home. The registration records shall be neatly and securely maintained, and no registration records shall be
destroyed until six (6) years have elapsed following the date of registration. The register shall be available at all times for inspection by all law
enforcement officers.
D. Dependent mobile homes shall not be allowed within a mobile home park. (1984 Code)
Chapter 28
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
3-28-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license shall, in addition to the information required in Section 3-1-1, specify the total floor area and be accompanied by a floor plan
showing same.
3-28-2: BUILDING AND PREMISES REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 119/702
A. Floor area shall be calculated as defined in Section 3-1-2. Total floor area applicable for the determination of the yearly license fee shall include the sum
total of all the floor area in use or reserved for or retained for the use of the commercial establishment or activity, including, but not restricted to,
principal and accessory use floor area, cellars and basements, even though any such floor area may be temporarily or permanently vacant or not in
use. (Ord. 86-19, 3-18-86)
Chapter 29A
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
3-29A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPLICANT: Any person or entity seeking a massage establishment business license. If the applicant is a sole proprietorship, the information sought to be
provided shall be for the individual owner; if a partnership, by each general and each limited partner; if a joint venture, by each joint venturer; if a
corporation, by each officer and director, and unless the corporation's stock is publicly traded, by each shareholder owning or holding more than ten
percent (10%) of the outstanding stock in said corporation; if a limited liability company, by each manager and by each member owning or holding more
than a ten percent (10%) membership interest; if an entity is made up of one or more subentities, then the foregoing information shall be provided or for
each subentity. It shall also include the business manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business.
CONVICTION: A plea of guilty or nolo contendere, finding of guilty, jury verdict or entry of judgment by sentencing of any crime, including, but not limited
to, convictions, preceding sentences of supervision, conditional discharge or first offender probation under the laws of any jurisdiction of the United States.
EMPLOYEE: Any person over eighteen (18) years of age, employed by or under contract with the owner of a massage establishment, who renders any
service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or its patrons.
LICENSEE: The operator of a massage establishment.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft
parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations used in this practice, under such circumstances that it is reasonably
expected that the person to whom treatment is provided, or some third party on such person's behalf, will pay money or give any other consideration or
gratuity.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
limited partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association that engages in or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, a business of providing
massages by massage therapists. Massage establishments shall not include bodywork establishments which are defined in and require a separate license
pursuant to chapter 29B of this title.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration or gratuity whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage, and who holds a massage
therapist license issued by the Illinois department of financial and professional regulation.
OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE: Any business, a function of which is to engage in or carry on massages by a massage therapist at a location designated
by the customer or patron rather than at a massage establishment.
PATRON: Any person who is offered or receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or any
other consideration for such massage.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: Genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
STATE LICENSE: A valid license issued by the Illinois department of financial and professional regulation to a massage therapist pursuant to the Illinois
massage licensing act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/1 et seq. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-2: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Massage Establishment License Required: No person or entity shall engage in or carry out the business of massage unless that person or entity has a
valid massage establishment business license issued by the village pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every separate office or
place of business in the village, unless said business is exempt under section 3-29A-19 of this chapter. However, where individuals possessing the
license required in subsection B of this section, perform massage in their own homes, no massage establishment license shall be required for that
home. When a licensee performs massage in his or her own home, in addition to the requirements of this chapter, the requirements of the Bartlett
zoning ordinance pertaining to home occupations shall apply. A person or entity, who or which, prior to the adoption of this chapter, has been issued a
business license in 2015 (with an expiration date of April 30, 2016), to engage in or carry out the business of massage, as a spa, massage therapy or
health club, shall be subject to this chapter, and shall be required to apply for a separate massage establishment license on or before October 31,
2015, but shall not be required to pay an additional massage establishment license fee for the period ending April 30, 2016.
B. State License Required: No person shall engage in massage for compensation, unless the person has a valid state license issued by the Illinois
department of financial and professional regulation pursuant to the massage licensing act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/1 et seq., or is exempt
therefrom under said act. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-3: APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT BUSINESS LICENSE:
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application, under oath, with the village of Bartlett upon
a form provided by the village clerk and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee, in the amount set forth in section 3-1-1 of this title. Copies of the massage
establishment business license application shall be forwarded to the building director, the health inspector, and the community development director. Each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 120/702
such director or inspector, or his or her designee, shall, within thirty (30) days, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment
and upon inspection, each inspector shall file a written report with the village clerk concerning compliance with the applicable regulations. The application,
once accepted, shall also be referred to the police department for investigation. The police department will perform the required criminal record check, if
any. Background investigations of the applicant shall require the submission of fingerprints. The cost of the criminal record check and cost of fingerprint
submissions shall be borne by the applicant. Massage therapists holding a valid state license shall not be required to submit to a criminal background
check if he or she submits a true and accurate copy of his or her state license. Each application shall contain the following information:
A. A definition of service to be provided.
B. The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted.
C. Federal employer identification number (FEIN) and state of Illinois business tax number (IBT).
D. The name and residence address of each applicant (all provisions which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a person operating as a
sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or association).
1. If applicant is a corporation, the name, primary residence address, driver's license number, social security number, and fingerprints of each officer,
director and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation or company, and the address of the corporation
or company itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment. A certificate of good standing from the secretary of state of the state of
its incorporation shall also be submitted.
2. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the name, primary residence address, driver's license number, social security number, and fingerprints
of each manager and of each member that owns greater than a ten percent (10%) membership interest in said company. A certificate of good
standing from the secretary of state of the state of its organization shall also be submitted.
3. If applicant is a partnership, the name, primary residence address, driver's license number, social security number and fingerprints of each partner
including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment.
E. The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant.
F. Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
G. Individual applicant's height, weight, color of eyes, hair and sex.
H. Copy of driver's license or state identification card.
I. One portrait photograph of the applicant at least one inch by one and one-half inches (1" x 11/2") and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints shall be
taken by the chief of police or his/her agent. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, fingerprints of any and all officers,
shareholders, directors, partners, members, managers or agents of the entity (except for massage therapists) along with the fee for each.
J. Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.
K. The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, previously operating in this or another municipality, county or
state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason for the revocation or suspension, and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
L. All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted.
Convictions shall mean by plea of guilty or nolo contendere finding of guilty, jury verdict or entry of judgment by sentencing of any crime, including, but
not limited to, convictions or preceding sentences of supervision, conditional discharge or first offender probation under the laws of any jurisdiction of
the United States:
1. That is a felony, or
2. That is a misdemeanor, an essential element of which is dishonesty or that is directly related to the practice of the professions including, without
limitation, the following Illinois offenses, or if found guilty outside the state of Illinois, would constitute the same offense if committed within the state
of Illinois:
a. An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony.
b. An offense enumerated in any provision of article 11, entitled "sex offenses", of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
c. A violation of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., as amended from time to time.
d. A violation of the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
e. A felony offense enumerated in article 24, deadly weapons, of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq., as amended
from time to time, or any other offense that involves the use of weapons.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 121/702
M. The name and address of each massage therapist who is or will be employed in the establishment, including a copy of their respective state licenses as
issued by the Illinois department of financial and professional regulation, and if the business intends to hire any employees or independent contractors
to perform Asian bodywork approaches (see definitions in chapter 29B of this title), or other forms of bodywork (see definitions in chapter 29B of this
title) or modalities that are exempt under section 25 of the massage licensing act1 who are not state licensed massage therapists, a listing of the name,
address, type of bodywork approach or modality that will be practiced for each employee, and for each independent contractor, and if Asian bodywork
approaches or other bodywork approaches will be offered by any person other than a massage therapist or individual exempt under section 3-29A-19
of this chapter, then an Asian bodywork establishment license shall also be required for the business, and each practitioner of an Asian bodywork
approach shall procure an Asian bodywork approach practitioner license as required under chapter 29B of this title.
N. The name and address of any other business owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subsection D of this section.
O. A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant.
P. Authorization of the village, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license, and to perform criminal background investigations as required by this chapter.
Q. Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application.
Applicants, who hold a valid state massage therapist license, are exempt from the fingerprinting and criminal background check requirement, if a copy
of the license is submitted with the application.
Upon the completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of all foregoing information, the village clerk shall accept the application for the
necessary investigations. The holder of a massage establishment license shall notify the village clerk of each change in any of the data required to be
furnished by this section within ten (10) days after such change occurs. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:
The village of Bartlett shall issue a license for a massage establishment if all requirements for a massage establishment described in this chapter are met
unless it finds:
A. The correct license fee or other fees or fines owed to the village of Bartlett have not been tendered to the village; or
B. The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the village's building,
zoning, and health regulations; or
C. The applicant or its employees, other than massage therapists, have been convicted by plea of guilty or nolo contendere, finding of guilty, jury verdict or
entry of judgment by sentencing of any crime, including, but not limited to, convictions or preceding sentences of supervision, conditional discharge or
first offender probation under the laws of any jurisdiction of the United States:
1. That is a felony, or
2. That is a misdemeanor, an essential element of which is dishonesty or that is directly related to the practice of the professions including, without
limitation, the following Illinois offenses, or if found guilty outside the state of Illinois, would constitute the same offense if committed within the state
of Illinois:
a. An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony.
b. An offense enumerated in any provision of article 11, entitled "sex offenses", of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
c. A violation of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., as amended from time to time.
d. A violation of the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
e. A felony offense enumerated in article 24, deadly weapons, of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq., as amended
from time to time, or any other offense that involves the use of weapons.
The village of Bartlett may issue a license to any person found guilty of (or whose employees have been found guilty of) any of the crimes
described in subsections C2a through C2e of this section only if it determines that such finding of guilt occurred at least ten (10) years prior to the
date of the application and the individual has had no subsequent felony findings of guilty of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor findings
of guilty for a crime or crimes set forth in this section and demonstrates that he or she has been rehabilitated.
D. Any applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact or failed to disclose required information or a fact in the license
application or in any other document required by the village.
E. Any applicant has had a massage business, massage therapy or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the village or any
other state, county, municipality or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of the application.
F. Any applicant is not over eighteen (18) years of age or older.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 122/702
G. Copies of the state licenses of persons, who will be providing massage services at the business establishment, including outcall services, have not
been provided.
H. The information required under this section has not been furnished. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-5: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION:
The village of Bartlett shall act to approve or deny an application for a license under this chapter within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall
the village of Bartlett act to approve or deny said license later than forty five (45) days from the date that said application is complete and was accepted by
the village. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate on April 30 following such issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. (Ord.
2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-6: POSTING OF LICENSE; PHOTO IDENTIFICATION CARD:
A. The state licenses issued to massage therapists shall be available for public inspection and review upon request, if said licenses are not posted and
available for immediate inspection in the reception area for patrons, if any, or in the therapist's work area.
B. Every massage therapist shall possess his or her state license and a government issued photo identification card while on the licensed premises and
produce such state license and identification card upon request of any representative of the village of Bartlett.
C. To provide outcall massage service, the massage therapist must possess a government issued photo identification card and state license in the name
of the individual providing the service. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-7: REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:
The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time, including
employees, independent contractors and massage therapists, along with their current photographs and a copy of their respective state licenses and
license copies. Such register and license copies shall be available at the massage establishment to representatives of the village of Bartlett during regular
business hours. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-8: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; WAITING PERIOD AFTER REVOCATION:
A. Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the village of Bartlett after notice and a hearing, for good cause, or in
any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee, of the licensee, or any independent contractor under written
or oral contract with the licensee, including a massage therapist, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state, county or local laws, rules,
regulations or ordinances at licensee's place of business. Such license may also be revoked or suspended by the village of Bartlett after notice and
hearing, upon the recommendations of the health inspector that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard to proper
sanitation and hygiene. Such revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed in this chapter.
B. If a license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the conduct of the business of a massage establishment at
that location for a period of three (3) years. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-9: REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS FOR INVESTIGATION RESULTING IN BUSINESS LICENSE SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION:
In the event that the village of Bartlett conducts an investigation of a licensed massage establishment, which results in the revocation or suspension of its
business license, the licensee shall reimburse the village for any and all of the village's costs for the investigation. Failure to pay such costs within ten (10)
days' written notice from the village shall result in the continuance of any suspension until such time as those costs are paid and no massage
establishment business license shall be issued or renewed for such a business at the same location until such costs have been paid to the village. The
village shall have such additional or further remedies for collection of such costs as are available by law. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-10: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE:
A massage therapist license issued by the state may be revoked or suspended in accordance with the Illinois massage licensing act, 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 57/1 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. The chief of police shall report any and all suspected violations to the massage licensing
board and to the department of financial and professional regulation. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-11: FACILITIES NECESSARY:
Every location for which a massage establishment license is sought shall, in addition to meeting all other village regulations, comply with the following:
A. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages.
Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 123/702
B. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages.
All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept
separate from the clean storage areas.
C. The minimum number of plumbing fixtures shall be provided and maintained as required by the building code or this chapter, whichever is more
restrictive. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-12: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary manner.
B. Prices for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
C. All employees, including massage therapists, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments.
D. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels which shall be laundered after each use by an individual patron
and stored in a sanitary manner. All towels and linens furnished for use of one patron shall not be refurnished for use of another patron until laundered.
E. The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with nontransparent towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or
massage therapist.
F. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, baths, and steam rooms and any other physical facilities shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day
the massage establishment is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it
shall be kept dry.
G. Oils, creams, lotions, and other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
H. Each massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering massage to any
patron.
I. No massage therapist, employee, or licensee shall perform, offer, or agree to perform any act which shall require the touching of a patron's sexual or
genital area.
J. Any reception or waiting area shall be open to the public and visible from outside of the immediate entrance, e.g., storefront windows and any entrance
door shall be transparent and unobstructed. Any exterior windows or doors with a view to the waiting area or reception area must be free of any posting
or material that would obstruct the view of the waiting area or reception area from the outside of the establishment.
K. No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or
distributed any advertisement, picture, or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive
or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional massage services.
L. No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall depict, place, publish, distribute, or cause to be depicted, placed,
published, or distributed any advertising matter that suggests to prospective patrons that any services are available other than those services permitted
by this chapter, or which would suggest that employees or massage therapists are dressed in any manner other than that permitted by this chapter.
M. No advertising will suggest or describe the physical characteristics of employees or massage therapists.
N. No person shall be denied a massage or access to the massage establishment because of gender. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-13: PERSONS UNDER AGE EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED ON PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be offered or receive a massage at any massage business establishment
unless accompanied by, or with written consent of, a parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-14: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on any premises
used in any way for or by a massage business, patron or massage therapist. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-15: HOURS AND MASSAGE THERAPIST ON PREMISES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 124/702
No portion of any business premises used in any way for or by a massage business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., and there shall be at least one state licensed massage therapist present on the business premises at all times
when the massage establishment is open for business. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-16: EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPIST:
No person shall employ, as a massage therapist, any person unless the employee has obtained and has in effect a state license issued by the Illinois
department of financial and professional regulation pursuant to the Illinois massage licensing act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/1 et seq., as it may be
amended from time to time. If a massage establishment employs any person or hires any independent contractor who is not a stated licensed massage
therapist, but performs or will perform any Asian bodywork approach or other bodywork approach, the establishment shall also procure a bodyworks
business license pursuant to chapter 29B of this title, and any person that will perform Asian bodywork approaches that is not a massage therapist, shall
first procure an Asian bodywork approach practitioner's license from the village in accordance with the requirements of chapter 29B of this title. (Ord.
2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-17: INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
Upon issuance of a massage establishment business license, in addition to the inspection requirements of section 3-29A-3 of this chapter, the licensee
shall provide any representative of the village with reasonable opportunity to inspect the premises for which the permit is issued and to interview the
licensee's agents, employees, and independent contractors under oral or written contract to perform massages on the business premises or off site for the
purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and state and federal laws are being complied with. It shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to allow any representative of the village access to the premises of the massage establishment or to hinder such access or
to fail to provide such information in any manner. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-18: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to
fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any other person.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to expose his or her sexual or genital area to any other person. It shall also be unlawful
for any person, in a massage establishment, to expose the sexual or genital area of any other person.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering,
the sexual or genital area of his or her body.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, offer or agree to perform any act which shall require the touching of a patron's sexual or genital area or
any unlawful act, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14, 5/11-14.1, 5/11-14.3, and 5/11-14.4, which are incorporated as now or hereafter
amended.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment, to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage
establishment, any agent, employee or any other person under his or her control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsection A, B, C or
D of this section.
F. It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to administer or permit massage within the village, except within the establishment licensed to
carry on such business under this chapter or as outcall massage service.
G. It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted
with a door capable of being locked. Toilets and cubicles used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall be clearly marked as to purposes
on the exterior door or curtain of the cubicle, room or booth. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to eliminate any other regulation
concerning the maintenance of premises, or to preclude authorized inspection of any premises, whenever such inspection is deemed appropriate by
the police or health departments. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-19: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE; EXEMPTIONS:
The massage establishment license, otherwise required under this chapter, shall not be required for hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or any facility
at which a healthcare worker duly licensed by the state of Illinois provides, on an ongoing basis, professional health services to individuals, including, but
not limited to, the offices of an occupational therapist licensed under the Illinois occupational therapy practice act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 75/1 et
seq.; a physical therapist licensed under the medical practice act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 60/1 et seq.; a chiropractor licensed under the medical
practice act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 60/1 et seq.; and a naprapath listed under the Illinois naprapathic practice act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes
63/1 et seq. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-20: SALE OR TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage business or the relocation of the massage establishment, the massage establishment license shall be null
and void. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 125/702
3-29A-21: NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS:
No person or entity granted a massage establishment license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the massage establishment under a name not
specified in the license, nor shall the person conduct business under any designation or location not specified in the license, except that the location for
outcall massage service need not be specified on the license. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-22: JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY:
Any act or failure to act of an employee, a person performing massage at or on behalf of a massage establishment as an independent contractor or
otherwise, or an agent of the licensee with respect to the licensed business shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee. The licensee and individual
committing a violation are jointly and severally liable for any fines or penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29A-23: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
A. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine in the amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed each time on each day during or on which violation occurs or is
permitted to occur.
B. Whenever a person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, firm and/or other entity violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, the village may cause appropriate legal actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, to be instituted and maintained to enforce compliance
herewith. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
Chapter 29B
BODYWORK ESTABLISHMENTS AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS FOR
PRACTITIONERS OF ASIAN BODYWORK APPROACHES
3-29B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, unless otherwise indicated by the context:
AOBTA: The American Organization For Bodywork Therapies Of Asia.
APPLICANT: Any person or entity seeking bodywork approach business license. If the applicant is a sole proprietorship, the information sought to be
provided shall be for the individual owner; if a partnership, by each general and each limited partner; if a joint venture, by each joint venturer; if a
corporation, by each officer, director and shareholder; if a limited liability company, by each manager and by each member owning or holding more than a
ten percent (10%) membership interest; if another entity, the information shall be provided for each trustee, beneficiary and/or owner. It shall also include
the operations manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business. Applicant shall also include any person seeking an Asian
bodywork approach practitioner's license.
ASIAN BODYWORK APPROACH: The treatment of the human body, and purported treatment of the human mind and spirit, including the electromagnetic
or energetic field which surrounds and infuses it, by using pressure and/or manipulation of the soft tissue and acupoints of the human body based on
Chinese medical principles for assessing and evaluating the human body's energetic system. It uses traditional Asian techniques and treatment strategies
to primarily affect and balance the energetic system for treating the human body, emotions, mind, energy field and spirit for the promotion, maintenance
and restoration of human health. Methods of assessment and evaluation include the Chinese Four Pillars of examination, observation, listening, asking,
and touching. Assessments are based primarily on Chinese medicine parameters relating to the balance and circulation of the Five Essential Substances:
Qi, Jing, Shen, Xue and Jin-ye. Treatment may include touching, pressing or holding of the body along meridians and/or on acupoints primarily with the
hands, stretching, external application of medicinal plants or foods, heat or cold applications to the body, and dietary and/or exercise suggestions.
Cupping, guasha, moxibustion and other methods and modalities may also be used, such as shiatsu, acupressure, Amma, Qigong, acupuncture,
biomedicine, Tui Na, Jin Shin, Jyutsa, Chi Nei Tsan, Jin Sin Do, Thai bodywork and other trademark or other forms recognized by AOBTA.
ASIAN BODYWORK APPROACH PRACTITIONER: Any person who performs any Asian bodywork approach services to patrons or any person under
such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom such Asian bodywork approach services are provided, or some third party on
such person's behalf, will pay money or any other consideration or gratuity therefor.
BODYWORK APPROACH BUSINESS: A person acting as a sole proprietor, a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, association,
firm or entity having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of one or more Asian bodywork approaches or other bodywork
approaches, and which has a fixed place of business where any person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, association, firm
or entity engages in or carries on Asian bodywork approach or other bodywork approach and/or hires employees, agents or enters oral or written contracts
with individuals or independent contractors to perform Asian bodywork approach or other bodywork services for patrons for money, other consideration, or
any gratuity.
BODYWORK APPROACH PRACTITIONER: Any person who performs an Asian bodywork approach and/or other bodywork approach services to patrons
or any person under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom such Asian bodywork approach or other bodywork
approach services are provided, or some third party, on such person's behalf will pay money or give other consideration or any gratuity therefor.
CONVICTION: A plea of guilty or nolo contendere, finding of guilty, jury verdict or entry of judgment by sentencing of any crime, including, but not limited
to, convictions, preceding sentences of supervision, conditional discharge or first offender probation under the laws of any jurisdiction of the United States.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who renders any service in connection with the operation of a bodywork approach business and receives compensation from the
operator of the business or patrons. All employees of a bodywork approach business shall be over the age of eighteen (18).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 126/702
LICENSEE: The operator of a bodywork approach establishment business license and/or any person who holds a bodywork approach practitioner's
license issued by the village.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft
parts of the body with hands or with aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations used in this practice, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the
person to whom treatment is provided, or some third party on such person's behalf, will pay money or give other consideration or any gratuity therefor
performed by a state licensed massage therapist and which may include any bodywork approaches if performed by a state licensed massage therapist.
MASSAGE BUSINESS: A person acting as a sole proprietor, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, firm or other business or entity
having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage by one or more massage therapists.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who for consideration or gratuity performs a massage and who holds a valid massage therapy license issued by the
Illinois department of financial and professional regulation.
NCBTMB: The National Certification Board Of Therapeutic Massage And Bodywork.
NCCA: The National Commission For Certifying Agencies.
NCCAOM: The National Certification Commission For Acupuncture And Oriental Medicine.
NOBTA: The National Organization Of Bodywork Therapies Of Asia.
OTHER BODYWORK APPROACHES: Recognized bodywork approaches and modalities, other than Asian bodywork approaches that are specifically
exempt under section 25 of the massage licensing act1, including those that do not involve soft tissue manipulation, including Alexander technique,
Feldenkrais, reike and therapeutic touch, and certain service marked bodywork techniques that involve soft tissue manipulation, including Rolfing, Trager
approach, polarity therapy and orthobionomy if approved by their respective governing body based on a minimum level of training, demonstration of
competency and adherence to ethical standards set by their governing body, and practitioners of bodywork who restrict manipulation to soft tissue to the
feet, hands and ears, and who do not have the client disrobe, such as reflexology.
OWNER: Any person or legal entity who owns ten percent (10%) or greater interest in a bodywork approach business.
PATRON: Any person who receives one or more Asian bodywork approach services under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or
she will pay money or give other consideration therefor.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: Including the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-
6-2015)
3-29B-2: BODYWORK APPROACH BUSINESS LICENSE:
A. It shall be unlawful for any bodywork approach business establishment to operate in the village without a valid and current bodywork approach
establishment business license issued by the village pursuant to the terms of this chapter. A separate license shall be required for each bodywork
business location regardless of whether multiple businesses are operated by the same person acting as a sole proprietor, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, joint venture, firm, association, or business. All practitioners offering Asian bodywork approaches require a village Asian
bodywork practitioner license. A person offering or practicing Asian bodywork approaches shall have an Asian bodywork approach practitioner license
issued by the village as described in section 3-29B-3 of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any massage business establishment licensed by the village pursuant to chapter 29A of this title, or individual massage therapist
licensed and operating under the massage licensing act, to employ, hire, sublease, contract or allow at any location where massage is performed, any
practitioner of Asian bodywork approaches to perform or provide any Asian bodywork approaches unless that business also has a bodywork
establishment business license under this chapter, and each practitioner of Asian bodywork approaches procures an Asian bodywork approach
practitioner's license from the village, and each practitioner of other bodywork approaches employed by or under contract with the massage business
meets the minimum qualifications therefor as set forth in section 3-29B-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-3: ASIAN BODYWORK APPROACH PRACTITIONER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person offering or providing Asian bodywork approaches shall perform a massage or any Asian bodywork approach without a state massage therapy
license or a current valid Asian bodywork approach practitioner license issued by the village. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Hospitals, nursing homes, or any facility at which a healthcare worker duly licensed by the state of Illinois provides on an ongoing basis, professional
health services to individuals, or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state of Illinois, or to those
working under the direction of any such persons in any such businesses, including the offices of an occupational therapist licensed under the
occupational therapy practice act2, a physical therapist licensed under the physical therapy act3, a physician or chiropractic physician licensed under
the medical practice act4, a naprapath licensed under the naprapathic practice act5.
B. Any barber, cosmetologist, aesthetician or nail technician lawfully carrying on their respective businesses to the extent authorized under a valid
unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the state of Illinois; provided, this exemption is only intended to permit normal and customary
barbery, cosmetology, aesthetic and nail technology services which involve incidental physical contact, such as scalp rubs, facials, and hand
manipulations which otherwise qualify as massage activities or bodywork approach services. This exemption is not intended, and does not permit,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 127/702
general massage activities as part of any barber, cosmetologist, aesthetician or nail technician business beyond that authorized by their state license or
certification, nor does it permit bodywork approaches beyond that authorized by its state license.
C. Any athletic trainer registered in the state of Illinois who administers such athletic related massage or bodywork approach services in the normal course
of training duties.
D. No Asian bodywork approach services shall be performed off the bodywork approach establishment business premises, including at the patron's
premises, including the patron's place of business or residence, unless performed by a state licensed massage therapist.
E. Bona fide health/sport establishments which allow persons of all ages on the premises and which meet the following criteria:
1. The primary purpose of the establishment is health and fitness; massage and bodywork service is subsidiary;
2. No more than twenty percent (20%) of the establishment revenue is derived from massage services and/or bodywork approach services; and
3. Massage and/or bodywork approach facilities shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the establishment's building.
F. Massage businesses licensed pursuant to chapter 29A of this title that do not perform or provide Asian bodywork approaches or other bodywork
approaches by any person who is not a massage therapist. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-5: APPLICATION FOR BODYWORK APPROACH BUSINESS LICENSE AND INITIAL INSPECTIONS:
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a bodywork approach business shall file an application, under oath, with the village of Bartlett
upon a form provided by the village clerk and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee, in the amount set forth in section 3-1-1 of this title. Copies of the
bodywork approach business license application shall be forwarded to the building director, the health inspector, and the community development director.
Each such director or inspector, or his or her designee, shall, within thirty (30) days, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a bodywork
approach business and upon inspection, each inspector shall file a written report with the village clerk concerning compliance with the applicable
regulations. A copy shall also be forwarded by the building director to the Bartlett fire protection district or other applicable fire district having jurisdiction.
The application, once accepted, shall also be referred to the police department for investigation. The police department will perform the required criminal
record check, if any. Background investigations of the applicant shall require the submission of fingerprints. The cost of the criminal record check and cost
of fingerprint submissions shall be borne by the applicant. Each application shall contain the following information for each applicant:
A. A definition of service to be provided.
B. The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted.
C. Federal employer identification number (FEIN) and state of Illinois business tax number (IBT).
D. The name and residence address of each applicant (all provisions in this section which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a person
operating as a sole proprietorship, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, or association).
1. If applicant is a corporation, the name, primary residence address, driver's license number, social security number, and fingerprints of each officer,
director and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation or company (excluding corporations whose
stock is traded), and the address of the corporation or company itself, if different from the address of the bodywork approach establishment. A
certificate of good standing from the secretary of state of the state of its incorporation shall also be submitted.
2. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the name, primary residence address, driver's license number, social security number, and fingerprints
of each manager and of each member that owns greater than a ten percent (10%) membership interest in said company. The provisions of
subsections E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, and O of this section shall be completed for each such person. A certificate of good standing from the secretary of
state of the state of its organization shall also be submitted.
3. If applicant is a partnership, the name, primary residence address, driver's license number, social security number and fingerprints of each partner
including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the bodywork approach establishment. The
provisions of subsections E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, and O of this section shall be completed for each such person.
E. The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant.
F. Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
G. Individual applicant's height, weight, color of eyes, hair and sex.
H. Copy of driver's license or state identification card.
I. One portrait photograph of the applicant at least one inch by one and one-half inches (1" x 11/2") and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints shall be
taken by the chief of police or his/her agent. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, fingerprints of any and all officers,
shareholders, directors, partners, members, managers or agents of the entity (except for massage therapists) along with the fee for each.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 128/702
J. Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.
K. The bodywork approach business or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, if previously operating in this or another
municipality, county or state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason for the revocation or suspension, and the business activity
or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
L. All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted.
Convictions shall mean by plea of guilty or nolo contendere, finding of guilty, jury verdict or entry of judgment by sentencing of any crime, including, but
not limited to, convictions, preceding sentences of supervision, conditional discharge or first offender probation under the laws of any jurisdiction of the
United States:
1. That is a felony, or
2. That is a misdemeanor, an essential element of which is dishonesty or that is directly related to the practice of the profession including, without
limitation, the following Illinois offenses, or if found guilty outside the state of Illinois, would constitute the same offense if committed within the state
of Illinois:
a. An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony.
b. An offense enumerated in any provision of article 11, entitled "sex offenses", of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
c. A violation of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., as amended from time to time.
d. A violation of the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
e. A felony offense enumerated in article 24, deadly weapons, of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq., as amended
from time to time, or any other offense that involves the use of weapons.
M. The name and address of any other business owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in subsection D of this section.
N. A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant.
O. Authorization of the village, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license, and to perform criminal background investigations as required by this chapter.
P. A description of the proposed bodywork approach business, including the number of Asian bodywork approach practitioners, and the name, primary
residence addresses, social security numbers, and driver's license number of each Asian bodywork approach practitioner and other bodywork
practitioner that will be employed by the business, and stating what other activities or business will be conducted at the same location, and the physical
facilities to be used.
Q. A statement of whether the bodywork approach business will be conducted by a manager. In such case, the manager's name, address, telephone
number and age shall be provided along with a statement of any convictions as set forth under subsection L of this section.
R. A current certificate of inspection of the premises from an applicable county board of health, if required.
S. The license fee and other fees as provided in section 3-29B-11 of this chapter.
T. In the event applicant is made aware that any information or document submitted as part of this application process is inaccurate or incomplete,
applicant shall immediately notify the village clerk and provide appropriate corrections. Failure to accurately and completely provide, or as necessary
update, required information may delay the processing of such application or result in its denial or result in the suspension or revocation of an existing
license.
U. If a business intends to provide either bodywork approaches or modalities other than Asian bodywork approaches that are also exempt under section
25 of the massage licensing act6, then the business applicant shall for each employee or independent contractor that is intended to perform such other
bodywork approaches or modalities furnish a certification of such modality approved by AOBTA, NCBTMB, NCCAOM, or NCCA evidencing a minimum
of fifty (50) hours of training in that other bodywork approach or modality.
V. If upon investigation, the village determines that the practitioner of other bodywork approaches licensure or certification may not be bona fide, or that the
organization providing the licensure or certification may not be bona fide, the village may conduct additional investigation by requiring the employee or
independent contractor that will be performing other bodywork approach to submit to fingerprinting. When fingerprinting is required, the applicant shall
present himself or any owner or herself for fingerprints to be taken by the village of Bartlett police department. Applicant (or any owner) shall pay the
fingerprint fee as provided in subsection 3-29B-11C of this chapter for each person required to submit fingerprints.
W. Proof of commercial general liability insurance of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) general aggregate coverage for said business covering the acts and omissions of its employees, and such insurance coverage from
each of its independent contractors or confirmation they are covered by the business' insurance policy, or proof of such insurance coverage by the
individual Asian bodywork approach practitioner or other bodywork practitioner. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 129/702
3-29B-6: APPLICATION FOR VILLAGE ASIAN BODYWORK APPROACH PRACTITIONER LICENSE AND MINIMUM
QUALIFICATIONS:
Every person seeking a village Asian bodywork approach practitioner license shall make an application to the village clerk. Any person seeking an Asian
bodywork approach practitioner license to perform Asian bodywork approach services defined by this chapter shall provide, in conjunction with his or her
license application or upon request by the village clerk, information establishing the qualification for an Asian bodywork approach practitioner license. The
village clerk shall have the right to confirm any of the information asked for or provided in the applications. Applications shall include the following:
A. The name (including nicknames or aliases) and address, telephone number, social security number, driver's license number, and age of the applicant.
B. The location where the Asian bodywork approach will be performed.
C. The Asian bodywork approach license fee as provided in section 3-1-1 of this title.
D. Business, occupation, or employment of each Asian bodywork approach practitioner employee and independent contractors of the applicant for five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of application.
E. Fingerprints for running a background check by the Bartlett police department, and an investigation authorization on forms furnished by each applicant
authorizing the Bartlett police department to conduct a criminal background check and receive reports from the Illinois state police, the FBI and other
law enforcement agencies.
F. Two (2) passport size photographs (1 inch x 1.5 inches) of the applicant and owners (head and shoulders area, face forward) shall be provided by the
applicant to be used in the investigation of the applicant, the preparation of a photo identification license card, and the identification of the license
holder following issuance. Provided, in the case of a renewal application, the village clerk may waive the requirement for photographs if the applicant's
photographs are on file and new photo identification permit cards are not to be issued.
G. Certification from the American Organization For Bodywork Therapies Of Asia (AOBTA) that the applicant is a professional member and certifying or
approving the applicant as a practitioner of Asian bodyworks, or if the applicant is approved by another Asian bodywork organization based on a
minimum level of training, demonstration of competency, and adherence to ethical standards set by their governing body meeting the following
requirements:
1. The applicant has a current certification with the NCBTMB; or
2. The applicant has been certified or approved by another Asian bodywork organization that has a curriculum in Asian bodywork based on actual
classroom or formal education, and without membership or certification by such organization based on apprentice hours; or
3. The applicant shall have graduated from an Asian bodyworks school or oriental school of medicine with a minimum three hundred (300) hour
curriculum that includes Asian bodywork, Chinese medical theory, anatomy and physiology, and clinical practice, provided such school is accredited
by the AOBTA, NCBTMB or the NCCAOM.
H. The application shall include:
1. The name, address, telephone number and website address of the Asian bodywork approach school;
2. The name of all faculty members of the Asian bodywork school who provided education or training to the applicant including those teachers' Asian
bodywork certifications, experience and educational background;
3. The applicant shall provide a copy of his or her school transcript which shall include identification of all courses taken, the number of hours for those
courses, a passing grade for all those courses, a copy of their tuition bill, and proof of payment of tuition.
4. A copy of the ethical standards of the school or Asian bodywork organization.
5. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the village to establish the accuracy and legitimacy of the other information provided
pursuant to this section.
6. The burden of establishing the minimum qualifications shall be on the applicant.
I. No certification or approval from an Asian bodywork approach school shall be accepted by the village clerk if all or a portion of the credits used for the
certification of the applicant were earned in a country other than the United States Of America.
J. No Asian bodywork approach practitioner license shall be issued by the village clerk unless the village clerk has received written verification from the
Asian bodywork approach school that the applicant has successfully completed the requirements of the Asian bodywork approach school's program.
K. If upon investigation, the village determines that an applicant's licensure or certification may not be bona fide, or that the organization providing the
licensure or certification may not be bona fide, or that the Asian bodywork organization or school has not verified the accuracy of the documents
required by this section to be true and correct, the village clerk may deny the Asian bodywork approach practitioner license. The village clerk shall
notify the applicant of the bodywork approach business licensee and any applicant for a village Asian bodywork approach practitioner license of the
reasons for the denial in writing at the address of the applicant listed on the application. The applicant shall have the right to establish the bona fide
nature of the licensure or certification in writing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 130/702
L. At the time of and after the village issues an Asian bodyworks approach practitioner license under this chapter, it shall be the obligation of the licensee
to provide the village with all of the information set forth in this section for each new or different Asian bodywork approach practitioner prior to the time
that person commences work at the licensed premises.
M. Payment of the applicable fees as set forth in section 3-29B-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-7: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS FOR OTHER BODYWORK PRACTITIONERS:
A. If a business intends to provide either bodywork approaches or modalities other than Asian bodywork approaches that are also exempt under section
25 of the massage licensing act7, then the business applicant shall for each employee or independent contractor that is intended to perform such other
bodywork approaches or modalities shall furnish a certification of such modality approved by AOBTA, NCBTMB, NCCAOM, or NCCA evidencing a
minimum of fifty (50) hours of training in that other bodywork approach or modality.
B. Documents establishing that any person proposing to practice under any other bodywork approach satisfies the minimum qualifications for bodywork
approach practitioner license including, but not limited to:
1. Documents showing the name, address and telephone number of the organization, association or school issuing the certificates or membership to
the persons employed by the business as well as a copy of its curriculum; and
2. Documents from the organization, association or school issuing the certificates establishing the minimum level of training, testing and ethical
standards set by the governing body of the organization or association; and
3. The name and address of the governing body of the organization, association or school; and
4. Proof that the person has completed the level of training, demonstrated competency, and adherence to ethical standards by records of the governing
association establishing the practitioner's attendance at the program, including the date the practitioner began training; the date of completion of the
practitioner's training program; proof of payment of the practitioner's tuition, and the identity including the name, business address, website address,
and telephone number(s) for the faculty, testers or other persons involved in the training, testing and establishment of ethical standards of their
school or governing body and the name and address of the governing body.
5. Any licenses or certificates for each practitioner; and
6. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the village to establish the accuracy and legitimacy of the other information provided
pursuant to this section.
C. If upon investigation, the village determines that the practitioner of other bodywork approaches licensure or certification may not be bona fide, or that
the organization providing the licensure or certification may not be bona fide, the village may conduct additional investigation by requiring the employee
or independent contractor that will be performing other bodywork approach to submit to fingerprinting. When fingerprinting is required, the applicant
shall present himself or any owner or herself for fingerprints to be taken by the village of Bartlett police department. Applicant (or any owner) shall pay
the fingerprint fee as provided in subsection 3-29B-11C of this chapter for each person required to submit fingerprints.
D. In the event the practitioner of other bodywork approaches does not meet the minimum criteria for the bodywork approach, the business shall not be
authorized to offer that bodywork approach or modality service, or advertise that it will provide that service unless another employee or independent
contractor under contract to perform that other bodywork approach meets the minimum requirements therefor set forth in this section. (Ord. 2015-77,
10-6-2015)
3-29B-8: APPLICATION PROCESSING:
A. An application shall not be considered proper or filed until all information and material required of the applicant has been submitted to the village clerk.
B. Upon receipt of a proper application, the village clerk shall investigate the information contained in the application and shall determine whether the
applicant, owners and the premises designated, and each Asian bodywork approach practitioner, whether an owner, employee or independent
contractor, are in compliance with applicable state and local laws.
C. The investigation, including inspections and background checks, shall be completed within forty five (45) days after receipt of a proper and complete
application. Provided, the village clerk may extend this investigation period by an additional period upon a finding that such additional period is needed
to properly complete the investigation or where the village clerk's workload associated with the number of applications submitted under this chapter
makes the processing of the application impractical. Provided, whenever such an extension period is invoked, written notice shall be provided to the
applicant along with the specific reasons for such extension.
D. If, within ten (10) days, following completion of the investigation, the village clerk determines that the applicant and/or premises are in compliance with
the applicable laws of the village, the village clerk shall issue the bodywork approach business license and/or Asian bodywork approach practitioner
license or licenses.
E. If, within ten (10) days, following completion of the investigation, the village clerk determines that the applicant, owners, Asian bodywork approach
practitioner and/or premises are not in compliance with the applicable laws of the village, the village clerk shall notify the applicant or applicants in
writing that its, his, or her license has been denied, setting forth the reasons therefor, and advising the applicant of his or her right to a hearing pursuant
to section 3-29B-24 of this chapter. Such denial shall be final and effective on the eleventh day following mailing of the notice by the village clerk. The
fee paid by the business applicant pursuant to section 3-29B-11 of this chapter, shall be returned, less fifty dollars ($50.00) which will be retained as a
processing fee. Any fees paid by the practitioner pursuant to section 3-29B-11 of this chapter shall be returned, less twenty five dollars ($25.00) which
shall be retained as a processing fee. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 131/702
3-29B-9: POSTING OF LICENSE, PHOTO IDENTIFICATION CARD:
A. The village bodywork approach business license issued shall be available for public inspection and review upon request, if said licenses are not posted
and available for immediate inspection in the reception area for patrons, if any, or in the bodywork approach work area.
B. Every massage therapist working at a massage business establishment that also provides Asian bodywork approach services shall possess his or her
state license and a government issued photo identification card while on the licensed premises and produce such state license and identification card
upon request of any representative of the village of Bartlett.
C. Every Asian bodywork approach practitioner shall possess his or her village Asian bodywork approach practitioner license and a government issued
photo identification card while on the licensed premises, and produce such village license and identification card upon request by any representative of
the village of Bartlett.
D. Every practitioner of other bodywork approaches shall possess a government photo identification card while on the premises, and produce said
identification card upon request by any representative of the village of Bartlett. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-10: LIMITATION ON ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
No bodywork approach business license or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license shall be issued or renewed:
A. To an applicant or owner who has been convicted of the following offenses:
1. Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex offenses as defined in article II of the criminal code of 1961, as amended.
2. Any felony based upon conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity, within the past ten (10) years; or
3. Any felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity, but which felony involved the use
of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including rape or prostitution, within the past five (5) years; or
4. Any misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation, based upon conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or
activity, within the past five (5) years.
B. To an applicant, owner or agent or straw person for such applicant or owner whose license issued under this chapter, massage business license issued
pursuant to chapter 29A of this title, or business license issued pursuant to chapter 1 of this title prior to the effective date hereof has been revoked for
cause.
C. To an applicant or owner who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
D. To an applicant or owner under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
E. To an applicant or owner where grounds for revocation exist as provided under section 3-29B-23 of this chapter.
F. In addition to the provisions stated above, no bodywork approach business license shall be issued or renewed as follows:
1. To a corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the "business corporation act of
1983", as amended, to transact business in Illinois and is in good standing, or to a limited liability company, unless it is organized in Illinois and is in
good standing.
2. To any applicant or owner whose place of business is conducted by a manager unless the manager possesses the same qualifications required by
the licensee. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-11: FEES:
A. The fee for a bodywork approach business license shall be as provided in section 3-1-1 of this title and such license shall be valid for one year from
May 1 to April 30 of each year. The fee for 2015 shall be prorated and credit shall be given for any business license fee paid for the period May 1, 2015
through April 30, 2016.
B. The fee for an Asian bodywork approach practitioner license shall be as provided in section 3-1-1 of this title and such license shall be valid for one year
from May 1 to April 30 of each year, but shall be prorated for the year 2015.
C. A fingerprint fee of equal to the current rate being charged by the Illinois state police for processing fingerprints shall be paid for each person required to
submit fingerprints under this chapter. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-12: EXPIRATION OF BODYWORK APPROACH BUSINESS LICENSE, PRACTITIONER LICENSE, AND RENEWAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 132/702
A. Each bodywork approach business license or Asian bodywork approach practitioner's license shall expire each year on April 30 and may be renewed
only by making application as provided in section 3-29B-5 of this chapter. Provided, in lieu of full submittal, an applicant or owner may, on forms
provided by the village clerk, certify that the information previously provided remains true and valid. This renewal application shall be processed as
provided in section 3-29B-5 of this chapter. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of
the Asian bodywork approach license will not be affected. Renewal applications for bodywork approach business licenses and Asian bodywork
practitioner's licenses shall be obtained from the village clerk's office.
B. When the village clerk denies renewal of a bodywork approach business license and Asian bodywork approach practitioner's license as provided for in
this chapter, the applicant or owner shall not be considered for a license or permit for one year from the date of denial. Provided, if subsequent to denial
the village clerk finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant or owner may be granted a license.
C. Upon expiration of an Asian bodywork approach practitioner license, the practitioner shall renew his/her application for a license on a form issued by the
village clerk's office. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-13: BODYWORK APPROACH BUSINESS FACILITIES AND OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
No license or renewal thereof, shall be issued to conduct a bodywork approach business unless an inspection, conducted not less than once each year,
discloses that the business complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
A. Hot and cold running water shall be provided.
B. Adequate private dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons.
C. All walls, ceilings, floors, steam rooms, and other physical facilities in a bodywork approach business shall be kept in good repair, and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
D. All bodywork approach businesses shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels which shall be laundered after each use by an individual
patron and stored in a sanitary manner. All towels and linens furnished for use of one patron shall not be refurnished for use of another patron until
laundered.
E. Every portion of the bodywork approach business, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary manner.
F. Prices for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
G. All employees, including Asian bodywork approach practitioners or other bodywork approach practitioners, shall be clean and wear clean,
nontransparent outer garments.
H. The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with nontransparent towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee,
Asian bodywork approach practitioner, or other bodywork approach practitioner.
I. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, baths, and steam rooms and any other physical facilities shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day
the bodywork approach business establishment is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is
used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
J. Oils, creams, lotions, and other preparations used in administering bodywork approach services shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
K. Each Asian bodywork approach practitioner or other bodywork approach practitioner shall wash his or her hands in hot running water using a proper
soap or disinfectant before administering bodywork approach services to any patron.
L. No Asian bodywork approach practitioner or other bodywork approach practitioner, employee, or licensee shall perform, offer, or agree to perform any
act which shall require the touching of a patron's sexual or genital area.
M. Any reception or waiting area shall be open to the public and visible from outside of the immediate entrance, e.g., storefront windows and any entrance
door shall be transparent and unobstructed. Any exterior windows or doors with a view to the waiting area or reception area must be free of any posting
or material that would obstruct the view of the waiting area or reception area from the outside of the establishment.
N. No bodywork approach business granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed,
published or distributed any advertisement, picture, or statement which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be
false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any bodywork approach services.
O. No bodywork approach business granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall depict, place, publish, distribute, or cause to be depicted,
placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that suggests to prospective patrons that any services are available other than those services
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 133/702
permitted by this chapter, or which would suggest that employees, Asian bodywork approach practitioners or other bodywork approach practitioners are
dressed in any manner other than that permitted by this chapter.
P. No advertising will suggest or describe the physical characteristics of employees, Asian bodywork approach practitioners, or other bodywork approach
practitioners.
Q. No person shall be denied bodywork approach services or access to the bodywork approach business because of gender. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-14: PERSONS UNDER AGE EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED ON PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be offered or receive Asian bodywork approaches at any bodywork
approach business establishment unless accompanied by, or with written consent of, a parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-15: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on any premises
used in any way for or by a bodywork approach business, patron or bodywork approach practitioner. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-16: HOURS:
No portion of any business premises used in any way for or by a bodywork approach business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-17: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. No employee, independent contractor or operator of a bodywork approach business or holder of an Asian bodywork approach practitioner license shall
perform, offer or agree to perform any act which would require the touching of a patron's sexual or genital area.
B. The sexual or genital areas of patrons shall be covered by towels, clothing, cloths or undergarments at all times when in the presence of an employee,
Asian bodywork approach practitioner or other bodywork practitioner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a bodywork approach business establishment to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of
his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any other person.
D. No employee or operator shall administer Asian bodywork approach services or other bodywork approach services to a patron exhibiting any skin
fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, or skin eruption, unless a physician duly licensed by the state of Illinois certifies in writing that such persons
may safely receive Asian bodywork approach or other bodywork approach services prescribing the conditions thereof.
E. Bodywork approach business employees, independent contractors and agents, and Asian bodywork approach practitioners must wear clean,
nontransparent outer garments fully covering the sexual or genital area.
F. Bodywork approach businesses are prohibited from advertising in ways which would suggest that employees are dressed in a way other than that
allowed in this section, or that any massage or services other than those defined by this chapter are available.
G. Any bodywork approach business license and an Asian bodywork approach practitioner license issued under this chapter shall be displayed in a
conspicuous location within the customer area of a licensed business.
H. At all times during the hours of operation of a bodywork approach business there shall be present a manager or other employee of the license holder
who shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age.
I. No bodywork approach business license holder shall employ as a massage therapist any person unless said person has obtained and has in effect a
license issued by the state of Illinois, or an Asian bodywork approach practitioner unless said person has obtained and has in effect an Asian bodywork
practitioner license issued by the village of Bartlett.
J. It shall be unlawful for any business which holds a license to operate a bodywork approach business within the village to fail to comply with the
conditions and regulations set forth in this chapter or to suffer or permit noncompliance with such conditions and regulations of this chapter on or within
the licensed premises.
K. It shall be unlawful for any business licensed as provided in this chapter to operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not
specified in such license.
L. The doors to the individual rooms in which bodywork approach services take place shall not be equipped with any locking device and shall not be
blocked or obstructed from either side.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 134/702
M. The doors which customers use for egress and ingress to any bodywork approach business shall not be locked during regular business hours. For
purposes of this section regular business hours shall be considered anytime in which bodywork approach services are being offered on a licensed
premises.
N. No person providing bodywork approach services shall escort the person receiving the said services from the customer or patron's parked vehicle into
the premises where the bodywork approach services are to be performed.
O. It shall be unlawful for any business licensed as provided in this chapter to advertise or use any other business name to advertise any service which is
not authorized by this chapter or state statute in any manner. Internet advertisements containing unlawful advertising and listing the address of a
licensed business shall be presumed to have been originated by the license holder at that address who shall bear the burden by clear and convincing
evidence to establish that the advertising was not placed by the licensed business or its agent.
P. All persons working for a licensed business or applying for an Asian bodywork approach practitioner's license shall have an Illinois driver's license or
Illinois secretary of state identification card present with them while working on a licensed premises.
Q. Any business holding a bodywork approach business license shall be liable for the acts of its employees and independent contractors performing Asian
bodywork approach services and/or other bodywork approach services on the licensed premises without scienter of the employee's or independent
contractor's acts. All persons offering or providing Asian bodywork approach services or other bodywork approach services in any licensed bodywork
approach business shall be presumed to be employees of that business and not independent contractors, or sublessees, unless overcome by clear
and convincing evidence. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-18: PREMISES RESTRICTIONS:
A. The bodywork approach business premises shall be in compliance with applicable codes and ordinances of the village, including, but not limited to,
zoning, building and life safety codes and all state laws and county health codes and regulations.
B. When any license shall have been revoked for cause, no license shall be granted to any person or entity for a period of three (3) years thereafter for any
bodywork approach business or the conduct of an Asian bodywork approach or other bodywork approach or modality in the premises described in the
revoked license. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-19: PERIODIC INSPECTIONS OF BODYWORK APPROACH BUSINESSES AND PREMISES:
The village administrator, or his/her authorized designee, shall from time to time, and at least once a year, make an inspection of each bodywork approach
business granted a license under the provisions of this chapter for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are complied with. Such
inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any license holder to fail to allow such inspection officer
access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-20: TRANSFER, CHANGES OF OWNERSHIP OR MANAGEMENT:
A. Any bodywork approach business license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be applicable only to the specific business licensee, practitioner license
and location designated, and may not be sold, transferred, or otherwise assigned. Provided, where the licensee remains the same, but a request is
made to designate and substitute a different location, the village clerk may approve such new location upon submission of proof that such location is in
compliance with this chapter. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be required for processing such location changes.
B. Any permit issued pursuant to this code shall be applicable only for the specific business designated, and may not be sold, transferred or otherwise
assigned, except where ownership of the business remains identical.
C. A transfer in the ownership or control of a bodywork approach business shall constitute change in the licensee and the existing license shall be deemed
surrendered, extinguished and void. A new application and license shall be filed and processed as provided in section 3-29B-5 of this chapter prior to
such transfer taking effect. Any transfer in the ownership of a bodywork approach business in violation of this chapter shall constitute operation of such
business without a license.
D. No bodywork approach business, or person issued an Asian bodywork approach practitioner license under this chapter shall use the name or telephone
number of a prior bodywork approach business after the transfer of ownership or control of a bodywork approach business or any name or telephone
number which is different than those in the application for the bodywork approach business license issued by the village.
E. Notice shall be provided prior to any change of the designated manager conducting business for the bodywork approach business license. The new
manager shall be qualified to operate the bodywork approach business as provided in section 3-29B-5 of this chapter. The licensee shall, not less than
ten (10) business days before such change is to take effect, give the village clerk written notice of such change. The notice shall include any
information concerning the new manager which is required in section 3-29B-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-21: JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY:
Any act or failure to act of an employee, a person performing massage at or on behalf of a massage establishment as an independent contractor or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 135/702
otherwise, or an agent of the licensee with respect to the licensed business shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee. The licensee and individual
committing a violation are jointly and severally liable for any fines or penalties assessed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-22: NOTICE OF REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR REFUSAL OF A LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE:
No bodywork approach business license or Asian bodywork approach practitioner's license shall be revoked, suspended, or refused until the applicant,
license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder has received written notice from the village clerk at the address provided in the
application on file with the village. The notice shall set forth the allegations of why the license should be revoked, suspended, or refused. Said written
notice shall be served upon the bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner's license holder, as the case may be,
by delivering the same personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder representative or Asian bodywork
approach practitioner license holder manager identified in the applicable application. The license holder shall notify the village within forty eight (48) hours
of any change in the name or address of its representative. If the applicable licensee cannot be found, and the service of such notice cannot be otherwise
made in the manner therein provided, a copy of such notice shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, and by regular mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder at the licensee's place of business or
residence on file with the village. The revocation or suspension of a bodywork approach business license, and/or Asian bodywork approach practitioner
license shall be deemed effective three (3) business days after personal service or after the mailing of the written notice as provided herein. (Ord. 2015-77,
10-6-2015)
3-29B-23: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF A LICENSE:
The license of a bodywork approach business and/or Asian bodywork approach practitioner may be revoked or suspended, in addition to the fines
provided for in section 3-29B-26 of this chapter, upon one or more of the following grounds:
A. The bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder has committed an act(s) of fraud or deceit in
the application for license, or renewal thereof, submitted to the village clerk.
B. The bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder is engaged in the practice of massage without
a state massage therapy license under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating a state licensed massage therapist or another Asian bodywork
approach practitioner of a like or different name.
C. The bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder has committed an act of fraudulent, false,
misleading or deceptive advertising, or prescribing medicines, drugs, or practices any other licensed profession without legal authority therefor.
D. The bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder has committed an act(s) of prostitution, sexual
offense, or trafficking in controlled substances after the date of issuance of a bodywork approach business license or Asian bodywork approach
practitioner license.
E. The bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder is found to be in violation of any section of this
chapter.
F. The bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder permits an act or acts of prostitution or
solicitation for an act or acts of prostitution to be performed within the premises or elsewhere or permits any procedure during the performance of
services within or off the premises that are performed for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification of any patron, or should reasonably be expected
to cause such result, or permits the use of trafficking of controlled substances or cannabis on the premises.
G. The bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder performs an act of prostitution within the
premises or off the premises or solicits an act of prostitution on or off the premises or performs services within or without the premises in such a
manner for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification of a patron, or should reasonably be expected to cause such result, or the licensee uses or is
trafficking in controlled substances or cannabis.
H. The bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder has violated or is not in compliance with this
chapter and the license has been suspended within the preceding twenty four (24) months.
I. A bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder who knowingly conducted massage activities or
provided bodywork approach services in the village during a period of time when the license holder's license was suspended.
J. Within a twenty four (24) month period, a person or persons committed an offense as listed in subsection 3-29B-5L of this chapter, which substantially
occurred in or on a licensed premises, and for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees or independent
contractors under contract of the bodywork approach business license holder at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is
being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
K. A bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder is delinquent in payment to the village for ad
valorem taxes or other taxes or fees related to the bodywork approach business. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-24: HEARING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 136/702
A. Any applicant, owner, bodywork approach business license holder or Asian bodywork approach practitioner license applicant or holder who receives a
notice of denial, revocation or suspension may file a request for hearing with the village administrator as provided herein. Such request shall be filed
with the village administrator in writing no later than ten (10) business days following receipt of the notice, and shall include a response to the village
clerk's notice. Such response shall include a brief statement addressing the substantive deficiencies cited in the village clerk's notice and shall set forth
the basis for why the license should not be denied, revoked or suspended. If a request for hearing is filed of an order of the village clerk suspending or
revoking a license, such suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending final order of the village administrator as provided in this section. If a request
for hearing is not filed, the village administrator may review the allegations and any other pertinent material, and enter a ruling revoking, suspending or
refusing to issue a license.
B. When any applicant, bodywork approach business licensee or Asian bodywork approach practitioner licensee requests a hearing, the village
administrator shall schedule an informal public hearing not later than twenty one (21) days following receipt of such request. The village administrator
may designate a hearing officer to schedule, convene and conduct the public hearing. In such case, the hearing officer shall have the same powers as
the village administrator to administer oaths and to continue the hearing from time to time to permit the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, to
provide additional information. The purpose of the hearing will be to offer the applicant or licensee an opportunity to show cause why the application
should not be denied or the license suspended or revoked. The village administrator may designate an administrative hearing officer. A record shall be
made of the public hearing and documents may be submitted and/or testimony given, either in person or through sworn affidavit. The Illinois code of
civil procedure shall not be applicable to such hearing. Hearsay may be admissible so long as the village administrator or hearing officer determines
that it bears an indicia of reliability and so long as the rules associated with hearsay are equally applied to all participants in the hearing. This record
may be made by electronic recording. The village administrator or hearing officer shall have the power to administer oaths and to continue the hearing
from time to time to permit the applicant to provide additional information. Where such designation has been made, the hearing officer shall submit
proposed findings and recommendations to the village administrator within fourteen (14) days of the close of the hearing.
C. Any violation of this chapter or unlawful act of any employee, or any independent contractor under contract with such business, of a licensed bodywork
approach business committed on a licensed premises shall be attributable to the licensed bodywork approach business.
D. Within twenty eight (28) days after the close of hearing set forth in subsection B of this section, the village administrator shall make written findings of
fact and issue an appropriate order. A copy of such order shall be promptly served upon the applicant, bodywork approach business license holder or
Asian bodywork approach practitioner license holder. If the village administrator determines that the license should be revoked or suspended, the
suspension or revocation shall take effect immediately upon receipt unless otherwise specified.
E. The decision of the village administrator as provided in subsection D of this section shall be the final administrative action of the village with respect to
the license or application, and shall be subject to the immediate appeal by the applicant, bodywork approach business license holder, or Asian
bodywork approach practitioner license holder to the circuit court of Cook County. Such appeal to the circuit court or administrative review act shall be
filed not later than thirty five (35) days following receipt of the village administrator's findings and order. Failure to file such appeal as provided herein
shall render the village administrator decision final. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
3-29B-25: REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS FOR INVESTIGATION RESULTING IN BUSINESS LICENSE SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION:
In the event that the village of Bartlett conducts an investigation of a licensed bodywork approach business, which results in the revocation or suspension
of its business license, the licensee shall reimburse the village for any and all of the village's costs for the investigation and hearing. In the event the village
of Bartlett conducts an investigation of a licensed Asian bodywork approach practitioner which results in the revocation or suspension of the licensee's
Asian bodywork approach practitioner's license, the said licensee shall reimburse the village for all of the village's costs for the investigation and hearing.
Failure to pay such costs within ten (10) days' written notice from the village shall result in the continuance of any suspension until such time as those
costs are paid and no bodywork approach business license shall be issued or renewed for such a business at the same location until such costs have
been paid to the village. The village shall have such additional or further remedies for collection of such costs as are available by law. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-
2015)
3-29B-26: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
A. Any person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, association, firm or entity found guilty of violation, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues. In addition to any other penalty, a license holder violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to having their
license revoked, suspended or not renewed.
B. Whenever a person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, firm and/or other entity violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, the village may cause appropriate legal actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, to be instituted and maintained to enforce compliance
herewith. (Ord. 2015-77, 10-6-2015)
Chapter 30
ICE CREAM VENDORS
3-30-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated:
DUSK: The darker stage of twilight characterized by little or inadequate sunlight.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 137/702
VEHICLE: Shall mean and include any "vehicle" within the meaning of section 1-217 of Illinois vehicle code1, as amended, "motor driven cycle" within the
meaning of section 1-145.001 of the Illinois vehicle code2, as amended, "motorcycle" within the meaning of section 1-147 of the Illinois vehicle code3, as
amended, and "bicycle" within the meaning of section 1-106 of the Illinois vehicle code4.
VEHICLE OPERATOR: Any person operating any vehicle within the village from which ice cream or similar products will be sold at retail. (Ord. 2005-113,
10-18-2005)
3-30-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of a vehicle for the storage and/or carrying of any ice cream or similar product for sale at retail from said
vehicle within the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett without first having obtained an ice cream vendor license as provided in this chapter.
B. Application for an ice cream vendor license shall be filed with the village clerk. Every applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee to the village
treasurer for each original application and the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee for each renewal application pursuant to section 3-1-1 of this title.
The initial license shall be valid until September 30 of the year in which it is issued unless sooner suspended or revoked. Thereafter renewal licenses
shall be valid for the time period of October 1 through September 30 of each following year unless sooner suspended or revoked.
C. In addition to the information required under section 3-1-3 of this title, the applicant for an ice cream license shall furnish the following information, under
oath:
1. Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
2. All business and residential addresses for the past three (3) years.
3. A list of names of all vehicle operators.
4. Social security numbers, fingerprints, recent photographs, of and copies of drivers' licenses of all vehicle operators listed in subsection C3 of this
section.
5. Criminal background check authorizations in the form attached to ordinance 2005-51 as exhibit A signed by each vehicle operator listed in
subsection C3 of this section.
6. A list of all vehicles owned, leased and/or operated by or on behalf of licensee that will be used for the storage and/or carrying of any ice cream or
similar product for sale at retail from said vehicle within the corporate limits of the village, including:
a. Make, model, and year of each vehicle.
b. Vehicle identification number of each vehicle.
c. License plate number of each vehicle.
d. Copies of permits issued for each vehicle by the applicable county health department(s).
D. No ice cream vendor licensee shall allow or permit any person to use any vehicle owned, leased and/or operated by or on behalf of licensee for the
storage and/or carrying of any ice cream or similar product for sale at retail from said vehicle within the village other than a vehicle listed in licensee's
application in accordance with subsection C6 of this section.
E. No ice cream vendor licensee shall allow or permit any person to use and/or operate any vehicle owned, leased and/or operated by or on behalf of
licensee for the storage and/or carrying of any ice cream and/or similar product for sale at retail from said vehicle within the village other than a vehicle
operator listed on licensee's application as herein provided for whom a criminal background check has been performed by the village and has been
approved by the village as provided herein. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-3: STANDARD FOR DETERMINING ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
An ice cream vendor license shall be issued to the applicant by the village clerk unless the village clerk finds, on the basis of the application and reports
submitted by the chief of police or his respective designees, that:
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for such ice cream vendor license; or
B. Based on the entry of a final, unappealable order by any court, administrative agency, or hearing officer finding that the applicant or other person or
entity described in section 3-1-3 of this title and/or any "vehicle operator" defined in section 3-30-1 of this chapter:
1. Is guilty of any felony and/or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, the following: contributing to the delinquency of a
child pursuant to section 2a of the neglected children offense act5; contributing to the criminal delinquency of a juvenile pursuant to 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/33D-1; selling, giving or delivering alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years in violation of the liquor
control act of 19346 or the Illinois criminal code of 19617 or applicable ordinance; and/or any disqualifying criminal offenses of public act 91-0598
and/or public act 93-0224 copies of which are attached to ordinance 2005-51 as exhibit B and incorporated herein (the "disqualifying criminal
offenses"); or
2. Has been engaged in acts constituting a nuisance in fact; or
3. Has been engaged in acts constituting a nuisance per se as enumerated in Illinois statutes or this code; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 138/702
4. Has been engaged in acts constituting a danger to the public, health, safety or morals; or
5. Has violated the consumer fraud laws of the state of Illinois, or any other state, or of the United States; or
6. Has engaged in a business or profession in defiance of the state statute or local ordinance regulating or prohibiting the same, which includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
a. Prostitution; or
b. Gaming operations; or
c. Sale of narcotics; or
d. Dealing in stolen property; or
e. Practicing in a profession without proper certification; or
7. Has violated any of the provisions of section 3-1-10 or 3-1-12 of this title; or
8. Has been found to have violated any substantially identical provision of the ordinance of any other municipality by the final, unappealable order of
any court, hearing officer or administrative agency.
C. Any failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-4: PROCESSING LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
A. Within two (2) business days after receipt of a completed application for a license, the village clerk shall refer copies of the application to the police chief
or his designee as may be required to determine whether the proposed business or activity meets the standards hereinbefore set forth.
B. Each officer to whom the application has been referred shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within thirty (30) days after receiving such
application or a copy thereof.
C. Upon receipt of all reports, the clerk shall review them to determine whether they contain all information required in order to determine whether the
standards set forth in section 3-1-3 of this title and this chapter have been met, and if any investigative report is incomplete, the clerk shall return it to
the proper officer for further investigation and completion. If the application is incomplete, or if additional information is required from the applicant in
order to determine whether applicant meets the standards set forth in section 3-1-3 of this title and this chapter, the application shall be returned to the
applicant with a letter specifying those portions of the application, which are incomplete, or the additional information that is required.
D. Upon receipt of all relevant investigative reports, the village clerk shall determine, on the basis of the application and such reports, whether the
applicant meets all the standards set forth in section 3-1-3 of this title and this chapter. If the applicant meets those requirements the clerk shall
promptly issue the license; otherwise, the clerk shall promptly deny the application stating in writing the reasons for the denial of the license, including
the requirements of section 3-1-3 of this title and/or of this chapter, which resulted in the denial of the license application. Notwithstanding any provision
herein to the contrary, the village clerk shall issue the license or written denial, as the case may be, within forty five (45) days of receipt of a complete
application from the applicant.
E. The clerk shall cause to be kept in her office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all other information and
data pertaining thereto, and of the approval or denial of each application.
F. The applicant may appeal the decision of the clerk within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is mailed to the applicant, by submitting to the clerk a
written request for a hearing before the village administrator. The clerk shall give the applicant at least ten (10) days' prior notice of the time and place
of such hearing. The hearing officer shall consider the application and shall hear evidence by any police and/or health officer on the basis of whose
report the clerk denied the application. The applicant or his attorney shall have the right to examine witnesses and present evidence on behalf of the
applicant. At the conclusion of the hearing, the village administrator shall make findings of fact and enter an order affirming or reversing the denial of
such application.
G. Any license issued in violation of the provisions of section 3-1-3 of this title or this chapter shall be null and void. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-5: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No ice cream vendor license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be assignable or otherwise transferable. Any such assignment and/or
transfer shall be null and void. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-6: HEALTH DEPARTMENT PERMIT:
Each vehicle owned, leased and/or subject to the provisions of this chapter operated by or on behalf of the licensee shall have affixed to said vehicle a
current permit issued by the applicable county health department having jurisdiction over the licensed activities, and said vehicle and all storage and sales
of ice cream and/or similar products shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, codes, ordinances, and laws of said county health department.
(Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-7: IDENTIFICATION CARD:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 139/702
The village clerk shall provide each vehicle operator with an identification card which shall contain a photograph of the vehicle operator and the full name
and license number assigned hereunder, which card must be worn on the front of the outermost garment of said vehicle operator at all times while
operating the vehicle and/or engaging in sales or offer for sales of ice cream and/or similar products within the village. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-8: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
Every ice cream vendor license issued hereunder will terminate on September 30 of each year unless sooner suspended or revoked. In any event, no
refund of any application fee shall be made. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-9: SUSPENSION; HEARINGS:
Suspensions of ice cream vendor licenses shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 3-1-15 of this title. Hearings on the suspension of
an ice cream vendor license and business license (if applicable) may be held concurrently. Grounds for suspension of ice cream vendor licenses are set
forth in section 3-30-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-10: GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Any license issued under this chapter during the term of such license may be suspended or revoked by the village president depending on the number of
violation(s) and/or the severity of the violation(s), for any of the following causes:
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for such license.
B. The entry of a final, unappealable order by any court, administrative agency, or hearing officer finding that the licensee, or any person or entity
described in section 3-1-3 of this title and/or any "vehicle operator" defined in section 3-30-1 of this chapter:
1. Is guilty of any felony and/or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, the following: contributing to the delinquency of a
child pursuant to section 2a of the neglected children offense act8; contributing to the criminal delinquency of a juvenile pursuant to 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/33D-1; selling, giving or delivering alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years in violation of the liquor
control act of 19349 or the Illinois criminal code of 196110 or applicable ordinance; and/or any disqualifying criminal offenses of public act 91-0598
and/or public act 93-0224, copies of which are attached to ordinance 2005-51 as exhibit B and incorporated herein (the "disqualifying criminal
offenses"); or
2. Has been engaged in acts constituting a nuisance in fact; or
3. Has been engaged in acts constituting a nuisance per se as enumerated in Illinois statutes or this code; or
4. Has been engaged in acts constituting a danger to the public health, safety or morals; or
5. Has violated the consumer fraud laws of the state of Illinois, any other state, or of the United States; or
6. Has been engaged in a business or profession in defiance of the state statute or local ordinance regulating or prohibiting the same, which includes,
but is not limited to, the following:
a. Prostitution; or
b. Gaming operations; or
c. Sale of narcotics; or
d. Dealing in stolen property; or
e. Practicing in a profession without proper certification.
C. Failure of the licensee to pay any fine, penalty, and/or license fee owed to the village.
D. Refusal by the licensee or any vehicle operator or employee or agent of licensee to permit any inspection by any such person with a duly authorized
enforcement officer or employee while in the performance of their duties in making any inspection required under this or any village ordinance.
E. Any violation or violations of this chapter by licensee, its vehicle operators, employees and/or agents.
F. Failure of licensee to maintain the minimum insurance requirements provided for herein.
G. Failure of licensee to maintain a current permit issued by the applicable county health department for each vehicle owned, leased, and/or operated by
or on behalf of licensee that is/are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
H. No license revocation shall be effective until after the licensee has had an opportunity to have a hearing pursuant to subsection 3-1-15D of this title.
I. Hearings on the revocation of an ice cream vendor license and business license (if applicable) may be held concurrently. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 140/702
3-30-11: LIMITATIONS ON LICENSES:
Each ice cream vehicle shall also have a driver's identification card, including a picture of the driver, prominently displayed so that it is clearly visible to the
customers. If more than one ice cream vehicle is operated by a licensee, each ice cream vehicle shall be designated by a different number, and such
number also shall so appear on each side of such ice cream vehicle. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-12: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
All vehicles owned, leased, and/or operated by licensee and/or any employee and/or agent of licensee subject to the provisions of this chapter, shall be
maintained and operated in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Illinois vehicle code11 and all applicable village ordinances. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-
17-2005)
3-30-13: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Each ice cream vendor subject to the provision of this chapter shall maintain insurance in the types and minimum amounts of coverages set forth below:
Each ice cream vendor licensee shall carry commercial general liability insurance and business automobile liability insurance with an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state and having a rating of B+: VII or better in the latest edition of the "Best & Co. Insurance Guide". The policy limits for the
commercial general liability insurance shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury,
personal injury and property damage. The limits for the business automobile liability insurance shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage, and shall cover liability arising out of "any auto" including owned, hired, and
nonowned autos. All insurance required by this chapter shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire period of the license. The certificate(s) of
insurance, and, if requested, the policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof, shall be approved by the village attorney and shall be
deposited with and kept on file by the village clerk. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005)
3-30-14: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any ice cream or similar product from a vehicle within the corporate limits of the village of
Bartlett prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after dusk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any ice cream vendor licensee to permit any employee, contractor, subcontractor, agent or other person or entity acting by or on
behalf of said licensee to sell or offer for sale any ice cream or similar product from a vehicle within the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett prior to
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after dusk. (Ord. 2005-113, 10-18-2005)
3-30-15: INCORPORATION OF OTHER LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions set forth in chapter 1 of this title are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter, provided however, that in the event of any
conflict between the provisions set forth in chapter 1 of this title and the provisions set forth in this chapter, the provisions set forth in this chapter shall
control to the extent of such conflict or inconsistency. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-113, 10-18-2005)
3-30-16: NONAPPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall not apply to ice cream vendors engaged in intrastate or interstate travel through the corporate limits of the village who do not engage in
any sale or offer for sale of ice cream or related products within the village. (Ord. 2005-51, 5-17-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-113, 10-18-2005)
Chapter 31
LOCAL VIDEO GAMING LICENSES
3-31-1: DEFINITION:
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: For purposes of this chapter, video gaming terminal shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Illinois Gaming Act1.
(Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-31-2: FEE:
There is hereby imposed on the privilege of operating every video gaming terminal in the Village, as defined in the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 40/1, et seq., an annual fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per video gaming terminal for the period May 1, 2017 to April 30,
2018, or for the first year in which one or more such video gaming terminal license(s) issued to any entity; and an annual fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) per video gaming terminal for the period beginning May 1, 2018 to April 30, 2019, and for each year thereafter. Said video gaming terminal fee
shall not be prorated or refunded for any partial year for which such license issues or is paid. (Ord. 2017-107, 8-15-2017)
3-31-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 141/702
No person shall keep or display for operating or patronage by the public within this Village any video gaming terminal without having first obtained a written
license therefor from the Village Administrator, which license shall be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, and
such posted license may include more than one device on such licensed premises. It shall be a prerequisite to any such video gaming terminal license
issued by the Village that such person or entity keeping the video gaming terminal have in place the following licenses:
A. A valid license from the Illinois Gaming Board for each such device; and
B. A valid State of Illinois liquor license issued by the Illinois Liquor Commission; and
C. A valid liquor license for service of alcoholic liquor on the premises issued by the Bartlett Liquor Control Commissioner.
The revocation, loss or suspension of either such license set forth in subsection A, B, or C of this section, shall automatically result in the same status
for the Village video gaming terminal license issued hereunder, without refund of any license fee. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
3-31-4: APPLICATION FORM REQUIRED:
An application for a video gaming terminal license shall be made to the Village Administrator on forms furnished by the Village Clerk. The application shall
set forth the number of video gaming terminals for which permission is sought for a particular premises, and shall include a copy of the licenses issued
from the State of Illinois for each video gaming terminal at that location, and a copy of the applicant's State of Illinois and Village of Bartlett liquor license
for that location, and shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee. (Ord. 2012-52, 7-17-2012)
Title 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
HEALTH AND SANITATION REGULATIONS
4-1-1: FOOD REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
The Village of Bartlett shall adhere to, follow and enforce the regulations adopted in the 2017 U.S. Public Health Service FDA Food Code, as amended,
from time to time. A certified copy of such code is available for inspection at the Community Development Department. (Ord. 2019-19, 3-5-2019)
4-1-2: REGULATIONS AFFECTING WATERCOURSES AND POOLS:
A. Watercourses: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the Village. (1968
Code § 19.303)
B. Pools: Any stagnant pool of water in the Village is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any such nuisance to
remain or exist on any property under his or its control. (1968 Code § 19.304)
4-1-3: DISPOSITION OF REFUSE1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the Village uncovered piles of refuse, garbage, offal or carcasses of dead animals. Any
uncovered piles of refuse are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1968 Code § 19.305; amd. 1983 Code)
4-1-4: SEWAGE DISPOSAL RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, permit, cause, create or contribute to, in any way, an open drain, sewer or cesspool, and it shall also be
unlawful for any person to permit, create, cause or contribute to any unsightly, nauseous or unhealthful condition by failing to properly dispose of sewage
or refuse, both within the limits of the Village and at any point within one mile of the Village limits. (1968 Code § 19.315)
4-1-5: BURIAL OF THE DEAD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a cemetery or to bury any person within the Village limits, or within a mile thereof, except in an established
cemetery. (1968 Code § 19.306)
4-1-6: KEEP PREMISES IN SAFE AND SANITARY CONDITION2:
It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way. Any such
structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1968 Code § 19.307)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 142/702
4-1-7: DANGEROUS ACTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to commit or do any act which endangers the public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. (1968 Code § 19.308)
4-1-8: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property under his control. The Chief of Police and the
Health Officer of the Village are each authorized to abate any such nuisance existing in the Village, whether such nuisance is specifically recognized by
ordinance or not. (1968 Code § 19.311)
4-1-9: SPITTING IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or other public place, or on the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall, public vehicle or
other place frequented by the public or to which the public is invited. (1968 Code § 19.312)
4-1-10: FLY ASH:
The maximum amount allowed from fly ash or dust shall not exceed that as permitted under current EPA standards. (1968 Code § 19.314; amd. 1983
Code)
4-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. (1968
Code § 19.316)
Chapter 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of interpretation and enforcement of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR: Any person, firm or corporation who provides collection or removal services of garbage, refuse, recyclable
materials or yard waste from non-residential areas, including commercial, business or industrial establishments and large multi-family developments
included within the corporate limits of the Village.
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of
produce, and includes but is not limited to, food waste; animal, fruit, vegetable, fish or fowl matter; food containers of any nature and other material of any
nature which is subject to rapid decay, putrefaction and generation of noxious gases or odors and which serve as breeding or feeding materials for insects,
rodents or other animals.
LARGE MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT: Any apartment complex of more than two (2) apartment buildings with a minimum of one hundred forty four
(144) residential rental apartment units where the occupants lease dwelling space and do not own or pay Real Estate Taxes on the leased space and for
which complex there is no homeowner, townhome, or condominium association, including the apartment complexes commonly known as the Bartlett
Terrace Apartments and the Bartlett Lake Apartments.
NON-RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION: The collection and/or removal of garbage, refuse, recyclable materials and/or yard waste from
commercial, business, industrial properties or establishments and/or from large multi-family developments within the Village not included under the
franchise or other contract entered by the Village with a residential solid waste collector.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Items which have post-consumer use or value, including but not limited to, the following: paper (newspaper, Kraft paper and
mixed paper), glass, steel and bi-metal cans, aluminum, HDPE plastics (milk, water and laundry detergent bottles) and PET plastics (soda bottles).
REFUSE: Every type of waste material that is not garbage, including but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, furniture, bedding, ashes,
cinders, construction debris, household appliances, furnishings and fixtures and all other material which is not subject to rapid decay or decomposition and
which does not serve as a breeding or feeding material for insects, rodents or other animals.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR: Any firm or corporation that has entered a franchise or other contract with the Village to provide garbage,
refuse, recyclables and/or yard waste collection and/or removal services from single family detached or attached residences or from multi-family residential
complexes (except for large multi-family developments) located within the corporate limits of the Village.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR: Any person, firm or corporation who provides collection or removal services of garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard waste.
YARD WASTE: Accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the maintenance of
lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. (Ord. 2018-29, 4-3-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 143/702
4-2-2: RECEPTACLES REQUIRED; CONTAINERS FOR RECYCLABLES:
A. Duty Of Owner Or Resident: It shall be the duty of every owner or his agent and/or the occupant of any house, building, flat or apartment or tenement in
the Village where people reside, board or lodge, or where animal or vegetable matter is prepared or served, at all times to maintain in good order and
repair a sufficient number of watertight garbage containers, having a capacity of not less than five (5) nor more than thirty two (32) gallons for the
storage of garbage, refuse and junk. (Ord. 74-35, 8-20-1974)
B. Containers For Recyclables Provided By The Village: To promote the recycling of garbage in the Village, the Village will provide, at its sole cost and
expense, three (3) separate containers, or one container with three (3) compartments, for each household in the Village whose residents voluntarily
participate in the recycling program.
C. Pick Up Of Recyclables By Collectors: It shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensed garbage collector to pick up any recyclable materials,
including, but not limited to, aluminum and bimetal cans, newspapers and glass bottles from a recycling container. (Ord. 88-108, 11-15-1988)
4-2-3: DEPOSITS IN STREETS:
No animal or vegetable matter (except branches tied in bundles) shall be deposited on any public street, alley or public way, unless it is contained in a
tightly sealed garbage container which meets the requirements of the preceding section. (Ord. 74-35, 8-20-1974)
4-2-4: DUMPING WITHOUT PERMIT PROHIBITED:
A. Permit Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any dirt, clay, earth, gravel, stones, broken concrete debris, or other similar
materials on any public property.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited on any property or to suffer or permit to be deposited on property owned or
controlled by such person any old stoves, refrigerators, washing machines, water heaters, furnaces, other appliances, machinery, equipment,
household furniture, furnishings or fixtures, or any similar items in any location in the Village, except in an area properly zoned and licensed for such
purposes. (Ord. 72-13, 10-3-1972; amd. 1984 Code)
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any leaves, grass clippings or snow by raking, shoveling, plowing or blowing
onto any public street. (Ord. 86-24, 4-1-1986)
B. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 72-13, 10-3-1972;
amd. 1984 Code)
4-2-5: BACK YARD COMPOST PILES:
A. Definitions:
COMPOST BIN: A structure with three (3) to four (4) walls, or circular, and possibly a roof, which is used to contain the landscape waste during the
composting process. A bin may be constructed of brick, cement blocks, rocks, wood, snow fencing or woven wire fencing.
COMPOST PILE: A collection of landscape waste which is piled and maintained in such a fashion as to encourage the decay of the waste into a
fertilizing material, for use on the property on which the pile is located.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Grass, shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter, and other materials accumulated as the
result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, gardens and trees.
B. Regulations:
1. Landscape waste may be placed in a compost pile for the purpose of creating compost. No food scraps, which may attract animals or vermin or
produce obnoxious odors, shall be placed in any compost pile.
2. Compost piles shall not be located less than twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring dwelling unit nor less than five feet (5') from any rear or side
lot line, or within any required front yard, as defined by the Bartlett zoning ordinance. In no event shall a compost pile be located in any side or rear
yard drainage or utility easement or in the path of any natural surface water drainage.
3. All compost piles shall be so constructed that materials deposited on the compost pile will not be wind-blown or scatter to other premises.
Composting piles or bins shall be no greater than five feet (5') in height and shall not exceed a maximum ground or base area of one hundred (100)
square feet.
4. Compost piles may be located within compost bins. These bins, which are subject to the size and setback limitations listed in subsection B2 of this
section, do not require a building permit. (Ord. 90-66, 8-7-1990)
4-2-6: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any police officer or inspector of the Building Department of the Village, upon observing any violation of this chapter, shall issue a notice directed to the
owner of record or occupant of the property on which said nuisance occurs, or to both, which said notice shall describe the violation and shall establish the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 144/702
reasonable time limit for the abatement thereof by such owner or occupant which time shall be not less than two (2) days nor more than ten (10) days after
service of such notice. (Ord. 74-35, 8-20-1974)
4-2-7: CITIZEN MAY FILE COMPLAINT:
Any citizen of the Village who observes a violation of this chapter may sign a complaint, under oath, setting forth in detail the violation, its location and the
name of the owner and occupant of the property on which such nuisance is alleged and may file said complaint with the Police Department of the Village,
which shall assign to a police officer the duty to investigate such alleged violation, and, in the event that such police officer finds that the facts alleged in
such complaint are true, he shall proceed to issue a notice of violation pursuant to the preceding section. (Ord. 74-35, 8-20-1974)
4-2-8: PENALTY:
Any property owner and/or any occupant of property who allows the storage of garbage, refuse and/or junk on any property owned or occupied by him,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and any person
who shall neglect to abate and remove such nuisance after notice thereof shall, for each twenty four (24) hours thereafter during which said nuisance
continues, be subject to a like penalty as that originally incurred. (Ord. 74-35, 8-20-1974)
4-2-9: COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS, INDUSTRIAL AND LARGE MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT COLLECTIONS:
A. Non-residential solid waste collection of garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, and/or yard waste performed by commercial solid waste collectors shall
be limited to Monday through Saturday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Non-residential solid waste contractor service in nonresidential
areas of the Village may be extended to Sundays between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. during those weeks which
contain a nationally observed holiday.
B. Commercial solid waste collectors shall not perform garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, or yard waste collection and disposal services outside of the
hours permitted in subsection A of this section.
C. No property owner, property management company, or occupant of any commercial, business, industrial or large multi-family development property or
establishment shall allow for non-residential solid waste collection outside of the hours permitted in subsection A of this section.
D. The notice provisions set forth in section 4-2-6 of this chapter shall not be applicable to a violation of this section.
E. The general penalty provisions set forth in section 4-2-8 of this chapter shall not be applicable to a violation of this section.
F. Any person, firm or corporation, including any commercial solid waste collector found liable or convicted of a violation of subsection B of this section
and/or any person, firm or corporation, including any property owner, property management company, or occupant of a commercial, business or
industrial property or establishment or large multi-family development found liable or convicted of allowing non-residential solid waste collection in
violation of subsection C of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 2018-29, 4-3-2018)
Chapter 3
NUISANCES
4-3-1: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or discard in any place accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest, of a capacity of one and
one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, which has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch; or for the
manager, owner or lessee of such premises to knowingly permit such refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain in such condition. (1968 Code § 23.026)
4-3-2: PLANTS, WEEDS, GRASS, VEGETATION AND NATIVE PLANTINGS:
A. Nuisance Declared:
1. Any such weeds as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, or other noxious weed as defined in the Illinois Noxious Weed Law1 found growing
in any lot or tract of land in the Village are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in
any such place.
2. It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit plants, weeds, grass, or other vegetation other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to
grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the Village, except native plantings on native planting lots as described in subsection H of
this section for which a current native planting lot permit as provided in subsection H3 of this section has been issued, or in a natural or buffer area
as provided under 525 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/1, et seq. Any such weeds, grass, plants, or other vegetation exceeding such height are hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
B. Vacant Lots: All vacant lots or open land shall be maintained free of brush, rocks, garbage, rubbish, debris, dirt piles, or spoils so that the same may be
mowed by the Village, or a contractor hired by the Village, at the direction of the Health Officer or Code Enforcement Officer in the event of a violation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 145/702
of this section and the failure of the property owner to abate any such nuisance after notice as provided in subsections C and/or D of this section.
C. Removal; Notice To Abate: It shall be the duty of the Health Officer or Code Enforcement Officer to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner
of any such premises on which weeds, grass, plants and/or other vegetation or plants have grown in violation of the provisions of this section, and to
demand the abatement of the nuisance within seven (7) days, or if a violation reoccurs within the same calendar year, demand the abatement of the
nuisance within five (5) days. Where the property owner cannot be found or otherwise served with notice by mail, then alternatively notice to abate a
violation of this section may be given by posting a sign in a conspicuous place near the main entrance of a structure on the property, if there is a
structure on the property, otherwise, at a conspicuous place on the property. In either event, the text of the notice shall contain a reference to the
provision of this Code violated and may contain such other information respecting the nature of the violation as the Health Officer and/or Code
Enforcement Officer deemed advisable. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, tamper with, or remove the "Notice to Abate" sign from the
property where it is posted unless authorized by the Health Officer or Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Abatement: If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within seven (7) days after such notice, or if a violation reoccurs within the same
calendar year, if the person so served does not abate the nuisance within five (5) days, the Village may enter upon the premises, or hire a contractor
and authorize it to enter upon the premises, to abate such nuisance, by cutting or removing the overgrown weeds, grass, plants or other vegetation or
native plantings, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement and such expense shall be charged to the owner and paid by such owner or the
occupant of the property. In addition, a fee to cover the costs incurred by the Village for investigation, inspection and administrative costs associated
with the abatement of the nuisance (to be known as a "nuisance abatement fee") in the amount of seventy five dollars ($75.00) shall also be charged to
the owner of said property.
E. Nuisance Abatement Billing Notice: In the event the owner or occupant fails to abate the nuisance within the time prescribed in subsection D of this
section, once a nuisance has been abated by the Village on a property, the Health Officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the property
owner thereof in writing of the costs incurred by the Village to abate the nuisance, and of any other fees associated with the abatement, including the
nuisance abatement fee, in a nuisance abatement billing notice. Such fees shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the property to the Village within
said thirty (30) days from the date stated on the nuisance abatement billing notice. If the fees are not paid within thirty (30) days, the Health Officer or
Code Enforcement Officer shall prepare a notice of claim for lien for the Village Clerk's signature, together with: 1) a copy of the statute granting
authority to the Village to lien the property2, 2) a copy of the ordinance implementing the statute referenced in item 1 of this subsection, or as codified in
this section, and 3) the location of the overgrown weeds, grass, plants, or other vegetation, or native plantings in violation of subsection H of this
section, which have been cut or removed. Notice of such claim for lien shall be mailed to the person or entity to whom the tax bill for the General Real
Estate Taxes on the property for the taxable year immediately preceding the cutting or removal activities was mailed, and to the owner of the premises
if the owner is a different person or entity, and his address is known, sent by certified mail, or delivered by personal service; provided, however, that
failure of the Village Clerk or her designee to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the validity of the debt
owed to the Village. If on any one parcel the Village engaged in removal or cutting activity on more than one occasion during the course of one year,
then the Village may combine any or all of the abatement costs and fees for each of those abatement activities and the applicable nuisance abatement
fees into a single notice of lien.
F. Lien: The expense of the abatement and the nuisance abatement fee shall be a lien upon the premises. Whenever a bill for abatement charges remains
unpaid for thirty (30) days after it has been sent, the Village Clerk or her/his designee shall file within sixty (60) days of the date on which the Village or
its authorized contractor cut or removed the overgrown weeds, grass, plants or other vegetation, or native plantings in violation of subsection H of this
section, a sworn statement of lien claim with the Recorder of Deeds, or Registrar of Titles of the County in which such premises are located. This sworn
statement shall be signed by the Village Clerk and shall contain the legal description of the premises, the permanent index number(s), street address or
other description sufficient for identification of the premises, the amount of money representing the expense and costs incurred or payable for the
abatement services, the date the overgrown weeds or overgrown grass, plants or other vegetation, or native plantings were cut or removed, and the
date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the Village, or payable for the service. The failure of the Village Clerk or her designee to
timely record such sworn statement of lien claim shall not affect the validity of the debt owed the Village.
G. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid abatement charges, including weed cutting and/or removal charges and/or nuisance
abatement fees, may be sold for nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges and fees after deducting
costs, as is the case with the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the Village.
The Village Prosecutor is hereby authorized to institute such foreclosure proceedings in the name of the Village, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters, against any property for which such notice as provided in this section have been properly sent and the lien has been timely recorded,
and in his/her opinion has been perfected.
H. Native Planting Lot(s):
1. Terms Defined: "Native planting lot" shall mean a privately owned lot which is landscaped, or is proposed to be landscaped, so as to exhibit the
deliberate and conscious decision to plant, cultivate, and maintain "native plantings" defined as those native or naturally occurring plant species
identified as wildflower and prairie grasses in commonly accepted publications including "Plants of the Chicago Region", by Floyd Swink and Gerold
Wilhelm (1974), "Wildflowers of the Tallgrass Prairie, the Upper Midwest", by Sylvan T. Runkel and Dean M. Roosa (1989), "Field Guide to North
American Wildflowers, Eastern Region", by the Audubon Society (1979), and "Native Illinois Herbs and Forbs", by the Illinois Department of
Conservation. A copy of each aforesaid publication shall be on file and available for review in the Community Development Department.
2. Restrictions: Native plantings shall not:
a. Be permitted within the public parkway, unless approved and installed by the Village;
b. Obstruct a public sidewalk/path or the intended flow of any drainage easement or swale;
c. Interfere with the "native planting vision clearance triangle" defined as the triangular area determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points
measured five feet (5') equidistant from each lot corner of the two (2) intersecting property lot lines of the subject property;
d. Be permitted without the issuance of a permit therefor as provided in subsection H3 of this section.
3. Permit: No person shall own or maintain a native planting lot without first securing a permit for a native planting lot from the Community Development
Department. A permit application must be submitted or renewed each year with the Community Development Department prior to May 1st and shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 146/702
be valid for one year; from May 1st to the following April 30th. Applications for a permit shall include the following:
a. Landscape plan drawn to scale with the location of existing/proposed native plant materials clearly labeled and identified;
b. List of all native plant materials by common name;
c. Common address and permanent index number (PIN) of the subject property;
d. Location of any/all easements;
e. Property lines clearly identified;
f. All existing structures, including accessory structures, fences, etc.;
g. Paved/impervious areas; and
h. North arrow.
4. Fee(s): A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required for an initial native planting lot permit application submittal. If the initial inspection
fails and/or is not in compliance with the approved permit and/or landscape plan, a twenty five dollar ($25.00) re-inspection fee will be charged to the
owner of the subject property for each subsequent inspection. Each year thereafter, a native planting lot permit application shall be required to be
renewed and an annual re-inspection of the property shall occur, however no annual renewal fee/inspection will be charged. If determined by the
Community Development Director or his/her designee(s) that a consultant is necessary to review the permit application and/or conduct an inspection
on the subject property, the applicant shall reimburse the Village for all consultant fees and expenses charged to the Village.
5. Required Inspection(s): Once an application is approved by the Community Development Department, a permit shall be issued for the installation of
the native plantings per the approved permit for the native planting lot. The owner of the subject property shall contact the Community Development
Department for an inspection once the native plantings have been installed. The inspection shall be conducted by the Health Officer and/or Code
Enforcement Officer for compliance with the approved permit and the plans and information submitted in support of a native planting lot. If the subject
property is not in compliance with the approved permit and/or fails the inspection, a re-inspection will be required until compliance is met. Thereafter,
only an annual inspection shall be conducted on the subject property for continued compliance with the approved permit on file with the Community
Development Department.
6. Compliance With Permit: Compliance with the terms of this section shall be a condition of the issuance of any native planting lot permit. The terms
and conditions of native planting lot permits shall be enforced in accordance with title 3, chapter 1 of this Code. If three (3) or more violations of this
section occur on any property issued a native planting lot permit, said permit may be revoked by the Village President in accordance with the
provisions of title 3, chapter 1 of this Code. Permits may be amended with the express written approval of the Community Development Director
and/or his/her designee.
7. Annual Cutting: Native plantings on native planting lots shall be fully mowed or cut to a height of eighteen inches (18") or less at least once prior to
May 1st of each calendar year. The Health Officer and/or the Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct an inspection of the subject property to verify
the native plantings have been mowed or cut.
I. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which violation occurs or continues. Any such fine imposed shall be in addition to any
abatement costs and nuisance abatement fees due the Village under this section, which in addition to any fine imposed by an Administrative Hearing
Officer or court of competent jurisdiction, shall be a debt owed the Village.
J. Collection Of Unpaid Fees And Expenses:
1. If an owner has unpaid fines for a violation of this section and/or outstanding costs and/or fees associated with the abatement of a nuisance on any
property in the Village for a violation of this section, and no lien has been recorded against said property, the Village Administrator or his/her
designee, may utilize the Illinois Comptroller's Local Debt Recovery Program (IDROP) as referenced in the Intergovernmental Agreement between
the Illinois Office of the Comptroller and the Village of Bartlett to collect such unpaid fines, costs and fees.
2. Properties subject to unpaid fines and/or abatement charges, including nuisance abatement fees imposed under this section, shall not be eligible for
a property transfer stamp from the Village of Bartlett until said outstanding fines and/or fees have been paid in full. (Ord. 2018-105, 9-18-2018)
4-3-3: GRAFFITI:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to not remove or paint over any prohibited sign painted directly on an exterior wall of a building or on
any structure upon that property. A prohibited sign includes, but is not limited to, any permanent display of any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia,
picture, outline, character, spectacle, delineation, announcement or any combination thereof which is painted of a color different from the color of the
exterior of the structure on which it is painted and which is visible beyond the boundaries of the property without having first received a sign permit from
the Village Community Development Department, unless exempt under section 10-12-4, "Exemptions", of the Village zoning ordinance. A painted area
on the side of a structure used to cover a prohibited sign which is of a different color or surface material that the remaining exterior surface of that side
of the structure is unlawful.
B. When the owner of property refuses or neglects to remove from the exterior of structures upon the owner's property any permanent display of a
prohibited sign in compliance with the regulations of this Code, the Village may take the following enforcement actions:
1. The Village shall send notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property if on file with the Village Clerk, and the person in
whose name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid, and by regular mail to each business licensed by the Village Clerk on that
property, of the violation of this section and for its abatement within fourteen (14) days from the postmark of said notice.
2. If the owner does not abate the violation during the notice period, the Village Administrator or her designee may proceed to abate such violation,
keeping an account of the expenses of the abatement which shall include an administrative fee of the greater of twenty five dollars ($25.00) or ten
percent (10%) of the cost of abatement. All expenses, including interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per year, shall be charged to and paid by
such owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 147/702
3. If the owner authorizes the Village to remove the prohibited sign and pays the Village for such expenses within thirty (30) days of its removal, the
Village shall not add the administrative fee to the expenses for abatement.
C. The expenses for abatement shall become a lien upon the property superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances except tax liens, if within sixty
(60) days after such expense is incurred the Village files notice of lien in the Office of the Recorder in the county in which such real estate is located.
The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate, the amount of money representing the expenses incurred or
payable for the service and the date or dates when such costs and expense was incurred by the Village. However, the lien shall not be valid as to any
purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the abatement and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not
be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arose prior to the filing of such notice.
D. Upon payment of the expenses by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by
the Village and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The lien may be enforced at any time by a proceeding to
foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanic's liens.
E. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and
each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 94-45, 5-3-1994)
4-3-4: EXCESSIVE NOISE:
A. State Rules And Regulations Adopted: The following provisions of title 35, subtitle H, chapter I, of the Illinois administrative code, part 900, sections
900.101, 900.103, 900.104; and part 901, sections 901.102, 901.103, 901.104, 901.105 and 901.106, are hereby adopted as and for sections 900.101,
900.103, 900.104, 901.102, 901.103, 901.104, 901.105 and 901.106 in this subsection A.
B. Definitions And Amendments:
1. Section 900.101 is amended as follows:
"Business Area" means and includes any area zoned as business, commercial and/or office/research, including any use area zoned for such uses in
the I-2 Economic Development Area Overlay District, or located entirely within a PD Planned Development District when such area has been
designated for business, commercial and/or office/research use, or entirely within any Planned Unit Development ("PUD") with any areas designated
for business, commercial and/or office/research use.
"Class A" means and includes residential and public land areas as those terms are defined herein.
"Class B" means and includes any business area as that term is defined herein.
"Class C" means and includes industrial area as that term is defined herein.
"Construction" means and includes the preparation of land for development or the construction or reconstruction of a building.
"Corporate Authorities" means the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett.
"Industrial Area" means and includes any area zoned as industrial, including the I-1 Light Industrial District, the I-2 General Industrial District or the I-
2 Economic Development Area Overlay District, or located entirely within any area within a PD Planned Development District when such area has
been designated for industrial use, or an area used for industrial use located entirely within any Planned Unit Development.
"Person" means and includes any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, firm, association, trust, estate, public or
private institution, group, agency, school or other educational entity, any political subdivision of this State or any other state or political subdivision or
agency thereof or any legal successor, representative, agent or agency of the foregoing.
"Playgrounds" means and includes areas developed for active play and recreation.
"Playfields or Athletic Fields" means and includes playgrounds, fields and courts for competitive sports, such as football, soccer, baseball, basketball
or tennis.
"Playlot or Tot Lot" means and includes small areas developed especially for pre-school and/or elementary school aged children, such as sand play
areas, slides, swings, teeters and climbing apparatus.
"Property" means and includes any real or personal property.
"Public Land Area" means and includes any area zoned as Public Lands District or located entirely within a PD Planned Development District when
such area has been designated for public land use, or is used for Playgrounds, Playfields or Athletic Fields, Playlot and Tot Lot located entirely within
any Planned Unit Development, or land used for any other active or passive recreation which is owned or leased by a park district.
"Residential Area" means and includes any area zoned as residential or mobile home, or located entirely within any area within a PD Planned
Development District when such area has been designated for residential or mobile home use, or is used for residential or mobile home purposes in
an area located within any Planned Unit Development.
2. Sections 901.105, 901.105(a)(4) and (a)(5) are hereby amended as follows:
(4) New Impacting Forging Operation is that property-line-noise-source comprised of impact forging operation on which construction began after the
effective date of this Ordinance.
(5) Existing Impact Forging Operation is that property-line-noise-source comprised of impact forging operations which are in existence on the
effective date of this Ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 148/702
C. Noise Limits: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person shall cause or allow sound beyond the boundaries of said person's property
located within any industrial, business or public land area that unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or with any lawful business and/or
activity or so as to exceed the applicable limits established in sections 901.102, 901.103, 901.104, 901.105 and/or 901.106 adopted in subsection A of
this section.
D. Exceptions: The provisions herein shall not be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize, enjoin or in any manner regulate sounds emitted from any of the
following:
1. Emergency warning devices and unregulated safety relief valves.
2. Agricultural field machinery used during daytime hours. For the purposes of this subsection, grain dryers operated off the farm shall not be
considered agricultural field machinery.
3. Lawn care maintenance equipment used between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Mondays through Fridays,
inclusive, and between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Saturdays, Sundays and nationally recognized holidays;
on golf course property at any time; and park district owned and/or operated property at any time.
4. Equipment being used for construction between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Mondays through Fridays,
inclusive, and between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays.
5. The operation of any vehicle registered for highway use while such vehicle is being operated in the course of ingress to and egress from a highway.
6. Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right of way occurring between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., and if sound will be amplified in connection therewith, when an amplifier permit has been
issued by the corporate authorities pursuant to the applicable provisions of this code.
7. Playlots or tot lots, playgrounds, playfields or athletic fields, recreational centers, gymnasiums, athletic clubs or swimming pools.
8. Organized amateur or professional sporting activities.
9. A permitted activity pursuant to a special variance as set forth in subsection I of this section, subject to the terms, conditions and restrictions of said
special variance.
10. Railroad trains in transit through the village.
11. Operation of snow removal equipment on streets and/or rights of way, including the loading and unloading of salt, sand or similar substances into
said vehicles on any public land area.
12. Operation of street sweepers on streets and/or rights of way between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
13. The testing of a stand by or emergency generator ("generator") and the operation of said generator during periods when the primary source of
power has been interrupted or has otherwise been disrupted. This exception shall not apply, however, to the use of any power cogeneration
equipment operated by any person within the village.
14. Noise emissions associated with a lawfully organized and supervised civic or public celebration or parade.
15. Emissions of sound from any area that is not zoned as industrial, business and/or public lands areas as those terms are defined herein.
16. Permitted activities pursuant to a carnival license or amplification permit subject to the terms and conditions of said license or permit.
E. Territorial Applicability: Nothing in this section shall be construed as regulating any noise emissions originating outside of the village. This section shall
be construed as applying to sounds emitted from industrial, business and/or public land areas, regardless of whether said sounds affect receiving areas
located within the village or outside of the village.
F. Other Private Or Public Action Not Impaired: Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any cause of action, or legal remedy therefor, including
actions under the rules and regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency and Illinois pollution control board, or either of them, of any
person or the public arising from the emission or release of noise from any source whatever.
G. Abatement Of Noise Source: Upon finding of a violation of the standards herein established, the person causing or permitting the noise to continue shall
be advised of the violation and given an opportunity to abate the noise level to an acceptable standard within such time period provided in a special
permit granted by the corporate authorities pursuant to subsection I of this section. In the event the violator fails to apply for a special permit in order to
abate the noise level within the time prescribed in a notice sent by the community development director, the village may proceed to enforce this section
against the violator.
H. Inspections: Any village law enforcement officer, or code enforcement official, in addition to any other authority vested in said officer or official, has the
power, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any property, building, structure or premises within the village as may be
necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, provided permission is obtained from the occupant or, in the case of unoccupied property, from the
owner or his agent. If such permission is refused, or is otherwise unobtainable, a search warrant must be obtained upon the showing of probable cause
to believe that a violation of this section may exist, before such entry or inspection is made. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, such permission
shall not be required from a person believed to be in violation if such permission is attained from adjoining landowners to perform said inspections and
testing.
I. Special Permit: The corporate authorities shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant a temporary special permit as follows:
1. Any person seeking a special permit pursuant to this section shall file an application with the corporate authorities. The application shall contain
information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the special variance is sought into compliance with this section
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community or on other persons. Notice of an application for a special permit shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 149/702
be given by the applicant for a special permit to the owners of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property upon which the applicant's
activity or proposed activity that is generating or will generate sound emissions. Any person who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of a
special permit may file an objection with the corporate authorities containing any information to support his, her or its claim.
2. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the corporate authorities shall consider the following factors: a) the hardship to the applicant,
the community and other persons of not granting the special permit, including the cost of complying with permitted noise levels; and b) the adverse
impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected; the adverse impact on property affected; and any other adverse impact of granting the
special permit, including the level and duration of sound emissions. Applicants for a special permit and persons contesting a special permit may be
required to submit any information the corporate authorities may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the corporate authorities
shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special permit.
3. The corporate authorities may grant a special permit license to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the
permitted activity. The special permit shall not become effective until all conditions have been satisfied by the applicant. Noncompliance with any
condition subsequent to issuance of the special permit shall be grounds to terminate it and subject the person holding it to the provisions of this
section regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special permit was granted.
4. Application for extension of time limits specified in special permits or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications
for initial special permits.
5. Enforcement of this section may be stayed by the corporate authorities as to any person filing an application for a special permit pursuant to this
section, until such time as the application is acted upon by the corporate authorities, if the corporate authorities determine that any ongoing violations
do not constitute a nuisance and/or are not a threat to the health, safety and welfare of persons residing in any residential areas adjacent to or in
close proximity to the applicant's property.
J. Nuisance, Injunction: Any violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided herein, the village attorney and/or
the village prosecutor may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this section. Such
application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction and/or permanent injunction.
K. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2001-129, 10-4-2001)
4-3-5: INFECTED TREES OR DANGEROUS TREES:
A. Enforcement Of Section: Based on a complaint, the village arborist may enter upon private property at all reasonable times for purposes of inspecting
trees, and may remove samples of specimens as are required for purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the same are infected, dead and/or
otherwise pose a danger to persons or property. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the village arborist from entering on private property for
purposes of carrying out the village arborist's duties hereunder, or to interfere with such village arborist in the lawful performance of her duties under
the provisions of this section.
B. Definitions:
DANGEROUS TREE: Any dead or damaged tree that because of its size, condition, and proximity to persons, public sidewalks, public streets,
residential structures or the affected property, or proximity to residential structures on adjoining property, may inflict injury or cause harm to persons,
property or the health of the general public.
INFECTED TREE: Any tree infected with an injurious parasite, insect, fungus or disease identified by the Illinois department of agriculture as
constituting an epidemical threat to trees or a species of trees, including, but not limited to, Dutch elm disease, emerald ash borer, verticillium wilt and
oak wilt.
C. Infected Trees And Dangerous Trees Declared Nuisances: Trees within the village of Bartlett of all species and varieties of:
1. Any infected tree affected by an injurious parasite, insect, fungus or disease identified by the Illinois department of agriculture as constituting an
epidemical threat to trees or a species of tree is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed and properly disposed of (or treated
in accordance with the requirements of this section) within thirty (30) days following notification of the discovery of such infection; and
2. Any dangerous tree is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be trimmed or cut to eliminate any dangerous condition, or removed and
properly disposed of within thirty (30) days following notification of the dangerous condition of such tree.
D. Infected And/Or Dangerous Trees Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner of property upon which an infected tree or a
dangerous tree is situated to possess or keep such a tree, or parts of such a tree, in an infected condition or in a state that causes a dangerous or
unsafe condition, after the expiration of thirty (30) days following the notification of the discovery of said infestation or dangerous condition, and such
infected tree or dangerous tree shall be removed and properly disposed of unless the village arborist has approved of cutting or trimming a portion
thereof, or treatment, and if treatment is authorized, proof of the treatment has been submitted to the village arborist as she directs.
E. Notice, Abatement Required: The village arborist shall give to the owner of the premises where any public nuisance described in this section is found, a
written notice of the existence of such nuisance and requiring the cutting, trimming, removal, chipping, disposal and/or treatment, as the case may be,
of the same within thirty (30) days following such notice, with such cutting, trimming, removal, chipping, disposal and/or treatment, as the case may be
as stated in said notice, to be done under the direction and supervision of the village arborist or her representative, or by a tree removal contractor
licensed by the village to trim, remove and/or treat trees. Treatment by a certified arborist or contractor licensed by the state of Illinois and the village to
treat trees must be approved by the village arborist and proof of the treatment shall be submitted to the village arborist as she directs. The notice shall
also notify the owner of said premises that unless such nuisance is abated by cutting, trimming portions of or removal of dangerous tree, or an infected
tree is removed, chipped, properly disposed of, and/or treated in compliance with the terms of the notice within such thirty (30) day period, the village
may proceed with the cutting, trimming, removal, chipping, and proper removal, as the case may be, of such nuisance, and assess the cost thereof
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 150/702
against the said property owner and file a lien against the affected real estate. In the alternative, the village, in its sole discretion, may treat the
nuisance and assess the costs of treatment against the property owner and file a lien against the affected real estate.
F. Manner Of Giving Notice: Service of such notice shall be by personal service where the owner of said premises is a resident of the village and resides in
the real estate affected, or by certified mail and regular mail after at least two (2) failed attempts at personal service upon said resident of the village.
Where the owner is a nonresident of the village, said notice shall be sent by certified mail and regular mail, addressed to said owner at his last known
address.
G. Manner Of Abatement: Upon the service of notice by personal service or by certified mail and regular mail, as applicable, it shall become the duty of the
owner of the premises to cause such tree or trees identified in the notice to be trimmed or cut to alleviate any dangerous condition as directed by the
village arborist, or removed, chipped (if stated in said notice), and properly disposed of, or treated, under the direction and supervision of the village
arborist or her representative, or by a tree removal contractor or other contractor licensed by the village to remove, trim and/or treat trees.
H. Failure To Remove, Option To Remove By The Village: If any person fails to remove any infected tree or to trim or cut portions of any dangerous tree to
alleviate the dangerous condition, or to remove a dangerous tree within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice to do so from the village arborist directing
such cutting, trimming or removal, the village may cut, trim, or remove and dispose of such infected or dangerous tree at the expense of the owner of
the property given such notice.
I. Lien Provisions:
1. Costs A Lien; Lien Notice Requirements: The costs of removal of one or more infected tree(s), or the cutting or trimming of portions of a dangerous
tree as directed by the village arborist by the village shall become a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances,
except tax liens; provided, that notice has been given as hereinafter described; and further provided that within sixty (60) days after such cost and
expense is incurred by the village, or person performing the service by authority of the village, in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the office
of the county recorder of deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out the following:
a. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof.
b. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for removal of the infected tree.
c. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the cutting, trimming or the removal of the dangerous tree.
d. The date when each such cost and expense was incurred by the village.
2. Effect Of Lien: The lien of the village shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the
infected tree removal or dangerous tree cutting, trimming or removal, and prior to the filing of the notice of lien, and the lien of the village shall not be
valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such real estate arose prior to the filing of such notice.
3. Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed,
the lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
J. Penalty: In addition to any other remedy provided in this section, any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed each day that any such violation of
any provisions of this section shall continue.
K. Effect Of Penalty On Recovery Of Costs: Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this section shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the
village to collect the costs of removal of such nuisance or to lien the real estate affected in accordance with the provisions of this section where it is
necessary for the village to remove such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2014-27, 4-15-2014)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
5-1-1: CREATION AND ORGANIZATION:
A. Department Created: There is hereby created the Bartlett Police Department, an executive department of the Village. The Police Department shall
consist of the Chief of Police and such captains, lieutenants, sergeants and police officers as may be provided for from time to time by the President
and Board of Trustees. (1968 Code, §5.001)
In addition to the aforementioned police personnel, certain civilian parking ordinance enforcement personnel, community service officers and an
administrative assistant to the Chief of Police, who shall not be police officers, nor have the powers of police officers, may be assigned from time to
time to operate under the supervision of the Police Department. (Ord. 76-6, 3-2-76; amd. 1983 Code)
B. Organization: The Police Department shall be organized and the officers thereof shall be appointed and shall function as provided by the rules and
regulations and subject to the control of the Village President and Board of Trustees as may be provided by ordinance. (1968 Code, §5.002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 151/702
C. Appointments and Promotions Within the Department: Appointments and promotions of members of the Police Department shall be made by the Board
of Police and Fire Commissioners.1 (1968 Code, §5.014)
5-1-2: BONDS REQUIRED:
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, each officer shall execute a bond to the Village in the amounts to be prescribed by the Village
Board at the time of their appointment. (1968 Code, §5.005)
5-1-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The office of Chief of Police of the Bartlett Police Department is hereby created and established pursuant to the provisions set out in Title 1, Chapter 8,
Article H of the Bartlett Municipal Code. (1983 Code)
5-1-4: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the enforcement of all ordinances of the Village, of all statutes effective in the
Village, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest violators thereof. In addition: (1968 Code, §5.006)
A. Aid to Fire Department: It shall be the duty of the Police Department to aid the Bartlett and Countryside Fire Protection District within the Village by
giving alarms in case of fire and clearing the streets or ground in the immediate vicinity of the fire, so that the members of the Fire Department shall not
be hindered or obstructed in the performance of their duties. (1968 Code, §5.010)
B. Conduct of Members: It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner and to avoid
the use of unnecessary force. (1968 Code, §5.017)
5-1-5: POLICE ASSISTANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every citizen in the Village eighteen (18) years of age and over, when called upon by any member of the Police Department, in case
of emergency, to promptly aid and assist such officer in the execution of his police duties. Any person who shall refuse to give aid and assistance shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (1968 Code, §5.012)
5-1-6: WITNESS FEES:
All officers making arrests shall attend as witnesses before the court where the trial may be had, and shall procure all necessary evidence in their power
and furnish a list of witnesses to the court and the Village Attorney, and no Village officer shall be entitled to any witness fees to be taxed against the
Village in any action for the violation of an ordinance where the Village is plaintiff. (1968 Code, §5.018)
5-1-7: POLICE WEAPONS:
Each member of the Police Department shall, at his own expense, provide his own gun, the pattern, design and caliber of which shall be approved in
advance by the Chief of Police. (1968 Code, §5.021)
5-1-8: POLICE PENSION FUND:
The Police Pension Fund shall operate under the provisions of the Illinois Revised Statutes. (1968 Code, §5.013)
There is hereby levied upon all property subject to taxation within the Village a special tax at a rate on the dollar which will produce an amount which,
when added to the deductions from salaries or wages of police officers, and receipts available from all other sources referred to in the Illinois Pension
Code, will equal a sum sufficient to meet the annual requirements of the Police Pension Fund of the Village, pursuant to the provisions of sections 3-125
and 3-127 of the Illinois Pension Code.2 The annual requirements to be provided by such tax levy shall be equal to the reserve prescribed by said Illinois
Pension Code. (Res. 75-34R, 7-1-75)
5-1-9: JUVENILE SECTION OF DEPARTMENT:
A. There is hereby created a Juvenile Section within the Police Department, which shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction over persons under the age of
seventeen (17) years. The Chief of Police shall designate and assign certain members of the Police Department to be the Juvenile Officers and such
officers shall supervise and be in charge of said Juvenile Section. No person shall be designated as a Youth Officer unless such person shall have had
special training or experience in the matter of youth problems and juvenile delinquency.
B. The Juvenile Section, in the administration of the duties of said office and the supervision of the Juvenile Section, shall cooperate with all other divisions
of the Police Department and shall function under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 152/702
C. The Juvenile Section shall have charge of and be responsible for wayward, dependent and delinquent children under the age of seventeen (17) years,
crimes against children, domestic relations where children are involved and the investigation of all complaints pertaining thereto. The Juvenile Section
shall keep and maintain its own records of complaints, investigations and reports. All children under the age of seventeen (17) years who are
apprehended or brought into custody of the Police Department shall be turned over to the Juvenile Section.
D. All members of the Police Department shall cooperate with the Juvenile Section in connection with arrests and investigations involving delinquent
children. The Juvenile Section shall be charged with all matters referred by it to the Circuit Court of Cook and DuPage Counties, Juvenile Division, and
shall perform such other and additional duties as the Chief of Police may from time to time direct. (1983 Code)
5-1-10: VILLAGE JAIL:
A. Establishment: The place in the Village heretofore established and used as the jail, or any other place which may be hereafter used for that purpose, is
hereby declared to be the Village jail. (1968 Code, §7.301)
B. Custodian: The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the jail and shall have custody over all persons confined therein and of all property pertaining
thereto. (1968 Code, §7.302)
C. Prisoners:
1. Incarceration: The jail shall be used for the incarceration of all persons arrested for violating any law of the State of Illinois, the United States or for
violating any Village ordinance, until such person shall be lawfully brought before a magistrate for a hearing or until such person shall be lawfully
transferred to some other place of incarceration or otherwise lawfully released. (1968 Code, §7.303)
2. Communications With Prisoners: It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with any prisoner held in said jail without the permission of the
Chief of Police or other officer in charge. (1968 Code, §7.305)
3. Escape Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to escape, attempt to escape, or to assist any prisoner to escape or attempt to escape from
the Village jail. (1968 Code, §7.304)
D. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (1968 Code, §7.306)
ARTICLE A. COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER PROGRAM
5-1A-1: PROGRAM CREATED; LIMITATIONS ON PERSONNEL:
There is hereby created a community service officer program within the Department of Police. A community service officer is a uniformed, unarmed,
civilian member of the Police Department engaged in local ordinance enforcement and administrative duties. The objective of creating this position is to
relieve sworn personnel to perform duties that require a higher level of training and expertise, as well as to provide jobs for persons who wish to pursue a
career in law enforcement. The Chief of Police, with the advice and consent of the Village Administrator, may appoint community service officers in such
number as the corporate authorities shall from time to time deem necessary. Such community service officers shall be members of the Police Department
of the Village but not subject to Board of Police and Fire Commissioners' rules and regulations. Such community service officers shall supplement
members of the Police Department in the performance of their assigned and normal duties, only as provided herein.
5-1A-2: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
Each applicant to be a community service officer shall submit an application to the Chief of Police on forms prepared by the Police Department.
5-1A-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS; RECOMMENDATION:
A. No applicant may be appointed as a community service officer if he/she has been convicted of a felony, serious misdemeanor or other crime involving
moral turpitude.
B. An applicant for the community service officer program shall:
1. Be a United States citizen.
2. Be at least twenty (20) years of age.
3. Submit certification from a licensed physician that they possess sufficient physical fitness to perform required duties.
4. Possess good moral character.
C. Training Required: Community service officers, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive such a course of training in the use of materials
and other police procedures as shall be appropriate in the exercise of the powers conferred upon them under this Article. Said course of training shall
be developed and provided by the corporate authorities through the Chief of Police.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 153/702
5-1A-4: OATH; COMMISSION:
Each community service officer shall take an oath of office as required of all Municipal officials, and shall receive a commission signed by the Mayor and
Village Clerk.
5-1A-5: DUTIES:
A. Community service officers shall be assigned, except as specified in subsection B hereof, to perform the following duties:
1. To patrol the Village, being alert for violations of all local ordinances and attempt to achieve compliance therewith, subject to the assignment
restrictions of subsection B, and to report to his shift commander any violation of ordinances regulating those matters specified in subsection B.
2. To assist at the scene of traffic accidents with traffic control and whatever other assistance is needed.
3. To assist with public service complaints, "lock-outs", motorist assistance and other applicable requests.
4. To assist on ambulance requests.
5. To assist the Bartlett and Countryside Fire District on fire calls.
6. To provide relief for clerks, crossing guards and meter maids as needed.
7. To assist such patrol officers when needed.
8. To perform administrative duties as may be requested by the Chief or shift commander.
All such duties shall be performed in conformity with the rules and regulations of the Police Department and as directed by the Chief of Police.
B. Community service officers shall not be assigned to the following calls:
1. Crimes in progress.
2. Fights in progress.
3. Alarms.
4. Traffic stops.
5. Calls requiring follow-up investigation by an investigator or juvenile officer.
6. Domestic disturbances.
7. Noisy parties.
8. Suspicious persons.
9. Any other call which, in the discretion of the supervisor, would constitute a hazard for an unarmed officer.
5-1A-6: PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The Chief of Police shall promulgate rules and regulations of the Police Department governing the functions of community service officers. Said rules
and regulations shall establish specific guidelines and procedures with respect to the enforcement of the Bartlett Municipal Code by community service
officers, the performance of those duties delineated under Section 5-1A-5, the exercise of discretion by the shift commander or supervisor in the
assignment of duties pursuant to Section 5-1A-5A8, and such other matters as may be appropriate.
B. Obedience to Police Regulations: In addition to Village rules and regulations, community service officers shall be subject to the rules and regulations of
the Police Department in the same manner as the regular police officers.
5-1A-7: DUTY TO APPEAR AS WITNESSES:
All community service officers issuing citations for the violation of an ordinance of the Village shall attend as witnesses before the court where the trial may
be had, and shall procure all necessary evidence in their power, and furnish a list of witnesses to the court and the Village Attorney. No community service
officer shall be entitled to any witness fees to be taxed against the Village in any action for the violation of an ordinance where the Village is plaintiff.
5-1A-8: UNIFORMS:
Community service officers shall wear the uniform designated by Police Department rules, regulations and general orders. A uniform allowance, as
determined by corporate authorities through fiscal budget appropriation, may be provided.
5-1A-9: COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 154/702
The President and Board of Trustees of the Village shall determine, by ordinance or resolution, the compensation for community service officers. Benefits
for community service officers will be determined under the appropriate sections set forth in the Personnel Code relating to permanent part-time
employees.
5-1A-10: DISMISSAL:
Dismissal of community service officers shall be in accordance with section 10 of the Bartlett Personnel Code, as amended by Ordinance 82-19. (Ord. 82-
41, 7-6-82)
ARTICLE B. AUXILIARY POLICE
5-1B-1: OFFICE ESTABLISHED, QUALIFICATIONS, TERM:
A. There is hereby established the position of auxiliary policeman. Auxiliary policemen shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees in such number as the corporate authorities shall from time to time deem necessary.
B. Prior to entering upon any of their duties, auxiliary policemen shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures as
shall be appropriate in the exercise of the powers conferred upon them, which training and course of study shall be determined and provided by the
corporate authorities. The auxiliary police shall be residents of the Village, and prior to appointment shall have their fingerprints taken. No person shall
be appointed as such auxiliary policeman if he has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude.1
C. Auxiliary policemen shall serve at the discretion of the Board of Trustees and may be removed from office at the will of the Village President and Board
of Trustees.
D. Auxiliary policemen shall receive such hourly compensation for their services as determined by the corporate authorities.
5-1B-2: BOND REQUIRED:
The auxiliary policemen so appointed shall, at the time of their appointment, execute to the Village in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) each
with surety approved by the corporate authorities conditioned for the faithful performance of his duty as required by law.
5-1B-3: FUNCTIONS:
Auxiliary policemen shall not be members of the regular Police Department, nor shall they supplement members of the regular Police Department in the
performance of their assigned and normal duties, except as otherwise provided herein. Uniforms and identification symbols worn by such auxiliary
policemen shall be different and distinct from those used by members of the regular Police Department of the Village. The auxiliary policemen shall at all
times during the performance of their duties be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police of the Village.
5-1B-4: FIREARMS:
Auxiliary policemen shall not carry firearms except with the special permission of the Chief of Police, and when in uniform and while in the performance of
their duties.
5-1B-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The auxiliary policemen shall be conservators of the peace and shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace or are violating any Municipal ordinance or any criminal law
of the State;
B. To commit arrested persons for examination;
C. To direct traffic and assist in traffic control;
D. To assist in parade control and to keep peace in all large gatherings in and about the community;
E. To aid in the control of natural or manmade disasters and in case of civil disorder, and to assist in cases of riot, disaster and emergency control as
directed by the Chief of Police;
F. To perform such other related duties as directed by the Chief of Police or the corporate authorities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 155/702
It is expressly provided that in cases which render it impractical for members of the regular Police Department to perform the normal and regular police
duties, the Chief of Police or the regular Police Department is hereby authorized to assign auxiliary policemen to perform such normal and regular police
duties. (Ord. 68-20, 10-15-68)
5-1B-6: PARKING ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL:
The Village President and Board of Trustees may from time to time assign civilian parking ordinance enforcement personnel to the Police Department.
Such personnel shall have the powers and duties hereinafter specified:
A. Parking ordinance enforcement personnel shall monitor the Village parking meters and limited time parking zones within the Village, and, in the event of
a violation of the Village parking ordinances, shall have the power and authority to issue to violators notices to appear in court in the required form from
time to time by rule of court.
B. In no event are parking ordinance enforcement personnel authorized to make arrests or to carry weapons at any time. (Ord. 76-6, 3-2-1976)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL AND DOGS
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
ANIMAL: Any nonhuman living creature, domestic or wild.
ANIMAL CONTROL ACT: The animal control act1.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any premises designated by the village for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under authority of this chapter.
BITE: To be seized with teeth or jaws so that a person or companion animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and saliva of the biting animal
has contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin.
CAT: Felis catus.
COMPANION ANIMAL: An animal that is commonly considered to be, or is considered by the owner to be, a pet, including, but not limited to, canines,
felines, ferrets, and equines.
CONFINEMENT: The restriction of an animal by the owner or his agent to a building or other enclosure in isolation from other animals and from persons
except for contact necessary for the animal's care, or if the animal is authorized to leave its enclosure by court order, the muzzling and leashing of the
animal.
DANGEROUS DOG: A. Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of
serious physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
B. A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury; and
C. A dog which has been deemed to be a dangerous dog under the animal control act by the appropriate state or county official designated under said
act.
DOG: All members of the family Canidae.
DOG PARK: Any public park owned, leased and/or operated by a park district, forest preserve district, state, county or municipality which has been
specifically designated by the corporate authority of the public body that owns, leases and/or operates said parks for use by dogs.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: An animal which has been tamed for man's use.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing an enclosure and designed with secure sides, top and bottom to
prevent the animal from escaping and prevent the entry of young children.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength to
keep such dog or other animal under control.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has it in his or her care, or acts as its custodian or
who knowingly permits a dog to remain on any premises occupied by said person.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, company or corporation, society, association or other legal entity.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG: A dog that is unsupervised and found running at large with three (3) or more other dogs.
RESTRAINT: An animal shall be deemed to be under restraint if on the enclosed premises of its owner or upon a leash and under the control of a
responsible person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 156/702
RUNNING AT LARGE: An animal that is not restrained by a competent person and is present somewhere other than its owner's property.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: A physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, muscle tears, disfigurement, protracted
impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery without regard to
whether the person actually sought medical treatment.
TAME: An animal which is gentle and docile.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that: a) without justification attacks a person and causes serious physical injury, or death, or any individual dog that has been found
to be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions, and b) a dog which has been declared and/or deemed a vicious dog under the animal control
act by a court of competent jurisdiction.
WILD ANIMAL: Any species of mammal, reptile, amphibian, arachnid or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition, and
which, because it is carnivorous in its wild state, or is poisonous, or because of its size, physical makeup, vicious nature or other characteristics, would
constitute a danger to human life, domestic animals or property, including lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat,
jaguarundi and other wild cat of the family Felidae, hyena, bear, wolverine, badger, wolf, coyote, boar, alligator, crocodile, any poisonous or venomous
biting or injecting species of amphibian, arachnid, or reptile or any life threatening reptile. Any animal which is of a species listed specifically shall be
considered a wild animal and any poisonous, venomous biting or injecting species of amphibian, arachnid or reptile or life threatening reptile shall be
considered a wild animal, and the provisions of this chapter regarding such wild animals shall apply. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person owning, keeping or harboring any dog in the village to register the same with the village clerk and pay a license fee as
is hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-3: LICENSE APPLICATION AND FEE:
Each applicant for a dog license shall submit such information as shall be required in the application form available at the village clerk's office, and each
license application shall be accompanied by proof that the dog for which such application is made has been vaccinated for rabies. The expiration date of
each dog license shall be one year from the date of the current rabies vaccination. The license fee shall be two dollars ($2.00) for each dog for each year
or for each part of a year for which a license is issued. Senior citizens shall be issued one dog license per household at no charge. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-
2009)
5-2-4: DOG TAGS; REGISTER:
The person paying the fee hereinabove provided shall receive a metal dog license tag containing such lettering as may be directed by the village president
and board of trustees, without any extra charge therefor from the village clerk. Every dog kept in the village shall be equipped with a collar, and this tag
shall be fastened to such collar at all times when such dog is on any public street, alley or other public place. Any dog which does not have such tag while
in or upon any public street shall be deemed to be a stray and shall be impounded. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person who has custody of any dog or other animal:
A. To permit the animal to enter upon the premises of another within the village without the consent of the owners.
B. To permit any animal, whether licensed or not, to enter any public body of water, pond, fountain or stream except in any dog park where it is permitted to
do so by the owner, lessee, and/or operator of said dog park.
C. To permit, by action or inaction, any dog to bite any person or companion animal, other than its owner or the owner's immediate family.
D. To permit any animal to damage or destroy any property.
E. To permit any dog to chase, run after or jump at vehicles using the public thoroughfares.
F. To permit any dog to habitually snap, jump upon or otherwise threaten persons lawfully using any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath,
play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk.
G. To permit any dog that is unmuzzled or unleashed while off the owner's or custodian's property to growl, snarl, snap at or jump upon, or otherwise
threaten persons in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses an unjustified imminent threat of injury to a person or a companion animal.
H. To permit any dog, cat, or other animal to howl, yelp, whine or meow, bark or make noise in such a manner as to disturb any person or neighborhood.
I. To allow any place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unsanitary or become offensive to those residing in the vicinity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 157/702
J. No person, group or firm shall keep more than three (3) adult dogs, cats, horses, or any other animals per household unless they are kept on a property
specifically zoned to allow a veterinary clinic, animal hospital, kennel or zoo. For purposes of this chapter, when an animal reaches six (6) months of
age, it shall be considered an adult animal.
K. To fail to report to the chief of police an animal bite to a person or companion animal within twenty four (24) hours of said bite.
L. To keep, harbor or maintain any animal which may endanger the safety of persons or property.
M. To permit any dog to run at large in the village at any time except in a designated dog park. Dogs which are on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public
place without being held securely on a leash shall be deemed running at large. Dogs which are running at large shall be taken up and impounded by
the police department.
N. For the owner or custodian of a dog that has been deemed to be a dangerous dog to fail to report to the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours of
any such finding or determination by the state or county official designated under the animal control act, and to fail to file a copy of any such written
finding and order with the chief of police within said twenty four (24) hours.
O. For the owner or custodian of a dog that has been adjudicated and deemed to be a vicious dog to fail to report to the chief of police within twenty four
(24) hours of the entry of a court order making any such determination or declaration, and to fail to file a certified copy of said order with the chief of
police within said twenty four (24) hours irrespective of whether the time to appeal said order has run. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-6: IMPOUNDING DOGS:
A. Animals which are impounded in the village shall be kept in the enclosure established as the village pound until redeemed or otherwise disposed of as
may be directed from time to time by the village president and board of trustees.
B. Any person seeking to redeem any impounded animal shall pay a fee of six dollars ($6.00) a day for each day during which said animal has been held
in the pound.
C. Animals which are kept in the village pound shall be humanely treated and fed. Such pound shall be in the charge of the chief of police who shall be
responsible for the care and custody of the same. Unredeemed animals shall be disposed of as provided by the president and board of trustees. (Ord.
2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-7: ANIMALS FORBIDDEN IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any animal, even though on a leash, to be or enter upon any public hall, restaurant, confectionery shop, coffee shop, ice cream or
soft drink establishment, office, store, grocery, meat market, bakery or any store or shop for the sale of food, except any shop for the sale of animal pets,
anywhere in the village during the time that any of such places or establishments are open for use by the public or persons entitled to use the same.
Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any blind person using a trained, seeing eye dog, to veterinary offices or hospitals, or to animal
shows or exhibitions. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-8: VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS:
Any dog found to be a dangerous dog by the appropriate state or county official or his or her designee as provided for in the Illinois animal control act, or
any dog found to be a vicious dog by a court as provided in the animal control act, shall be subject to the restrictions declared by said official or court. The
owner or custodian of a dangerous dog or a vicious dog shall strictly adhere to all restrictions imposed by the administrator, the director or the respective
designees as defined in the animal control act and/or court ordered restrictions, if any. The owner or custodian of said dangerous dog or vicious dog must
report to the chief of police any such determination and/or order, and file a written copy of the restrictions imposed by the official or court within twenty four
(24) hours of the entry of said determination or court order. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-8-1: RESTRICTIONS ON KEEPING VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to harbor or keep any vicious or dangerous dog in the village unless the following conditions are strictly
observed:
A. Confinement: The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog shall not suffer or permit such dog to be unconfined unless such dog is securely muzzled and
restrained as set forth in the following subsection.
B. Restraints: The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog shall not suffer or permit such dog to be unconfined unless such dog is securely muzzled and
restrained by a chain or leash, and under the physical restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be so made that it will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or animal.
C. Enclosure: The pen must have a top, sides and a bottom, all so securely attached to each other that the dog cannot escape. The sides must be
embedded into the ground no less than one foot (1'), and must be so attached to the bottom that the dog cannot dig its way under the sides. The pen in
which a dog is required to be confined by this chapter shall be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 158/702
D. Signs: The owner of a vicious or dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that
there is a vicious or dangerous dog on the premises. A similar sign shall be posted on the pen in which such dog is confined.
E. Additional Restrictions: Any other and additional restrictions imposed by administrative order or court order shall be strictly adhered to. (Ord. 2009-70,
7-7-2009)
5-2-8-2: AUTHORITY TO KILL VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
The members of the police department are authorized to kill any dangerous dog, vicious dog, potentially dangerous dog running at large, or any wild
animal running at large, or any animal attacking a person or domestic animal, when necessary for the protection of any person or domestic animal. (Ord.
2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-9: DOGFIGHTING PROHIBITED:
No person or entity shall possess, harbor or maintain any dog for the purpose of dogfighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose
of causing or encouraging such dog to attack human beings or domestic animals. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-10: MUZZLES REQUIRED:
Whenever the village president shall, by proclamation, declare that danger from rabies is great, it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to go upon any public
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place unless such dog is securely muzzled. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-11: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary
care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and treatment. No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork, abandon
or otherwise abuse any animal. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-12: CONTROL OF DEFECATION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person unless
such person has in his immediate possession a device for the removal of excrement and a depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle
located upon property owned or possessed by such person.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in control of, or permitting any dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person to
fail to remove excrement left by such dog to a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-13: RABIES PREVENTION:
A. Procedure When Animal Is Suspected Of Having Rabies; Release Of Animal: All animals which have attacked, bitten, scratched or otherwise injured
any person so as to cause an abrasion or breaking of the skin of such person shall be impounded for a period of not less than ten (10) days. If,
however, a licensed veterinarian or rabies inspector receives information and evidence that the animal has been previously vaccinated in accordance
with the requirements of the state of Illinois2, then said animal shall be confined either in a kennel under veterinary supervision or said animal shall be
confined in the house of said owner and shall not be permitted upon the public streets, unless, in the judgment of the rabies inspector or the licensed
veterinarian, circumstances are such that the dog or other animal should be confined elsewhere. If said animal shall be confined within a private home,
it shall not be permitted to leave the home of the owner unless such dog or other animal is under the supervision of an adult, but, under no
circumstances shall such animal be permitted upon the public streets. It shall be presented for examination and observation by a licensed veterinarian
on the first, fifth and tenth days of a ten (10) day period, commencing within twenty four (24) hours of the date of the bite. All reports of bites received
by a veterinarian shall be reported in writing to the rabies inspector within twenty four (24) hours after the dog or other animal is confined and such
report shall contain the owner's name, address, the date of confinement, the breed, description, age and sex of the dog or other animal. Upon the
completion of confinement of the dog or other animal for the ten (10) day period, the veterinarian shall notify the rabies inspector and the local health
department in writing of the final disposition of the dog or other animal.
B. Recent Vaccination Of Animal: Nothing to the contrary herein contained, where a biting dog or other animal has been properly vaccinated for the first
time, less than thirty (30) days prior to the biting incident, said animal shall then be impounded for the full ten (10) days under the supervision of a
veterinarian or at the municipal impounding facility.
C. Duty Of Owner To Surrender Animal: The owner or custodian of any dog or other animal suffering from or suspected to be suffering from rabies as
provided in subsection B of this section shall surrender possession of such dog or other animal to any police officer of the village on demand.
D. Killing Of Rabid Animal Prohibited; Exception: Except in cases of emergency, no police officer or other person shall kill or cause to be killed any animal
suspected of being rabid. If, after the animal has been placed in quarantine, a licensed veterinarian tentatively diagnoses rabies in that animal, then the
animal shall be allowed to die by natural cause after which the head of such animal will be sent to a laboratory for pathological examination and
confirmation of the diagnosis. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 159/702
5-2-14: WILD ANIMALS:
5-2-14-1: PROHIBITION AGAINST KEEPING WILD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to harbor or keep any wild animal in the village, except the provisions of this section shall not apply to any
keeping of such animals in a bona fide licensed veterinary hospital for treatment, bona fide educational institution, museum, circus, carnival, zoo or other
event for entertainment, which is authorized by the proper and responsible official or officers of the village in accordance with all applicable laws and
ordinances, and provided that proper bond and/or insurance has been posted in accordance with village ordinances, all federal, state, county and local
permits and licenses have been procured and the applicant thereunder is in compliance with all federal, state, county and local rules, regulations, laws and
ordinances. It shall not be a defense to a violation of this section that the person or entity violating said section has attempted to, or has in fact,
domesticated the wild animal. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-14-2: NOTICE OF KEEPING OF WILD ANIMALS:
Upon the written complaint of any person that a person, firm or corporation procured, owns, possesses or harbors a wild animal on premises in the village,
the chief of police shall forthwith cause the matter to be investigated, and if after investigation the facts indicate that such person, named in the complaint,
is in fact the owner or is keeping or harboring any such wild animal in the village, the chief of police shall forthwith send written notice to such person,
requiring such person to safely remove said wild animal from the village within ten (10) days of the date of said notice. Notice as herein provided shall not
be required where such wild animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, or has escaped and is at large, in which case the
chief of police shall cause said wild animal to be immediately seized and impounded, according to the provisions of section 5-2-14-3 of this chapter, or
killed, if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person, domestic animal or property. (Ord. 2009-
70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-14-3: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDING OF WILD ANIMALS:
The chief of police shall forthwith cause to be seized and impounded any wild animal where the person owning, keeping or harboring such animal has
failed to comply with the notice sent pursuant to section 5-2-14-2 of this chapter. Any health officer or any police officer of the village shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this section, including, but not limited to, taking possession of any wild animal the officer reasonably believes is being
kept, possessed or harbored in violation of this chapter. If the person in possession refuses to relinquish possession of the wild animal, the health officer or
police officer shall so notify the chief of police, and the chief of police shall obtain an appropriate court order, with the assistance of the village attorney, to
obtain possession. This section shall not be interpreted to authorize or attempt to authorize entry into places not open to the public, without either the
consent of the owner or person in possession of a warrant or other court order. Upon seizure and impoundment, said animal shall be delivered to a place
of confinement for safekeeping with a qualified zoological park, humane society, veterinary hospital or animal refuge, authorized by law to accept, own,
keep or harbor such wild animals. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-14-4: FORFEITURE OF WILD ANIMAL:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section 5-2-14 shall, in addition to any fine, penalty or equitable relief granted against it,
forfeit the wild animal to the village for permanent disposition to a zoological or animal refuge authorized by law to accept, keep or harbor such animals, if
reasonably possible, or, if not, for destruction of said wild animal. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-15: COSTS TO BE PAID BY RESPONSIBLE PERSONS OR ENTITIES:
Any reasonable costs incurred by the village in seizing, impounding and/or confining any vicious dog, dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog, dog at
large, cat, domestic animal, or wild animal shall be charged against the person or entity who or that owns, keeps or harbors such animal and shall be
collected by the village prosecutor or village attorney. Such charge shall be in addition to any fine, penalty or equitable relief provided for violating this
chapter. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-16: NUISANCE; INJUNCTION:
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this chapter, the village attorney may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this chapter. Such application for relief may include seeking a
temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction and/or permanent injunction. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-17: PENALTY:
5-2-17-1: GENERAL PENALTIES:
Except for a violation of subsection 5-2-5M of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. If any violation shall be of a continuing nature, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day of
such violation and the person committing such violation shall be subject to the progressive penalties contained herein. (Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
5-2-17-2: SEPARATE PENALTIES FOR DOG AT LARGE VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating subsection 5-2-5M of this chapter (dogs running at large) shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by fines
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 160/702
not less than the following:
First offense $ 25.00
Second offense 50.00
Third offense 100.00
Fourth offense 200.00
Fifth offense 300.00
Each offense thereafter 500.00
(Ord. 2009-70, 7-7-2009)
Footnote 1: 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: 510 ILCS 5/8.
Chapter 3
MISDEMEANORS
5-3-1: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS:
A. Impersonation: It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful authority any Village officer or employee. Any person violating this
subsection shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (1968 Code, §7.112)
B. Interference with Village Officer:
1. It shall be unlawful to physically interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of the Village while they are engaged in the duties of their office or
employment. It shall not be unlawful to interfere with or hinder an officer or employee of the Village by means of demonstration, protests or other
forms of speech, even abusive or vulgar speech, unless such speech by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace.
2. Any person who shall resist physically any member of the Police Department or any other person duly authorized to perform police duty, in the
discharge of their duties, or shall in any way interfere with physically or physically prevent or hinder them in the discharge of their duties as such
member, or shall offer or endeavor physically to do so, and any person who shall in any manner assist physically any person in the custody of any
member of the Police Department to escape or attempt to escape from such custody, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00)1. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting demonstrations or other forms of speech, unless such speech by its very
utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of peace. (1968 Code, §23.006; amd. 1984 Code)
5-3-2: DISORDERLY CONDUCT, UNLAWFUL CONDUCT AND UNLAWFUL LOITERING:
A. Disorderly Conduct2: No person shall engage in disorderly conduct. Any person who shall do any of the following shall be guilty of disorderly conduct:
1. Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, where any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health;
2. Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, where property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged;
3. Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct;
4. Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another;
5. Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl;
6. Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place;
7. Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes;
8. Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others, for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming;
9. Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device;
10. Any person who assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable
thing in any place or from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet such person;
11. Any person who utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets;
12. Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is
allowed or tolerated;
13. Any person who shall act in a dangerous manner toward others;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 161/702
14. Any person who in the presence or hearing of another, curses or abuses such other person, or uses any violent or abusive language to such
person concerning such other person, any of such person's relations, ethnic group, race or otherwise uses such language under circumstances
reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace ("fighting words");
15. Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or other persons for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another;
16. Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation;
17. Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public ways so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses
to clear any public way when ordered to do so;
18. Any person who interferes with any public gathering or religious worship within the town.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting picketing, demonstrations or other forms of speech, unless said speech amounts to
"fighting words" which by its very utterance tends to incite a breach of the peace.
B. Fighting3: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or battery in any place in the Village. A person commits an assault when without
lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. A person commits a battery if he
intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification and by any means: 1) causes bodily harm to an individual; or 2) makes physical contact in an
insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
C. False Alarms4: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread any false alarm of fire in the Village, or to transmit in any manner to the
Fire Department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no
reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists.
D. Loitering on Public Property or in Public Places: Any person or persons who at any time stands, strolls or walks on any public street, sidewalk or in and
at any public place in such a manner to impede, hinder or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on such public sidewalk street
or property, and who refuses to disburse and move from the area from which such person or persons is impeding or interfering with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic when directed to do so by any member of the Police Department, shall be guilty of the misdemeanor of loitering.
E. Loitering on Business Property:
1. Definitions: As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
LOITERING:Remaining idle in one location, including walking around aimlessly, and sitting or standing in or out of a motor vehicle.
2. Loitering Prohibited: No person shall loiter on private property that is customarily used by the public as an integral part of a commercial venture in
such a manner as to:
a. "Disturb the peace" as defined by State law, to wit; to do any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a
breach of the peace;
b. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
c. Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully seeking access or the use of the commercial enterprise conducted on the property or adjacent or
continuous to said private property.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting picketing, demonstrating or other forms of speech unless such speech amounts to
"fighting words" as defined in Section 3-3-2A14 which by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace.
3. Notice: No person shall be guilty of a violation of this Section unless:
a. The property owner or tenant shall post the property with "No Loitering" signs or other notices of like meaning at the entrance or entrances to the
property and at intervals of not less than seventy five feet (75') on such property. Property of seventy five feet (75') or less may contain only one
sign; and
b. The person to be charged with loitering has been asked by the owner or tenant of the property, by an employee of the owner or tenant, by a
security officer or by a law enforcement officer to leave the property and has failed to leave.
F. Loitering for the Purpose of Engaging in Drug-Related Activity Unlawful:
1. It is unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare, or place open to the public, for the purpose of engaging in activity contrary to any of
the provisions of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq. (formerly Illinois Revised Statutes, chapter
561/2, paragraph 1100 et seq.), as amended, the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq. (formerly Illinois Revised
Statutes, chapter 561/2, paragraph 701 et seq.), as amended, or any other local, State or Federal law prohibiting the manufacture, distribution,
delivery, use or possession of a controlled substance (hereinafter "drug laws").
2. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is "manifested" are the following:
a. Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller. For purposes of this Section, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller" is
a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this State of any violation involving the use,
possession, or sale of any of the substances referred to in the drug laws within the previous year, or such person has been convicted of any of the
provisions of said drug laws or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this State or of any other state or jurisdiction within the
previous year; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks", or a person who possesses
"drug paraphernalia" as defined in the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 600/1 et seq. (formerly Illinois
Revised Statutes, chapter 561/2, paragraph 2101 et seq.) as amended;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 162/702
b. Such person is currently subject to an order of court prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug activity geographic area and such person is
located in such an area;
c. Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful
drug-related activity, including, but not limited to, such person acting as a "lookout";
d. Such person is a known member of a "gang" or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity; for purposes of this Section, a "known"
member of a "gang" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within the United States, within
the previous year, of any violation involving illegal gang activity;
e. Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion;
f. Such person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer;
g. Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related
activity;
h. The area involved is known to be an area of unlawful drug use and trafficking. For purposes of this Section, an area "known to be an area of
unlawful drug use" is a specifically defined geographic area, designated by the Chief of Police to be a known area of unlawful drug use; said
designation being based on empirical data.
3. No determination of intent shall be made absent an affirmative act by the person to be charged, which act or acts, when taken in context of the
totality of the surrounding circumstances, shall constitute a substantial step towards the violation of the aforementioned drug laws.
G. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of subsections 5-3-2A, B, C, D, E and/or F shall be severally fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed one each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 94-35, 4-19-94)
5-3-3: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY:
A. Injury to Public Property: It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface or interfere with any property belonging to the Village without proper authority
from the Village Board. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (1968 Code, §7.604)
B. Wind-Blown Refuse: It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or material in such a place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to
be scattered or cause clouds or dust or particles; and it shall be unlawful to permit the escape of soot, ashes or other solid products or results of
combustion so as to be wind blown or scattered. (1968 Code, §23.018)
C. Deposit of Grass and Rubbish Prohibited in Public Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped or deposited any grass,
leaves, branches or any other things in the roadway or gutter of any public street in the Village. (1968 Code, §23.027)
D. Trespassing Prohibited:
1. Trespass Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the Village upon either public or private property.
2. Definition: The term "trespass", as used herein, shall mean and includes the following acts:
a. An entry upon the premises of another, including the premises of a unit of local government ("government") or any part thereof, in violation of a
notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach or entry to such premises; or any such entry in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by the owner of such premises, the owner's agent, or any person having the
right to the possession or control of such premises, or the agent of the government which owns or controls such premises; or,
b. The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another, including government land, in violation of
a notice posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach or entry to such premises, or in violation of any
notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by the owner of such land, the owner's agent, or any person having the right to the possession
or control of such land, or the agent of the government which owns or controls such land; or,
c. The failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another, including government premises, after being requested to leave, either orally or in
writing, by any owner, the owner's agent or any person having the right to the possession or control of such premises, or the agent of the
government which owns or controls such premises; or,
d. The entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the owner thereof, or the person having the right to the
possession or control of such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being
requested to leave by the person having such right.
e. The entry upon the property of the Village with the intent to injure, damage, deface or interfere with the use of such property, without proper
authority from the Village Administrator or her designated representative.
3. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 88-115, 12-6-88)
5-3-4: INJURIOUS ACTS, CONDITIONS:
A. Missiles: It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley or other public place; and it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any
glass, tacks, nails or other similar articles on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the village. (1968 Code § 23.019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 163/702
B. Scaffolds: Any scaffold or ladder placed in such a way that it overhangs or can fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the village shall
be firmly constructed and safeguarded; and it shall be unlawful to place or leave any tools or articles on any such place in such a manner that the same
can fall onto any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public place from a height greater than four feet (4'). (1968 Code § 23.029)
C. Articles On Windows: It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any window ledge or other place abutting on a public street, alley or other
place a height above four feet (4') from the ground in such a manner that the same can be or is in danger of falling onto any such street, sidewalk, alley
or other public place. (1968 Code § 23.030)
D. Whistles: It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be blown any steam whistle of any stationary engine or steam engine in the village except as a signal
for starting or stopping work or in emergencies to avoid injury to persons or property. (1968 Code § 23.031)
E. Hunting: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer in the lawful exercise of his duties, to hunt for, trap, shoot or shoot at, with any
weapon of any kind, kill, or attempt to kill, injure, or attempt to injure, any wild birds or wild animals at any location or place within the corporate limits of
the village. (Ord. 84-91, 12-4-1984)
5-3-5: BAD CHECKS, ISSUE:
No person shall issue a check in payment of village services knowing that it will not be paid by the depository or under such circumstances that such
person ought to have known that it would not be paid by the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with the depository when the check or
other order is issued or delivered is prima facie evidence that the offender knew that such check would not be paid by the depository. Any person or entity
violating any provision of this section shall be fined ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 85-69, 7-16-1985)
5-3-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code § 23.035)
Chapter 4
WEAPONS
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
AIR RIFLE: Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, paintball gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm or a handgun which
impels a breakable paintball containing washable marking colors or, a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force that
reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
ANTIQUE FIREARM: Any firearm (including any firearm with a matchlock, flintlock, percussion cap or similar type ignition system) manufactured on or
before 1898; and any replica of any firearm (including any firearm with a matchlock, flintlock, percussion cap or similar ignition system) manufactured to
look like a firearm manufactured before 1898 if such replica is not designed or redesigned for using ammunition.
DANGEROUS WEAPONS: Any bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, slungshot, sand club, sandbag, sap, metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon regardless of
composition, weighted gloves, throwing star, any knife commonly referred to as a switchblade which has a blade that opens by hand pressure applied to a
button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, ballistic knife which is a device that propels a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil
spring, elastic material or compressed gas valve, knife with a blade at least three inches (3") in length, dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto,
bow and arrow, incendiary device, broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun, conducted electrical weapon, or any other dangerous weapon or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character. Dangerous weapons do not include "air rifle", "antique firearm", "firearm", or "handgun" as defined in this section.
DEALER: Any person engaged in the business of sale or other transfer of air rifles, firearms, handguns, ammunition or dangerous weapons at wholesale
or retail including any person who is a pawnbroker.
FIREARM: Any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas or
escape of gas. "Firearm" does not include:
A. Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, paintball gun or BB gun which either expels a single globular projectile not exceeding 0.18 inch in diameter and
which has a maximum muzzle velocity of less than seven hundred feet (700') per second or breakable paintballs containing washable marking
colors;
B. Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or recommended by the United States coast guard or the interstate commerce
commission;
C. Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition;
D. An antique firearm (other than a machine gun) which, although designed as a weapon, the department of state police finds by reason of the date of
its manufacture, value, design, and other characteristics is primarily a collector's item and is not likely to be used as a weapon; and
E. Model rockets designed to propel a model vehicle in a vertical direction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 164/702
HANDGUN: Any device which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas, or escape of gas that is
designed to be held and fired by the use of a single hand. "Handgun" does not include:
A. A stun gun or conducted electrical weapon;
B. A machine gun as defined in item (i) of paragraph (7) of subsection (a) of section 24-1 of the criminal code of 2012;
C. A short barreled rifle shotgun as defined in item (ii) of paragraph (7) of subsection (a) of section 24-1 of the criminal code of 2012; or
D. Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, paintball gun, or BB gun which expels a single globular projectile not exceeding 0.18 inch in diameter, or which has
a maximum muzzle velocity of less than seven hundred feet (700') per second, or which expels breakable paintballs containing washable marking
colors.
SALE OR OTHER TRANSFER: Any sale, gift, exchange, loan, rental or other transfer of one or more air rifles or dangerous weapons, but not including
any of the following:
A. Acquisition of an air rifle or dangerous weapon, or both, as the executor, administrator or other legal representative of a decedent's estate or as
guardian of a guardianship estate; or
B. Transfer of an air rifle or dangerous weapon, or both, by bequest or intestate succession; or
C. Acquisition or transfer of an air rifle or dangerous weapon, or both, by a trustee in bankruptcy in the administration of a bankrupt's estate; or
D. Return of an air rifle or dangerous weapon, or both, to a person, firm or corporation from whom it was received; or
E. Transfer of an air rifle or dangerous weapon, or both, where it is required by or in accordance with a judgment or decree of any court of lawful
jurisdiction; or
F. Transfer of an air rifle or dangerous weapon, or both, to any federal, state or local government, or any department, agency, bureau, institution or
commission thereof; or
G. Transfer of a dangerous weapon to a private museum, society, institution or other private organization which customarily acquires and holds
dangerous weapons as curios and relics or for scientific or research purposes; or
H. Loan or rental of an air rifle or bow and arrows solely for the purpose of target shooting upon a lawful target range. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
5-4-2: DEALERS:
No person shall engage in the business of dealer of air rifles, handguns, firearms, firearm ammunition or dangerous weapons in the village, unless
licensed in accordance with the provisions of the federal, state and local laws and/or ordinances governing the sale of such articles. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-
2016)
5-4-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS OR HANDGUNS:
A. No person shall fire or discharge without legal justification under the laws of the state of Illinois any firearm or handgun within the corporate limits of the
village.
B. Subsection A of this section does not apply to nor affect members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of practicing shooting at targets
upon established target ranges, whether public or private, or patrons of such ranges, while such patrons are using their firearms or handguns on those
target ranges.
C. Subsection A of this section does not apply to or affect members of any club organized for the purpose of commemorating historical events such as
Civil War battles, or to the discharge of handguns or firearms by honor guards on ceremonial occasions such as funerals, provided only blank
ammunition is used for those purposes. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
5-4-4: POSSESSION OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS:
A. No person shall carry or possess any dangerous weapon in the village, except when on his land or in his own abode, legal dwelling or fixed place of
business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person as an invitee with that person's permission.
B. No person shall carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against another any dangerous weapon (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 165/702
5-4-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of section 5-4-4 of this chapter do not apply to or affect any of the following officers while in the discharge of their official duties: sheriffs,
coroners, constables, policemen or other duly constituted peace officers, wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails and other
institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of crime; nor to the following employees or agents while engaged in the discharge of the
duties of their employment: watchmen, special agents and policemen employed by railroads or express companies, nor to persons lawfully summoned by
an officer to assist in making arrests, or preserving the peace while so engaged in assisting such officer. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
5-4-6: SALE OR OTHER TRANSFER OF AIR RIFLES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise transfer an air rifle to any person under the age of thirteen (13) years where the
dealer knows or has cause to believe the person to be under thirteen (13) years of age or where such dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry
relative to the age of such person and such person is under thirteen (13) years of age.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend or otherwise transfer any air rifle to any person under thirteen (13) years of age except where the
relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward or adult instructor and pupil, exists between such person and the person under thirteen (13) years
of age, or where such person stands in loco parentis to the person under thirteen (13) years of age.
C. The provisions of this chapter do not prohibit sales of air rifles:
1. By wholesale dealers or jobbers;
2. To be shipped out of the state. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
5-4-7: POSSESSION OF AIR RIFLES BY PERSONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any air rifle on the public streets, sidewalks, roads, highways, public land or any public place
within this state, except that this subsection A does not apply to or affect transportation of any air rifle that meets one of the following conditions:
1. Are broken down in a nonfunctioning state or are unloaded and are in an enclosed case; and
2. Are stored in the trunk of a vehicle, or if the vehicle does not have a trunk, are located in the vehicle so as to be not immediately accessible to an
occupant of the vehicle in which the air rifle is being transported.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any air rifle unless it is:
1. Kept on his own land or within his own abode, legal dwelling, or fixed place of business or on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person as
an invitee with that person's permission;
2. Used by the person if he is a duly enrolled member of any club, team or society organized for educational purposes and maintaining as part of its
facilities or having written permission to use an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and instruction of a responsible adult
and then only if said air rifle is actually being used in connection with the activities of said club team or society under the supervision of a responsible
adult; or
3. Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances when such air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to
endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in such manner as to prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside
the limits of such grounds or residence. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
5-4-8: DISCHARGE OF AIR RIFLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle from or across any street, sidewalk, road, highway or public land or any public place except on
a safely constructed target range. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
5-4-9: SEIZURE/REMOVAL OF AIR RIFLES:
The state police, or any sheriff, or any police officer shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or
used in any manner in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
5-4-10: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense, and a fine
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense thereafter. (Ord. 2016-04, 1-19-2016)
Chapter 5
MINORS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 166/702
5-5-1: CURFEW:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section:
CURFEW HOURS: 1. Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the
following day; and
2. Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any Friday or Saturday until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day.
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT: A person who is:
1. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
2. At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
REMAIN: To:
1. Linger or stay; or
2. Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
B. Offenses:
1. A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village of Bartlett during
curfew hours.
2. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the village of Bartlett during curfew hours.
3. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if said owner, operator or employee knowingly allows a minor to
remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
C. Defenses:
1. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
b. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
c. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
d. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
e. Involved in an emergency;
f. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police
department about the minor's presence;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 167/702
g. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity which is: 1) supervised by adults; and 2) sponsored by the village of Bartlett, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
h. Going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity which is: 1) supervised by
adults, and 2) sponsored by the village of Bartlett, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
i. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution and/or rights protected by article 1, section 3, 4, and/or 5 of the Illinois
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
j. Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the emancipation of minors act1, as amended.
2. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B3 of this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
D. Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place and shall investigate the validity of any defense under subsection C of this section claimed or alleged by the apparent offender. The police
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the police officer reasonably believes that based on any response and any
required investigation by the police officer, and other relevant circumstances:
1. A violation of subsection B of this section has occurred, and
2. No defense under subsection C of this section is present.
E. Penalties: A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2004-
84, 6-15-2004)
5-5-2: VANDALISM/PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: Shall include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a circuit court of this state, but does not include a
person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor, under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act2.
MINOR: A person who has attained eleven (11) years of age but who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY: Includes any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible personal property.
B. Offenses: Within the corporate limits of the Village no person shall:
1. Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without his consent; or
2. Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of another
person without his consent.
C. Penalty: Every person found guilty of a violation of subsection B of this Section shall be subject to either of the following penalties:
1. A fine not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one year.
a. The conditions of a conditional discharge shall include that the defendant:
(1) Not violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal ordinance of any jurisdiction; and
(2) Report to and appear in person before such person or agency as directed by the court.
b. The conditions of conditional discharge may, in addition, require that the defendant:
(1) Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss.
c. When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for a conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of
payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of
conditional discharge may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply
during such additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the
original conditions and to revoke the penalty of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are violated during such additional period.
d. When a petition is filed charging a violation of a condition imposed for conditional discharge, the court:
(1) May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a warrant for the offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the jurisdiction
or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a summons.
The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the sentence of conditional discharge until the final determination of the charge, and the
term of conditional discharge shall not run so long as the offender has not answered the summons or warrant.
(2) Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 168/702
(3) Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of confrontation, cross-examination and representation by counsel. The Village has the
burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the preponderance of the evidence.
(4) Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the
offender unless such failure is due to his wilful refusal to pay.
(5) May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on motion of the Village or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice
to all parties and a hearing.
e. If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue the
offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the
time of the initial penalty.
f. A judgment revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final appealable order.
D. Liability Of Parent Or Legal Guardian Of Minor Offender: The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal
guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of subsection B of this Section;
provided, that said minor has not paid said fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court; and further provided that said
parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law.
(Ord. 76-48, 11-16-1976)
5-5-3: TRUANCY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is enrolled in a public, private or parochial school to be present within the
corporate limits of the Village and not in attendance at said school when it is in session without permission from his or her parent or legal guardian. Any
person who shall so absent himself or herself from the school to which he or she is enrolled shall be guilty of the offense of truancy, even if the said school
is not located within the corporate limits of the Village. Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond the control of the person
so absenting himself or herself from school without parental permission shall not constitute truancy if permission for such absence has substantially been
obtained from the parent and such permission is submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within twenty four (24) hours after such absence.
(Ord. 94-53, 5-17-1994)
5-5-4: CONTRIBUTING TO TRUANCY:
No person eighteen (18) years of age or older may, by act or omission, knowingly encourage or contribute to the truancy of a minor. Truancy shall mean
"truancy" as defined in article 26 of the Illinois School Code (105 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 et seq.). (Ord. 94-53, 5-17-1994)
5-5-5: SPRAY PAINT/MINORS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
"Possession" means an act of physical dominion over, or within, a person's immediate and exclusive control. For purposes of this definition, exclusive
control may occur even though possession is jointly held or shared.
B. Possession Of Spray Paint Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess spray paint on the property of
another or in or upon any public building, public facility, park property, school property, public street or right of way, or railroad right of way. It shall be a
defense to an action for violation of this Section that the owner, manager or other person having control of the property, building or facility consents to
the presence of the spray paint.
C. Aiding And Abetting Possession Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to aid or abet a person under the age of eighteen (18) years in
the possession of any type of spray paint in violation of subsection B of this Section. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to aid or abet a person
under the age of eighteen (18) years in the purchase of any type of spray paint.
D. Sale Of Spray Paint Prohibited:
1. No person or entity shall offer for sale, sell, or cause to be sold to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years any can containing spray paint.
2. A person or entity who has reason to believe that a person attempting to purchase spray paint is under the age of eighteen (18) years, shall require
photographic identification from the individual prior to making the sale.
E. Exceptions: Nothing contained within this Section shall prohibit:
1. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years from possessing or using spray paint while under the immediate supervision of a parent, guardian or
other responsible person who is at least twenty one (21) years of age.
2. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years from possessing or using spray paint at the direction of and in connection with the course of
employment. (Ord. 96-104, 11-5-1996)
5-5-6: TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE TOBACCO OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS/MINORS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 169/702
ALTERNATIVE TOBACCO OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS: A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into
the body of nicotine or synthetic tobacco product which is intended to replicate tobacco and tobacco products, and/or other chemicals inhaled or
ingested by the user simulating smoking, whether by smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, vaping, chewing, dipping, snorting, sniffing or by any
other means. "Alternative tobacco or nicotine product" excludes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms are defined in
this section, and any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation
product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR VAPE: Any electronic device that provides a gas or vapor derived from nicotine, synthetic tobacco products intended
to replicate tobacco and tobacco products, or other alternative tobacco or nicotine products, and/or other chemicals and inhaled by the user simulating
smoking. The term "electronic cigarette" or "vape" includes, but is not limited to, electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah pipes, vape pens,
advanced personal vaporizers, box mods, or other devices capable of delivering aerosolized nicotine, synthetic tobacco products intended to replicate
tobacco and tobacco products, and/or other alternative tobacco or nicotine products, or other chemicals through inhalation or ingestion by the user
simulating smoking.
KNOWINGLY: Having a general knowledge of or reason to know or ground firm belief which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
POSSESSION: An act of physical dominion over, or within, a person's immediate and exclusive control. For purposes of this definition, exclusive
control may occur even though possession is jointly held or shared.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The act of inhaling smoke from a lighted tobacco product, or gas, or vapor from any alternative tobacco or nicotine product,
and/or the smoking, burning, vaping, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, electronic cigarette, vape, hookah,
tobacco, alternative tobacco or nicotine product, weed or herb, or use of any kind of smoking equipment, electronic cigarette or vape equipment.
SMOKELESS TOBACCO: Any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or chewing.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, or tobacco leaf in any of its forms, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or other forms of smokeless tobacco.
USE OF ALTERNATIVE TOBACCO OR NICOTINE PRODUCT: Smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, vaping, snorting, chewing, dipping, or sniffing
of any alternative tobacco or nicotine product.
USE OF TOBACCO: Smoking, chewing or dipping any tobacco product and/or smokeless tobacco.
B. Prohibited Sales, Delivery:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to sell, cause to be sold, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, or any alternative tobacco
or nicotine product, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. A person or entity who has reason to believe that a person attempting to purchase tobacco product(s) and/or alternative tobacco or nicotine products
is under the age of eighteen (18) years, shall require photographic identification from the individual prior to making the sale.
C. Purchase By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products and/or alternative
tobacco or nicotine products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco
products and/or alternative tobacco or nicotine products.
D. Possession By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to knowingly possess any tobacco products
and/or alternative tobacco or nicotine products.
E. Exception:
1. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a person under the age of eighteen (18) from possessing tobacco products and/or alternative tobacco
or nicotine products, in unopened packages, at the direction of and in connection with the course of employment.
2. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a person under the age of eighteen (18) from possessing tobacco products and/or alternative tobacco
or nicotine products for medical purposes when prescribed by a licensed physician, or under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such
person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home. (Ord. 2017-153, 12-5-2017)
5-5-7: LIQUOR/MINORS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic
ethyl alcohol. It does not include any denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this section shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of
denatured alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half
of one percent (0.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CONTROL: The right of possession of a residence or premises.
KNOWINGLY: Having a general knowledge of or reason to know or ground firm belief which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 170/702
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a Circuit Court of this State (but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act).
MINOR: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
PARENT: A natural or adoptive parent or a court-designated guardian.
POSSESSION: An act of physical dominion over, or within, a person's immediate and exclusive control. For purposes of this definition, exclusive
control may occur even though possession is jointly held or shared.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: A home, apartment, condominium, premises or other dwelling unit or meeting room or hall, whether occupied on a
temporary basis or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a social function, owned, rented, leased or under the control of any person
or persons, including the yard of such residence or premises.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of "alcohol" or "spirits", as defined in this section.
B. Aiding And Abetting: It shall be unlawful for any entity or person, including a parent or legal guardian, to aid or abet any minor in the violation of any
Federal or State law or Municipal ordinance regulating the sale, purchase, use or consumption of alcoholic liquor.
C. Adult Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any adult having control of any residence or premises to allow any alcoholic liquor to be possessed or
consumed by any minor in or upon said residence or premises, where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that any alcoholic liquor was in
the possession of, or being consumed by, such minor and where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of
the alcoholic liquor by such minor.
D. Presumption Of Knowledge: Whenever a person is present within any residence or premises of which the person is owner, lessee, permittee, bailee,
legal possessor or occupier thereof at the time that a violation of this section occurs therein, shall be prima facie evidence that such person had
knowledge of such violation. (Ord. 96-103, 11-5-1996)
5-5-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each
day a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 94-53, 5-17-1994; amd. Ord. 96-104, 11-5-1996)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC GATHERINGS
5-6-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to hold, manage or conduct any meeting or entertainment of any kind in the Village in any premises other than a building constructed in
full compliance with the Village ordinances and laws pertaining thereto for auditorium, theater or club house purposes, except in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter. (1968 Code, §22.1001)
5-6-2: INSPECTIONS:
No such gathering or entertainment shall be held or presented in any premises except 1) private residences, and 2) buildings described in the preceding
Section, unless such premises have been inspected by the Fire Marshal or Building Director not more than twelve (12) months before the date of such
gathering and found to be free from any fire or other hazard. No structure enclosed by a roof shall be used for such purpose unless the same is
constructed of nonflammable materials. Provided, that tents or structures covered by canvas or similar materials may be so used if such canvas or other
material has been properly treated so as to be rendered fire resistive. (1968 Code, §22.1002; amd. 1984 Code)
5-6-3: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Exits: Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in accordance with the Bartlett Building Code and the Bartlett Life Safety Maintenance Code.
(1968 Code, §22.1003; amd. 1983 Code)
B. Seats: Any stands or rows of seats used in such premises shall be so constructed as to be safe for the use designed, and shall be sufficiently strong to
carry the same weight and stress as is required for the construction of the auditorium floors of theater buildings, not less than one hundred (100)
pounds per square foot.
It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of persons to exceed the actual number of seats maintained for their accommodation.
(1968 Code, §22.1004)
C. Doors: All doors or gates on exits from premises used for such purposes shall open outward and no such exit shall be constructed or locked so that
egress from inside the premises is blocked. (1968 Code, §22.1005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 171/702
5-6-4: NOTICE OF PERFORMANCE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting, calling or managing any gathering in any premises other than a theater, club house or auditorium building
constructed as provided in Section 5-6-1 herein, to notify the Village Clerk of the date of such intended performance at least ten (10) days before the
meeting is to take place; upon such notice the Fire Marshal or the Building Director shall inspect the premises to determine whether or not they comply
with the provisions hereof. Any permit issued for any such gathering shall be subject to the condition that this Chapter be fully complied with, whether or
not such condition is embodied in the permit. (1968 Code, §22.1006)
5-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code, §22.1007)
Chapter 7
USE OF TOBACCO AND ALTERNATIVE TOBACCO OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS ON
SCHOOL PROPERTY
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
ALTERNATIVE TOBACCO OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS: A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the
body of nicotine or synthetic tobacco product which is intended to replicate tobacco and tobacco products, and/or other chemicals inhaled or ingested by
the user simulating smoking, whether by smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, vaping, chewing, dipping, snorting, sniffing or by any other means.
"Alternative tobacco or nicotine product" excludes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms are defined in this chapter, and
any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR VAPE: Any electronic device that provides a gas or vapor derived from nicotine, synthetic tobacco products intended to
replicate tobacco and tobacco products or alternative tobacco or nicotine products, and/or other chemicals and inhaled by the user simulating smoking.
The term "electronic cigarette" or "vape" includes, but is not limited to, electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah pipes, vape pens, advanced
personal vaporizers, box mods, or other devices capable of delivering aerosolized nicotine, synthetic tobacco products intended to replicate tobacco and
tobacco products, and/or alternative tobacco or nicotine products, or other chemicals through inhalation or ingestion by the user simulating smoking.
SCHOOL PROPERTY: Means and includes any building and/or grounds of any public kindergarten, elementary, middle school or high school.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The act of inhaling smoke from any lighted tobacco product, or gas, or vapor from any alternative tobacco or nicotine product,
and/or the smoking, burning, vaping, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, electronic cigarette, vape, hookah,
tobacco, alternative to tobacco or nicotine product, weed or herb, or use of any kind of smoking equipment, electronic cigarette or vape equipment.
SMOKELESS TOBACCO: Any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or chewing.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, or tobacco leaf in any of its forms, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or other forms of smokeless tobacco.
USE OF ALTERNATIVE TOBACCO OR NICOTINE PRODUCT: Smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, vaping, snorting, chewing, dipping, or sniffing of
any alternative tobacco or nicotine product.
USE OF TOBACCO: Smoking, chewing or dipping any tobacco product and/or smokeless tobacco. (Ord. 2017-154, 12-5-2017)
5-7-2: PROHIBITED USE OF TOBACCO AND/OR ALTERNATIVE TOBACCO OR NICOTINE PRODUCTS:
It shall be unlawful to use a tobacco product and/or alternative tobacco or nicotine product, and/or electronic cigarette or vape on or within any school
property located within the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett by any school personnel, student or other person, regardless of whether the use of any
tobacco product and/or alternative tobacco or nicotine product occurs inside or outside of a school building and regardless of whether school is in session.
(Ord. 2017-154, 12-5-2017)
5-7-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 2017-154, 12-5-2017)
Chapter 8
CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 172/702
CANNABIS: Means and includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or
synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made
from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted
therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102 of the "Illinois controlled substances act"1, as the same may be
amended from time to time, which statute and definition as the same may be amended are hereby expressly incorporated herein.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in section
10 of the methamphetamine control and community protection act, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the "cannabis
control act", 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.; the "Illinois controlled substances act", 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq.; or the
"methamphetamine control and community protection act", 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/1 et seq.; or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in
violation of the "Illinois food, drug and cosmetic act", 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 620/1 et seq. It includes, but is not limited to:
A. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance.
B. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance.
C. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or
a controlled substance.
D. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons.
E. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil, a synthetic drug
product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois food, drug and cosmetic act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 620/1 et seq., into the human body
including, where applicable, the following items:
1. Water pipes;
2. Carburetion tubes and devices;
3. Smoking and carburetion masks;
4. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
5. Carburetor pipes;
6. Electric pipes;
7. Air driven pipes;
8. Chillums;
9. Bongs;
10. Ice pipes or chillers;
F. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of section 5-8-3 of this chapter.
KNOWINGLY: Consciously aware of the presence of cannabis or awareness of the substantial probability of the presence of cannabis.
POSSESS: An act of physical dominion over cannabis and/or drug paraphernalia or exclusive control over the premises where the cannabis and/or drug
paraphernalia is found. For purposes of this definition, exclusive control may occur even though possession is jointly held or shared. (Ord. 2017-16, 2-21-
2017)
5-8-2: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 173/702
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess cannabis within the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett, unless said possession is authorized
under section 5.3(b) or section 11 of the cannabis control act2, or authorized under the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act3. (Ord.
2017-16, 2-21-2017)
5-8-3: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall keep for sale, offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.
B. Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any
commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful.
C. It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess or offer for sale an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it, or offer for sale for the use by
others, in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance for that use. This subsection does not apply to a person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the
hypodermic syringes and needles act4. This subsection also does not apply to a person who is legally authorized to possess cannabis paraphernalia
used in connection with the medical use of cannabis as allowed under the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act5.
D. In determining intent under subsection C of this section, the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled
substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 2017-16, 2-21-2017)
5-8-4: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Section 5-8-3 of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
1. Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful
research, teaching, chemical analysis, use in law enforcement activities and which is not offered for sale.
2. Items historically and customarily used in connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, or
inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden hoses, rakes, sickles,
baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling papers.
3. Items which are used for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit
purpose prohibited by this chapter.
4. A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the hypodermic syringes and needles act.
5. A person who is legally authorized to possess cannabis paraphernalia used in connection with the medical use of cannabis as allowed under the
compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act.
B. In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this section, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
1. The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put;
2. Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device
upon its functioning;
3. Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
4. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
5. Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising occurs;
6. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise exhibited
upon the premises where the sale was made;
7. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor
or dealer of tobacco products;
8. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
C. Drug paraphernalia or other property taken or detained, pursuant to probable cause and in conformance with all applicable laws, shall be forfeited upon
a finding by the circuit court or the local adjudication hearing officer, upon trial, hearing or plea of guilty, that section 5-8-3 of this chapter has been
violated. When property is forfeited under section 5-8-3 of this chapter, the chief of police may retain it for official use or destroy it. (Ord. 2017-16, 2-21-
2017)
5-8-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). In
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 174/702
addition to any other penalties already provided for by law and this chapter, a person or store owner convicted of selling drug paraphernalia shall be
subject to having his, their or its license to sell tobacco revoked. (Ord. 2017-16, 2-21-2017)
Chapter 9
THEFT AND RETAIL THEFT
5-9-1: THEFT:
A. Definitions:
OBTAIN: To bring about a transfer of interest or possession whether to the offender or to another.
OBTAIN CONTROL OR EXERTS CONTROL OVER PROPERTY: Shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, the taking, carrying away, interest
in, or possession of property.
OWNER: A person or entity, other than the offender who has possession of or any other interest in the property involved even though such interest or
possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has no authority to exert control over the property.
PERMANENT DEPRIVATION OR TO PERMANENTLY DEPRIVE: 1. Defeat all recovery of the property by the owner.
2. Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the property.
3. Retain the property with intent to restore it to owner only if the owner purchases it or leases it back, or pays a reward or other compensation for its
return.
4. Sell, give, pledge, or otherwise transfer any interest in the property or subject it to the claim of the person other than the owner.
PROPERTY: Anything of value. Property includes money, admission or transportation tickets, anything of value to the owner; things growing on, affixed
to, or found on land, or part of or affixed to any building; electricity, gas and water; telecommunications services; birds, animals, and fish which are
ordinarily kept in a state of confinement; food and drink.
STOLEN PROPERTY: Property over which control has been obtained by theft.
B. Theft: A person commits theft when he/she knowingly:
1. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
2. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of said property.
3. Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such a manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit.
4. Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
C. Possession Of Stolen Property: A person is in possession of stolen property when he/she knowingly obtains control over stolen property knowing the
property to have been stolen, or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him/her to believe the property was stolen.
D. Limitation: This section shall apply only to property having a total value of three hundred dollars ($300.00) or under, and the offender does not have any
convictions for theft.
E. Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2002-35, 4-16-2002)
5-9-2: RETAIL THEFT:
A. Definitions:
CONCEAL MERCHANDISE: Although there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.
FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise.
MERCHANDISE: Any type of tangible personal property.
MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment, or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.
MINOR: A person who is less than nineteen (19) years of age, is unemancipated, and resides with his or her parents or legal guardian.
PEACE OFFICER: Any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests
for offenses whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific offenses.
PERSON: Any natural person or individual.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 175/702
PREMISES OF RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, the retail mercantile establishment, any
common use areas in shopping centers, and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the
convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed.
SHOPPING CART: Those pushcarts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores or other retail mercantile establishments for
the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and incidentally from the stores to a place outside the store.
UNDER RING: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
B. Offense Of Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft when he/she knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, sorted or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
5. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment, without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.
C. Presumptions: If any person:
1. Conceals upon his/her person or among his/her belongings unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, sorted or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
2. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment;
such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention
of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
D. Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such person on or off the premises
of a retail mercantile establishment in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
1. To request identification;
2. To verify such identification;
3. To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his or her possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable
investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;
4. To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the custody of the peace officer;
5. In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention
and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such a detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
E. Limitation: This section shall apply only to goods having a value or full retail value of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or under and if the offender
does not have any convictions for retail theft.
F. Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2002-35, 4-16-2002)
Chapter 10
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Any property or dwelling unit within the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett at, in or upon which any three (3) or
more nuisance activities have occurred within any twelve (12) month period as a result of three (3) separate factual events that have been independently
investigated by authorized sworn personnel of the Village of Bartlett.
CONTACT: Any communication made by a tenant, occupant, landlord, owner, guest, neighbor or other individual to police or other emergency services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 176/702
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern conduct that occurs on that property.
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: A violation of the Criminal Code of 20121, the Cannabis Control Act2, the Illinois Controlled Substances Act3, or the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act4.
DISABILITY: With respect to a person: a) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; b) a
record of having such impairment; or c) being regarded as having such an impairment; but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to
a controlled substance as defined in the Federal Controlled Substance Act, 21 USC 802.
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE: The meaning provided under section 10 of the Safe Homes Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10.
DWELLING UNIT: The meaning provided under section 15 of the Landlord and Tenant Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/15.
LANDLORD: The meaning provided under section 10 of the Safe Homes Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10, and shall be included in the definition
of the term owner.
NUISANCE ACTIVITIES: Any criminal activity, including any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct, as defined by Federal or State and/or
Municipal ordinance where a citation is given, an arrest is made, or a violation has been documented:
A. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 9 (homicide) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-1 et seq.;
B. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 10 (kidnapping and related offenses) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-
1 et seq.;
C. Reserved.
D. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 12 (bodily harm) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-0.1 et seq.;
E. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 16 (theft and related offenses) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-0.1, et
seq.;
F. Any offenses defined and prohibited by article 17 (deception and fraud) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/17-1 et seq.;
G. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 18 (robbery) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18-1 et seq.;
H. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 19 (burglary) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/19-1 et seq.;
I. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 20 (arson) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-1, et seq.;
J. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 21 (damage and trespass to property) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-1 et seq.;
K. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 24 (deadly weapons) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq.;
L. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 25 (mob action and related offenses) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-
1 et seq.;
M. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 26 (disorderly conduct) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 et seq.;
N. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 28 (gambling and related offenses) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1
et seq.;
O. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 29 (bribery in contests) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/29-1, et seq.;
P. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 30 (treason and related offenses) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/30-1 et
seq.;
Q. Any offense defined and prohibited by article 31 (interference with public officers) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/31-
1 et seq.;
R. Any inchoate offense defined and prohibited by article 8 (inchoate offenses) of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-1 et
seq., which is relative to the commission of any of the aforesaid principal offenses;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 177/702
S. Any offense defined and prohibited by the Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.;
T. Any offense defined and prohibited by the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq.; or any offense defined
and prohibited by the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/1 et seq.;
U. Any offense defined and prohibited by section 6-16 (prohibited sales and possession) or section 6-20 (purchase or acceptance of gift of liquor by
persons under age 21) of the Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16 and 5/6-20;
V. Any violation of, action brought under, or the engagement in street gang related criminal activity, enterprise, pursuit or undertaking, or course or
pattern of criminal activity defined and actionable under the Illinois Streetgang Terrorism Omnibus Prevention Act, 740 Illinois Compiled Statutes
147/1 et seq.;
W. Any unlawful contact with a street gang member or gang member as defined in the Illinois Streetgang Terrorism Omnibus Prevention Act, 740
Illinois Compiled Statutes 147/1 et seq., and otherwise prohibited under the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq.;
X. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions set forth in this definition of nuisance activities (including subsections A through W inclusive of this
definition), pursuant to section 1-2-1.5 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1.5, the following activities, behavior or
conduct are hereby excluded from this definition of nuisance activities:
1. Contact made to police or other emergency services, if:
a. The contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or sexual violence;
b. The intervention of emergency assistance was needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence;
c. The contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that
individual's disability;
2. An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in
the dwelling unit or on the property within the Village of Bartlett; or
3. Criminal activity or a local ordinance violation occurring in a dwelling unit or on the property that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual
violence engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest or other
party.
Y. Notwithstanding the exclusions set forth in subsections X1, X2 and/or X3 of this definition, nothing set forth therein limits the enforcement of: 1)
section 15.2 of the Emergency Telephone System Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 750/15.2; 2) article 26 of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, 5/26-1, et seq.; or 3) article X of the Code of Civil Procedure, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-101 et seq.; or 4) prohibits the
Village from enacting or enforcing ordinances to impose penalties on the basis of the underlying criminal activity or local ordinance violation not
covered by subsections X1, X2, and/or X3 of this definition to the extent otherwise permitted by State and Federal laws; or 5) limits or prohibits the
eviction of or imposition of penalties on the perpetrator of the domestic violence, or other criminal activity.
OCCUPANT: Any person in actual or constructive possession of any real property within the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett, or any of the
buildings, structures, fixtures or improvements located thereon, and shall include any "tenant" as that term is defined in section 10 of the Safe Homes Act,
765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10.
OWNER: Any person having any legal or equitable interest whatsoever in any real property within the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett, together
with the buildings, structures, fixtures or improvements located thereon, or who, by any means whatsoever, has the ability, authority or right to regulate,
restrain, control, direct or affect the conduct of persons present on any such property and shall include, but shall not be limited to, a mortgagee in
possession who is vested all or part of the legal title to the property, and/or all or a part of the beneficial ownership and rights to the present use and
enjoyment of the property, and/or any person acting as an agent for any person having any such legal or equitable interest, and shall include any
"landlord" as that term is defined in section 10 of the Safe Homes Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10.
PERMIT: To allow, approve, consent to, acquiesce in, agree to, suffer or fail to prevent through inaction.
PERSON: Any natural individual, corporation, firm, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, land trust, unincorporated association or any other
group, enterprise or entity capable of owning, using or occupying property.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of the property, including, but not limited to, an owner, property manager or
occupant of property under his, her, their or its control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, together with any premises, house, rooms, buildings, structures, improvements or fixtures located thereon or affixed
thereto, or any separate part or portion thereof whether permitted or not.
SEXUAL VIOLENCE: The meaning provided under section 10 of the Safe Homes Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10.
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING: The meaning provided under section 9-119 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-119.
TENANT: The meaning provided under section 10 of the Safe Homes Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/10. (Ord. 2017-114, 9-5-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 178/702
5-10-2: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any property in the Village to become or remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in charge to: 1) aid, abet or permit a property to become a chronic nuisance property; and 2) allow a
property to continue as a chronic nuisance property after receipt of notice to abate the nuisance activity.
C. No person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently permit any property, within the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett, to become,
exist as or be used as a chronic nuisance property, and any chronic nuisance found to exist within the Village of Bartlett shall be subject to abatement
in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-114, 9-5-2017)
5-10-3: PROCEDURES:
A. Preabatement Procedure: Whenever the Chief of Police of the Village of Bartlett Police Department shall receive two (2) or more police reports
generated in the ordinary course of the business of the department, or any reports from sworn personnel of any other law enforcement agency lawfully
exercising jurisdiction in the Village of Bartlett, which reports describe the commission of any acts or conduct occurring on at least two (2) separate
occasions within the same twelve (12) months at, in or on the same property which could constitute any two (2) or more of the offenses set forth in the
definition of nuisance activity, the Chief of Police shall independently review said reports defined in this chapter as "nuisance activities" and determine
whether such acts or conduct in fact constitute any of said offenses. In the event that the Chief of Police determines that said reports in fact describe
the commission of acts or conduct which constitute any two (2) or more of said offenses that constitute nuisance activity, the Chief of Police may take
the following action:
1. Notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, or by personal service, the last taxpayer of record at such address shown on
the tax rolls of the County in which the property is located and the occupants, at the address of the property if those persons are different from the
person in charge, and to the property manager or its designee in the case of multi-family residential property, and to any other known person in
charge of the property in question, at such other place likely to give the owner, person(s) in charge or tenant(s) in possession notice that said
property may be in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property under the provisions of section 5-10-2 of this chapter, which notice shall identify
the property in question by either street address or legal description, and the permanent index number (PIN), describe the acts or conduct which
have occurred on the property that could serve as part of the basis for determining that the property may become a chronic nuisance property, and
demand that the owners and occupants, and the property manager or its designee in the case of multi-family residential property, and other person in
charge, if any, contact the Chief of Police within fourteen (14) days of the date of the letter to discuss potential courses of action which will prevent
and deter the property in question from becoming a chronic nuisance property.
2. After complying with the notification procedure set forth in subsection A1 of this section, if the Chief of Police of the Village of Bartlett Police
Department receives an additional police report describing the commission of subsequent acts or conduct that constitute nuisance activity within the
same twelve (12) month period as the acts or conduct with respect to which a notification was issued in accordance with subsection A1 of this
section, which acts or conduct were committed at the same property described in said notice and which could constitute the commission of one or
more of the offenses set forth in the definition of chronic nuisance activity, then the Chief of Police shall review such report and determine whether or
not such acts or conduct in fact constitute one or more of the said offenses, and, in the event that the Chief of Police determines that such acts or
conduct do constitute one or more of the said offenses, then the Chief of Police shall, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail,
or by personal service, and, in addition to either of the foregoing, by posting on the property itself, provide notice to the last taxpayer of record at the
address shown on the tax rolls of the County in which the property is located, and the occupants at the address of the property if those persons are
different than the person in charge, and to the property manager or its designee in the case of multi-family residential property, and to any other
known person in charge, with a second notice, which notice shall inform the owners, occupants, property manager (if applicable) and any other
person in charge that the property in question has become and is in fact a chronic nuisance property under section 5-10-2 of this chapter, describe all
of the acts and conduct forming the basis for the determination that the property in question is a chronic nuisance property, and demand that the
owner(s) and occupant(s) of the property and the property manager in the case of multi-family residential property, and any other person in charge
respond and meet with the Chief of Police within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice to determine and implement a course of action which will
result in the abatement of the property as a chronic nuisance property.
3. Proof that the notices requested under this section were sent or given in the manner required hereunder shall be deemed proof that the owners or
occupants, property manager, and/or other person in charge of the property to which the notices related received such notices. Notice to an owner,
occupant, property manager, or other person in charge shall not obviate or excuse any other party from his, her, their or its obligations under this
chapter.
B. Abatement Plan: At the meeting between the Chief of Police and the parties notified who are in attendance, the Chief of Police may request that the
owner, person in charge, or his, her or its tenant and/or the property manager for the multi-family residential development or building in which the
property lies in the case of multi-family residential property, implement a reasonable abatement and/or mitigation plan designed to obviate and prevent
future occurrences of the nuisance activity upon the property. The mitigation or abatement plan shall be reasonable under the circumstances in its
objective, cost and scope and shall commence to be implemented within seven (7) days of the meeting with the Chief of Police and fully implemented
within thirty (30) days of said meeting, or such longer period as allowed by the Chief of Police if not practically feasible to complete within thirty (30)
days.
1. If the nuisance activity complained of has or is being conducted by a tenant and/or other occupants residing in or on the property, the Chief of Police
may request the owner, person in charge and/or property manager to evict the tenant and all occupants. In the event eviction is requested, the
owner, or person in charge shall proceed with such action forthwith and in good faith.
2. The Village will assist in the eviction action by reasonably cooperating with the owner, person in charge, and/or property manager, including, but not
limited to, providing upon reasonable advance notice of any trial, law enforcement officers, and if applicable, other Municipal employees as witnesses
regarding the nuisance activity if relevant.
C. No Admission: When any party affected by this section responds and meets with the Chief of Police as required above, no statements made in
connection with the furnishing of that response or in a meeting shall constitute or be used as an admission that any nuisance activity has or is
occurring. This subsection does not require the exclusion of any other evidence which is otherwise admissible and offered for any other purpose than
an admission by a person affected by this chapter. (Ord. 2017-114, 9-5-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 179/702
5-10-4: ABATEMENT WHERE NO SPECIFIC PROVISION EXISTS:
In all cases where no provision has been made in any section of this Code or any ordinance of the Village defining what nuisances are and how the same
may be removed, vacated or prevented and in addition to whatever may be declared as a nuisance in this chapter or other ordinances of the Village, those
offenses which are known to be the common law of the land and the Statutes of the State as nuisances may, in case the same existing within the limits of
the Village to be treated as such. (Ord. 2017-114, 9-5-2017)
5-10-5: ENFORCEMENT; ABATEMENT REMEDY; PENALTY:
A. Abatement Of Nuisance: The Village may commence an action in the Circuit Court for a determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property
and/or to abate a chronic nuisance property as described above.
B. Injunctive Relief: Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged chronic nuisance property exists, the court may, without
notice or bond, enter a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction or permanent injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such
chronic nuisance property and may enter an order restraining any defendant from occupying, using or interfering with all property used in connection
with the chronic nuisance property.
C. Burden Of Proof:
1. In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the Village shall have the initial burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence
that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
2. It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property that the owner of the property or person(s) in charge, at the time in
question, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could
not in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct of others in possession leading to the findings that the property is a
chronic nuisance property.
3. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors if they are found appropriate, and shall
cite those found applicable:
a. The actions or lack of action taken by the owner or person(s) in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activity at the property.
b. Whether the nuisance activity at the property was repeated or continuous.
c. The magnitude or gravity of the nuisance activity at the property.
d. The cooperation of the owner or person(s) in charge of the property with the Village.
e. The cost to the Village of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition.
D. Remedy:
1. In the event a court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all
use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or until all the nuisance activities
and/or violations complained of are abated or the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it appropriate to abate the nuisance.
2. In addition to the remedy provided in subsection D1 of this section, the court may impose upon the owner, person(s) in charge and/or occupant(s) of
the property in question a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day, payable to the Village of Bartlett for
each day the owner, person(s) in charge and/or occupant(s) had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic public nuisance property and
permitted the property to remain a chronic public nuisance property.
3. In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property, including,
but not limited to:
a. The disturbance of neighbors.
b. The occurrence of other nuisances on or from the property, excluding therefrom occurrences involving: 1) contacts with the intent to prevent or
respond to actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence; 2) intervention of emergency assistance to respond to or prevent domestic
violence or sexual violence; 3) contact concerning an individual with a disability and the purpose of contact; or 4) criminal activity related to actual
or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence, except as provided in subsection Y under the definition of nuisance activities.
c. The property's general reputation and/or the reputation of persons in or frequenting the property.
4. The court may authorize the Village to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court. In the event that the Village is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the Village to effect the
closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the property and a debt to the Village. As used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually
incurred by the Village for the physical securing of the property.
5. The Police Department, Village Building Department and/or Community Development Department employee(s) effecting the closure shall prepare a
statement of costs, and the Village shall thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review. If no objection of the statement is made within the
period described by the court, a lien in said amount may be recorded against said property.
6. Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the Village.
(Ord. 2017-114, 9-5-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 180/702
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1-100
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED
6-1-100: CODE ADOPTED:
The Illinois Vehicle Code1, in its entirety and as the same may be amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated herein by reference and is expressly
made a part hereof. (Ord. 2017-144, 11-7-2017)
Chapter 3-100
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES
6-3-100: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in sections 5/1-101 and 5/11-100 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) ("the Act") are hereby expressly
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. (Ord. 70-13, 10-20-70)
6-3-101: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motor bicycle who resides within the Village shall pay, on or before June 30 of each year to the Village
Clerk, a tax or license fee for the use of each motor vehicle or motor bicycle used on any public street or alley in the Village, as is hereinafter provided,
subject to the following exemptions:
Bartlett residents who are sixty five (65) years of age and over;
Disabled veterans to whom the State of Illinois has issued disabled veterans' license plates;
New residents of the Village shall not be required to pay such license fee until thirty (30) days after occupancy of their Bartlett residence.
The purchaser of a new or used vehicle shall not be required to pay such license fee until thirty (30) days after the date on which such purchaser
receives delivery or possession of such vehicle.
Provided, however, that no more than one vehicle owned or operated by any such person shall be exempt from payment of the vehicle license fee.
(Ord. 70-13, 10-20-70)
B. The license plates issued to dealers in motor vehicles for vehicles held for sale and used only for demonstrations may be transferred to any other
vehicle so held and used by the same dealer; provided, that such dealers shall procure one license for each motor vehicle so held by him at any one
time during the year. (1968 Code, §16.004)
6-3-102: APPLICATION, ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motor bicycle which is garaged or otherwise kept in the Village shall file an application with the Village Clerk
setting forth the name and address of the applicant and a description of the vehicle for which the license is required. Upon payment of the fee herein
provided, the Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a license which shall be attested by him authorizing the use of such vehicle within the Village until the
expiration of the license. (1968 Code, §16.005)
6-3-103: LICENSE FEES:
Passenger cars
For the balance of 1984 $ 7.50
For 1985 12.50
For 1986 and thereafter 15.00
Trucks required to carry B State license
For the balance of 1984 12.50
For 1985 17.50
For 1986 and thereafter 20.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 181/702
Trucks required to carry C State license
For the balance of 1984 17.50
For 1985 22.50
For 1986 and thereafter 25.00
Trucks required to carry D or over state license:
For the balance of 1984 22.50
For 1985 27.50
For 1986 and thereafter 30.00
Motorcycles, pedal cycles or motor bicycles:
For the balance of 1984 6.00
For 1985 11.00
For 1986 and thereafter 13.50
Replacement stickers 2.00
Late penalty (applicable to all of the above) 10.00
(Ord. 84-39, 4-24-1984)
6-3-104: TIME OF PAYMENT, LICENSE YEAR:
Such license fees shall be due and payable annually in advance of July 1 of each year and the license shall be for one year; provided, that if purchase of a
vehicle is made six (6) months after the start of the license year, then upon application being made to the village clerk, a license shall be issued for the
remainder of the year upon payment of one-half (1/2) of the fee herein required. (Ord. 86-65, 11-4-1986)
6-3-105: LICENSE PLATES, STICKERS:
Each applicant, upon payment of the fee, shall be given a license plate, or windshield sticker, without charge, of such design and material as may be
approved by the village president and board of trustees, which plate shall be fastened in a prominent and visible place on the front of the vehicle at all
times that it is operated in the village. (1968 Code § 16.007)
6-3-106: USE OF FUNDS:
All revenue derived from such license fees, except for the cost of issuing the licenses and plates and collecting the fees, shall be kept as a separate fund
and used only for paying the cost of street or alley repairs and improvements, as is provided by statute. (1984 Code)
6-3-107: SETTLEMENT:
Pursuant to citation, the person so accused of said violation may settle and compromise the violation claim in respect of such ordinance violation by paying
to the municipality the applicable amount as shown in the schedule set forth in section 6-11-1305.2 of this title within a period of time to be specified in said
citation, on or before ten (10) days after the date of issuance, not counting the date of issuance; provided, however, that a person accused of violating the
vehicle sticker requirements of section 6-3-101 of this part shall not be paid pursuant to this section unless and until such person has purchased a proper
Bartlett vehicle sticker. (Ord. 81-61; amd. Ord. 2011-22, 4-19-2011, eff. 6-1-2011)
6-3-108: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this part shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code § 16.009)
6-3-109: ADDITIONAL STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois vehicle code1 are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof:
5/3-112(b) Failure to transfer title within five days
5/3-401(a) No valid registration - never applied
5/3-404 No bill of lading or manifest/dispatch record
5/3-411(a) Failure to carry registration card or reciprocity permit - second division vehicle
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 182/702
5/3-413(a,b) Improper display of license plates
5/3-413(f) Operation of vehicle with expired registration plate or sticker
5/3-416 Failure to notify the secretary of state of name/address change
5/3-417(a) Failure to immediately apply for replacement registration card, plate or sticker
5/3-701(1) No valid registration - no valid plate or sticker obtained
5/3-701(2) No valid registration - reciprocity, prorate or apportionment
(1984 Code)
Chapter 4-200
ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES
6-4-200: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof:
ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES 6-5/4-200
Abandonment of Vehicles Prohibited 6-5/4-201
Abandoned, Lost, Stolen or Unclaimed Vehicle 6-5/4-202
Removing of Motor Vehicles or Other Vehicles
(towing or hauling) 6-5/4-203
Reports on Towed Vehicles 6-5/4-204
Record Searches 6-5/4-205
Identifying and Tracing of Vehicle Ownership by
Illinois State Police 6-5/4-206
Reclaimed Vehicles - Expenses 6-5/4-207
Disposal of Unclaimed Vehicles 6-5/4-208
Disposal of Unclaimed Vehicles Without Notice 6-5/4-209
Police Reports After Vehicle is Reclaimed or
Disposed of 6-5/4-210
Disposition of Proceeds of Sale of Unclaimed
Vehicles 6-5/4-211
Titling Vehicles After Public Sale 6-5/4-212
Liability 6-5/4-213
6-5/4-213.1
(1984 Code)
Chapter 4-300
ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN, UNCLAIMED OR ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
6-4-300: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this part shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A. A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle, on the public way or in a public parking lot in such a state of
disrepair that it is incapable of being driven; or
B. A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle, on the public way or in a public parking lot that has not been moved for a period of at least
twenty four (24) hours and appears to have been abandoned by its owner based on:
1. Its condition;
2. The period during which it has not been moved; or
3. Other circumstances indicating abandonment; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 183/702
C. A vehicle on private property without the consent of the property owner, proprietor or agent, which person has requested that the vehicle be towed;
or
D. A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle defined as abandoned, inoperable or subject to being towed, by an ordinance of the village.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLES: A. A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of
the vehicle; or
B. A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of members of the public; or
C. A vehicle on a public street, way or alley that is impending the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to pedestrians or operators of the
vehicle; or
D. A vehicle that is parked in such a way as to block access to a fire hydrant; or
E. A vehicle illegally parked which prevents and obstructs snow removal from public streets or public parking lots.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title to a vehicle, or the right to possession of a vehicle as contained in the vehicle registration records of the state in
which the vehicle is registered.
TOWING SERVICE OPERATOR: A licensed towing company operating under an agreement with the village to provide towing services on behalf of the
village.
UNLAWFUL VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a search and seizure by the police department; or
B. A vehicle parked in violation of any statute or ordinance that authorizes the vehicle to be towed, but only when signs posted at the location of the
vehicle indicate that vehicles may be subject to towing.
VEHICLE: Any "motor vehicle" as defined in this code.
The definitions set forth in chapter 1, section 5/1-101 through 5/1-300, as subsequently renumbered of the Illinois vehicle code1 are expressly incorporated
herein by reference and made a part herein, except to the extent expressly defined in this section. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-301: AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING:
A. Abandoned vehicles may be towed after prior notice and the affording of an opportunity for a hearing as provided in sections 6-4-302 and 6-4-303 of
this part.
B. Hazardous and unlawful vehicles may be towed without notice. Within forty eight (48) hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this subsection, a notice
shall be sent to the owner of the vehicle and lienholder affording the opportunity for a hearing as provided in sections 6-4-304 and 6-4-306 of this part.
C. The towing of any vehicle pursuant to this part by the village or by any towing service operator shall be authorized, and only under the circumstances
and in accordance with the procedures herein provided.
D. Towed vehicles shall be impounded only at facilities approved by the police department until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to provisions of
this part and applicable law.
E. Nothing in this part shall prohibit the towing of vehicles in accordance with article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois vehicle code2, provided that all notices
hereunder shall be sent via certified mail, return receipt requested or personal service. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-302: PRETOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. Not less than seven (7) days prior to towing any abandoned vehicle pursuant to subsection 6-4-301A of this part, the village shall forward written notice
of its intent to tow by certified mail, return receipt requested or personal service, to the address of the owner of the vehicle and the lienholder if any, as
indicated in the most current registration list of the secretary of state of the state in which such vehicle is registered. The notice shall provide:
1. A description of the make, model, year and color of the vehicle; and
2. The vehicle identification number and the number and state of the license plate displayed on the vehicle; and
3. The location of the vehicle and a description of the circumstances indicating that it has been abandoned, and the name of the officer authorizing the
tow; and
4. A statement that the village will tow and store the vehicle at the expense of the owner if the vehicle is not moved, and if the vehicle is not claimed by
a certain date, it will be sold; and
5. A copy of this part, or a description of the owner's rights to consent the legality of the towing and a telephone number of the village through which the
owner and/or lienholder may obtain more information; and
6. Such other information as required by law.
B. On or before the day of mailing of the aforesaid written notice, a sticker or notice stating the village's intention to tow the vehicle, the earliest date upon
which the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the village police department shall be attached to the vehicle. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-
19-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 184/702
6-4-303: PRETOW HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. The owner of a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to subsection 6-4-301A of this part shall have seven (7) days after receipt of the
notice described in section 6-4-302 of this part to request, in writing, a pretow hearing. The written request shall be delivered to the police department
within the seven (7) day period. Unless such a request is received within the seven (7) day period, the vehicle may be towed and any hearing rights
under the provisions of this section shall be deemed waived.
B. In the event that a pretow hearing is not requested as provided herein, a posttow hearing shall, upon written request of the owner of the vehicle towed
as an abandoned vehicle and/or the lienholder with respect to said vehicle be provided pursuant to section 6-4-306 of this part.
C. Upon any request for a pretow hearing being made, the village shall schedule a date and time, not later than fifteen (15) days following receipt of such
request, for such hearing. Upon receipt of such request, but no less than forty eight (48) hours before such hearing, the village shall notify the owner of
the date and time for such hearing by telephone, by mail, or in person as the circumstances require. Pending a final disposition of such hearing, the
vehicle shall not be towed except pursuant to the procedures of this part applicable to hazardous or unlawful vehicles.
D. Upon any request for a pretow hearing being made, the matter shall be assigned to a hearing officer appointed by the village president with the advice
and consent of the village board of trustees in accordance with section 6-19-109 of this title. In no case shall that hearing officer be an individual who
was involved in the initial decision to tow the vehicle or the village prosecutor, or any person who is responsible for enforcing or prosecuting village
ordinances. The hearing officer shall have the authority to require the presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow and/or any
other village personnel and to request the presence of other witnesses at the hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature and the formal rules of
evidence shall not apply. However, hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons
in the conduct of their affairs.
E. After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether the
towing of the vehicle is authorized by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the village, citing the specific statutory or ordinance section authorizing
the towing. The owner and lienholder, if any shall be provided a copy of such decision.
F. If the hearing officer finds that towing is authorized by this part, the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with any towing and storage
costs to be imposed upon the owner thereof. The fees to be charged for towing and storage services shall not be more than the rates approved by the
chief of police for all towing companies authorized to tow for the village. The owner of the vehicle may avoid the towing by immediately removing the
vehicle from the improper location to a proper, lawful location and correcting any hazardous or unlawful condition of the vehicle.
G. If the hearing officer finds that towing is not authorized, he or she shall direct that the vehicle shall not be towed. The village shall furnish a copy of such
decision to the owner, who may display it plainly visible inside the vehicle. No vehicle about which such a decision has been rendered shall be towed
by the village unless:
1. The circumstances under which the decision was rendered have changed; and
2. The procedures for towing similarly situated vehicles under this part are followed.
H. All pretow hearing decisions, towing reports and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the village police department for a
period of at least five (5) years after each hearing or after each tow if no hearing was requested or held.
I. Any such hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate any violation of any village ordinance relative to the vehicle. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-304: POSTTOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES:
A. Not more than forty eight (48) hours after towing any hazardous or unlawful vehicle pursuant to this part and identification of the owner, and the
lienholder, if any, the village shall forward written notice of the towing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the address indicated in
the most current registration of the secretary of state of the state in which such vehicle is registered and to any lienholder. The notice shall provide:
1. A description of the make, model, year and color of the vehicle; and
2. The vehicle identification number, and the number and state of the license plate displayed on the vehicle; and
3. The location from and date on which the vehicle was towed, and a description of the circumstances necessitating the tow and the name of the officer
who authorized the tow;
4. A statement that the village has towed and stored the vehicle at the expense of the owner, and if the vehicle is not claimed by a certain date, the
vehicle will be sold; and
5. A copy of this part, or a description of the owner's rights to contest the legality of the towing and a telephone number of the village through which the
owner may obtain more information; and
6. Such other information as required by law.
B. All approved towing service operators shall prominently post at locations readily visible to the public transacting business at the towing facility, two (2)
large signs with dimensions of at least twelve inches by eighteen inches (12" x 18"), describing the owner's rights to contest the legality of the towing
and providing a telephone number of the village through which the owner may obtain more information. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 185/702
6-4-305: PROCEDURES FOR RELEASING TOWED VEHICLES:
A. Before the owner of any towed vehicle shall be permitted to remove the vehicle from an authorized storage location, the owner shall furnish evidence of
his identity and ownership or right to possession of the vehicle, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay the towing and storage fees in an
amount not more than the rates established by the village. The chief of police is authorized to promulgate regulations as to the documents or other
proof necessary to establish these facts.
B. The owner shall take possession of the vehicle within twenty four (24) hours of payment. The owner may pay the full amount of fees and subsequently
request a hearing pursuant to section 6-4-306 of this part.
C. Notwithstanding any provision of this part to the contrary, an owner may remove a towed vehicle without paying the full amount of the towing or storage
fees upon presentation of an order for release issued pursuant to subsection 6-4-306E2a of this part.
D. Notwithstanding any other ordinance or statutory provision to the contrary, any towing service operator must perform its services subject to the
provisions of this part. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-306: POSTTOW HEARINGS:
A. The owner and/or lienholder of a vehicle towed as a hazardous or unlawful vehicle pursuant to subsection 6-4-301B of this part or the owner and/or
lienholder of a vehicle towed as an abandoned vehicle who has not requested a pretow hearing shall have fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of
notice or release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first, to request in writing a posttow hearing to determine the validity of such tow and any towing or
storage charges. Said written request shall be delivered to the village clerk within said fifteen (15) day period, or the right to a posttow hearing under
the provisions of this part shall be deemed waived. The hearing will not be determinative or adjudicate any violation of any village ordinance.
B. Upon any request for a posttow hearing being made, the village shall schedule a date and time for such hearing as follows:
1. In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the full payment of towing and storage charges, the hearing shall take place within
fifteen (15) days after the receipt of such request for such hearing. Upon receipt of such request, but not less than forty eight (48) hours before such
hearing, the village shall notify the owner of the date and time for such hearing by telephone, by mail, or in person as the circumstances require.
2. In those instances where the vehicle has not been released, the hearing shall take place, unless otherwise agreed by the village and the owner,
within forty eight (48) hours after such request for such hearing, excluding weekends and holidays; except that if such request is made after three
o'clock (3:00) P.M., then a hearing shall be held on the third working day following the request. Upon receipt of such request, the village shall notify
the owner and lienholder of the date and time of such hearing by telephone, mail, or in person as the circumstances require.
C. Upon any request for a posttow hearing being made, the hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the manner provided in section 6-4-303 of this part
except where such procedures are not consistent with the provisions of this section.
D. After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall issue a decision finding that:
1. If the towing and storage of the vehicle was authorized by the laws of the state or by a village ordinance; and/or
2. There was no authority in law for the towing and storage of the vehicle, or the village officer or employee authorizing the vehicle to be towed did not
comply with the requirements of the statute or ordinance authorizing the tow; and/or
3. The towing of the vehicle was authorized by law, but the owner was caused to incur additional storage charges because of late notification of towing
or other reasons not the fault of the owner and/or the towing and/or storage fees charged by the towing company exceed the fees permitted by the
village. The specific amount owed by the owner, and the specific amount excused, shall be stated in the decision; and/or
4. The request for hearing was not properly made; and/or
5. The person requesting a hearing failed to appear or obtain a continuance.
E. The hearing officer shall advise the owner and lienholder of his findings at the conclusion of the hearing, as follows:
1. If the towing and storage was authorized by law, and is not otherwise reimbursable, the owner shall be so informed and further advised as to the
amount due.
2. If the towing and/or storage is found to be unauthorized or reimbursable:
a. If the vehicle has been released to the owner, the hearing officer shall complete and transmit to the village administrator for approval the amount to
be reimbursed along with the hearing officer's decision. Unless the village files a lawsuit to contest the decision of the hearing officer, the owner
shall be paid the money due within thirty (30) days after the decision of the hearing officer.
b. If the vehicle has not been released at the time of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue an order for the release of the vehicle. Upon
presentation by the owner to the towing service operator of the order for release, the vehicle shall immediately be released to the owner upon
payment by the owner of such towing and storage fees, if any, owed by the owner.
F. All decisions, towing reports, and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the police department for a period of at least five (5)
years after such hearing or after each tow if no hearing was requested or held.
G. The village, the owner and/or lienholder may contest the decision of the hearing officer in any manner provided by law. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 186/702
6-4-307: RECORD SEARCHES:
All record searches of vehicle owners shall be performed in accordance with article II of chapter 4 of the Illinois vehicle code3. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-308: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
A. When a vehicle seven (7) years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the owner for thirty (30) days after notice has been given as required in this title,
the village administrator or her designee shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of time and place of sale shall be posted in
a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded.
B. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the village administrator or her designee shall cause a notice of the time and place of sale to be sent by certified
mail or personal service to the owner and lienholder if such owner can be found as provided in this part and as otherwise required by law. Notice shall
also be given to the dealer in the event the vehicle has dealer license plates, as provided herein. Such notice shall contain a complete description of
the vehicle to be sold and the steps to be taken to reclaim the vehicle.
C. Where notification required by this subsection has been returned by postal authorities to the police department due to the addressee having moved, or
being unclaimed at the address obtained from the registration records, the sending of a second certified notice shall not be required.
D. All costs not recovered in a sale authorized by this part shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle if it is found, after a hearing, that he or she is
responsible for such costs.
E. No member of the police department or any other employee of the village, directly or indirectly, shall purchase or participate in the bidding for the
purchase of any vehicle so offered for sale. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-309: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES WITHOUT NOTICE:
A. When the identification of the owner and lienholder of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by the
means set forth herein and/or as otherwise required by law, after a reasonable effort, the vehicle may be sold without notice to the owner and/or
lienholder.
B. When an abandoned vehicle more than seven (7) years of age is impounded, as authorized by this part, it shall be kept in custody for a minimum of ten
(10) days for the purpose of determining ownership, contacting the owner and lienholder by certified mail, return requested, or personal service, and an
examination of the Illinois state police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. In the event the vehicle has dealer license plates, the
dealer shall also be provided notice as provided herein prior to such sale and/or disposal. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, without benefit of
disposition information being received from the owner or lienholder, the village administrator or her designee may authorize disposal of the vehicle as
junk only. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-310: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE:
The proceeds of the sale authorized by this part, after deducting the costs of removal and storage and the expenses of advertising and conducting the sale
shall be paid to the finance department to be deposited in the general fund of the village. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-311: VEHICLE REMOVED FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The cost of the removal and storage of any vehicle removed from private property at the request of the owner of such property shall be paid by the owner
of the property if the vehicle is not redeemed by the owner of such vehicle prior to its sale, if it is found after a hearing that he, she or it is responsible for
such costs. The proceeds of such sale shall be used to reimburse the owner of the property who requested removal and who has paid the cost of removal
and storage. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-312: AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO RELOCATE VEHICLES:
In the event any emergency arises necessitating the removal of any vehicle upon any public way, members of the police department are hereby authorized
to remove or relocate any such vehicle from one location to any other location. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-4-313: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS NOT RECOVERED:
A. Any costs incurred by the village of removal, impoundment or destruction of vehicles under this title not otherwise recovered, shall be paid by the
vehicle owner except as provided herein to the contrary. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
Chapter 5-200
DEALERS, TRANSPORTERS, WRECKERS AND REBUILDERS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 187/702
6-5-200: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof:
DEALERS, TRANSPORTERS, WRECKERS AND
REBUILDERS
No In-Transit Plates 6-5/5-201(h)
Failure to Display Three Tow-Truck Plates 6-5/5-202(e)
(Ord. 91-69, 9-17-91)
Chapter 605
SNOWMOBILES
6-605: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof:
SNOWMOBILES
Operation Generally 6-40/5-1
Operation on Highways 6-40/5-2
Youthful Operators 6-40/5-3
Operation on Ice 6-40/5-4
Special Events 6-40/5-5
(1984 Code)
Chapter 607
MOTORBIKES
6-607-1: DEFINITIONS:
MOTORBIKE: Any self-propelled two (2) wheeled vehicle, three (3) wheeled vehicle or four (4) wheeled vehicle, including all terrain vehicles.
OPERATE: To ride in or on and control the speed and direction of a motorbike, go-cart or snowmobile.
OPERATOR: Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a motorbike.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, or corporation. (Ord. 86-53, 9-16-86)
6-607-2: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
No person shall operate a motorbike unless it is equipped with all of the following:
A. A muffler in good working order which prevents noises which unreasonably disturb Village residents.
B. Adequate brakes.
C. In the case of vehicles used between the hours of sunset and sunrise, an operating headlight and taillight. (Ord. 86-53, 9-16-86)
6-607-3: OPERATING VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorbike:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 188/702
A. On or within the right of way of any public street, road or highway without a valid driver's license issued by the State of Illinois.
B. On a public sidewalk.
C. On any private property within the Village unless the operator has in his possession written permission from the owner of such property specifically
authorizing the operator to operate a motorbike on such property. (Ord. 86-53, 9-16-86)
6-607-4: PENALTIES:
6-607-4.1: PENALTY PROVISIONS:
Every person found guilty of this Part 607 shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 5-5-2, Vandalism/Parental Responsibility, of the Bartlett
Municipal Code expressly incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 86-53, 9-16-86)
6-607-4.2: MINORS, PENALTY PROVISIONS:
The parents of any minor who shall knowingly or negligently permit their minor child to operate a motorbike in violation of the provisions of this Part shall
be personally responsible for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of this Section. (Ord. 86-53, 9-
16-86)
Chapter 11-100, 11-200
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
6-11-100: ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof.
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS 6-5/11-100
Definitions 6-5/11-100
Provisions of Act Refer to Vehicles Upon
Highways - Exceptions 6-5/11-201
Required Obedience to Traffic Laws 6-5/11-202
Obedience to Police Officers 6-5/11-203
Obedience to Fire Department Authority 6-5/11-203.1
Fleeing or Attempting to Elude Police
Officer 6-5/11-204
Public Officers and Employees to Obey Act -
Exceptions 6-5/11-205
(1984 Code)
6-11-203.1: FIRE DEPARTMENT AUTHORITY:
The Fire Department officer of the Bartlett-Countryside Fire Protection District in command at any fire within the Village, or any fireman designated by him,
may exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to any
emergency call for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police. (1968 Code, §17.103)
Chapter 11-300, 11-400
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND SIGNALS
6-11-300: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly in corporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND SIGNALS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 189/702
Obedience to and Required Traffic-Control Devices 6-5/11-305
Traffic-Control Signal Legend 6-5/11-306
Pedestrian-Control Signals 6-5/11-307
Lane Control Signals 6-5/11-308
Flashing Signals 6-5/11-309
Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings 6-5/11-310
Unlawful Use or Damage to Highways, Appurtenances
and Structures 6-5/11-312
Unlawful Possession of Highway Sign or Marker 6-5/11-313
6-11-401.1: DAMAGE TO VILLAGE PROPERTY:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, it shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or negligently cause or permit any vehicle to destroy,
damage or deface any personal or real property owned or leased by the Village, or which is in the custody or control of the Village.
B. No person shall be deemed in violation of this Section if such destruction, damage or defacement is done or accomplished pursuant to the written
permission or consent of the corporate authorities of the Village. No Village officer or employee shall be deemed in violation of this Section if such
destruction, damage or defacement results from the proper performance of his or her duties as an officer or employee.
C. Any fine imposed upon a violator of the provisions of Section 6-11-401.1 of this Code shall be in addition to civil liability for damages to, destruction or
defacement of Village property. (1984 Code)
Chapter 11-500
DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, OTHER DRUGS OR
COMBINATION THEREOF
6-11-500: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof.
DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL,
OTHER DRUG OR COMBINATION THEREOF 6-5/11-501
Chemical and Other Tests 6-5/11-501.2
Transportation of Alcoholic Liquor 6-5/11-502
Reckless Driving 6-5/11-503
Negligent Driving 6-5/11-503.1
Drag Racing 6-5/11-504
(1984 Code)
6-11-503.1: NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon a public way negligently, heedlessly and without due
caution in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. (1984 Code)
Chapter 11-600
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
6-11-600: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code1 are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof:
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 190/702
General speed restrictions 6-5/11-601
Specific speed restrictions 6-5/11-601.1
Special speed limit passing schools 6-5/11-605
Designated school zones 6-5/11-605.1
Minimum speed regulation 6-5/11-606
Maintain attainable operating speed 6-5/11-611
(1984 Code)
6-11-601.1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It is hereby determined, upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigations conducted by the Village Engineer and Police Department, that the
maximum reasonable and safe speeds with respect to the conditions found to exist along said streets for vehicles traveling upon such streets are those
speeds hereinafter set forth: (1968 Code § 17.322)
A. 1. There is hereby established an absolute maximum speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour for all motor vehicles operated along and upon all
streets which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Village, and it shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any such street at a speed in excess
of twenty five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 76-50, 12-7-1976)
2. The speed limit on that portion of Prospect Street which lies between North Avenue and Devon Avenue shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (Ord.
88-38, 5-3-1988)
3. The speed limit for eastbound and westbound traffic on that portion of West Bartlett Road which lies:
a. Between Western Avenue and Devon Avenue shall be thirty five (35) miles per hour; and
b. Between Devon Avenue and Illinois Route 59 shall be forty (40) miles per hour. (Ord. 2013-53, 6-18-2013)
4. The speed limit for northbound and southbound traffic on that portion of Munger Road which lies:
a. Between Sterns Road and Forest Preserve Drive shall be thirty five (35) miles per hour; and
b. Between Forest Preserve Drive and Army Trail shall be forty (40) miles per hour. (Ord. 2000-83, 8-9-2000)
5. The speed limit for eastbound and westbound traffic on that portion of Struckman Boulevard between South Bartlett Road and Illinois Route 59 shall
be thirty (30) miles per hour. (Ord. 2013-53, 6-18-2013)
6. The speed limit for Main Street between Devon Avenue and Railroad Avenue shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. The speed limit for Railroad
Avenue between South Western Avenue and Main Street shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. The speed limit for Oak Avenue between North
Avenue and Railroad Avenue shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. The speed limit for North Avenue between Oak Avenue and Crest Avenue
shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 2018-106, 9-18-2018)
B. The Director of Public Works is hereby directed to post appropriate signs on all such streets indicating the applicable speed limit in accordance with the
provisions of this section. (Ord. 76-50, 12-7-1976)
C. Except as hereinbefore provided:
1. It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any street not under the jurisdiction of the Illinois State Department of Public Works and
Buildings, or the County, in an urban district within the Village at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess of
fifteen (15) miles per hour.
2. It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any highway outside the urban district at a speed of more than fifty five (55) miles per hour.
3. It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle of the first division towing another vehicle outside of an urban district at more than fifty (50) miles per hour or
in an urban district at more than thirty (30) miles per hour or fifteen (15) miles per hour in any alley.
4. It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the Village but under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Public Works
and Buildings, or of the County of Cook or DuPage, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street by the State or such County.
D. Provided further, that the speed of all vehicles of the second division, as defined by statute, shall be as follows:
1. If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and has a gross weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less (including the
weight of the vehicle and maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is fifty five (55) miles per hour outside of an urban
district, thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district, and fifteen (15) miles per hour in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or more
solid tires, the maximum is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and in all locations.
2. If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight and has a gross weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds (including the
weight of the vehicle and maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is fifty (50) miles per hour outside of an urban district,
thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district, and fifteen (15) miles per hour in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or more solid tires,
the maximum is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and in all locations.
3. If the vehicle is designed and used for carrying more than seven (7) passengers, and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is sixty (60)
miles per hour.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 191/702
E. The driver of any motor vehicle of the second division or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a street outside of a business or
residence district shall not follow within three hundred feet (300') of another motor vehicle of the second division or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prevent overtaking and passing nor shall the same apply upon any lane specifically
designated for use by motor vehicles of the second division.
F. Motor vehicles being driven upon any street outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles,
shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and
occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral processions. (1968 Code § 17.340)
6-11-605.1: DESIGNATED SCHOOL ZONES:
The speed for all school zones is set at twenty (20) miles per hour.
A. North Avenue between North Oak Avenue and Elroy.
B. Eastern Avenue between Oneida and East Morse.
C. North Oak Street between Lake Street and North Hickory.
D. Prospect Avenue between Stearns Road and Scott Court.
E. Stearns Road between Lee Street and Prospect Avenue.
F. Sycamore Trails Elementary School:
Westbound Foster Avenue, 200 feet east of Sycamore Lane.
Eastbound Foster Avenue, 200 feet west of Poplar Lane.
Westbound Struckman Boulevard, 200 feet east of Independence Drive.
Eastbound Struckman Boulevard, 200 feet west of Independence Drive.
Westbound Struckman Boulevard, 200 feet east of Poinsettia Lane.
Eastbound Struckman Boulevard, 200 feet west of Poinsettia Lane.
Southbound Sycamore Lane, north of Cedar Lane.
Northbound Sycamore Lane, north of Foster Avenue.
G. Prairieview Elementary School:
Eastbound Mayflower Lane, east of Struckman Boulevard.
Westbound Mayflower Lane, 200 feet east of Beaumont Circle (west leg of Beaumont Circle).
Southbound Struckman Boulevard, 200 feet north of Mayflower Lane.
Northbound Struckman Boulevard, 200 feet south of Mayflower Lane.
H. Bartlett Elementary School:
Eastbound Oneida Avenue, from Eastern Avenue to Elroy Avenue.
Westbound Oneida Avenue, from Elroy Avenue to Eastern Avenue.
I. Bartlett High School:
Eastbound Schick Road, from Petersdorf Road to 1,300 feet east of Petersdorf Road (Bartlett High School eastern property line).
Westbound Schick Road, from 1,300 feet east of Petersdorf Road (Bartlett High School eastern property line) to Petersdorf Road.
Northbound Petersdorf Road, from Army Trail Road to Schick Road.
Southbound Petersdorf Road, from Schick Road to Army Trail Road.
J. Nature Ridge School:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 192/702
Northbound Westridge Boulevard, from Butler Drive to West Bartlett Road.
Southbound Westridge Boulevard, from West Bartlett Road to Butler Drive.
Eastbound Ridgemore Drive, from Woodhaven Drive to Westridge Boulevard.
Westbound Ridgemore Drive, from Westridge Boulevard to Woodhaven Drive. (Ord. 82-48; amd. Ord. 92-5, 1-7-1991; Ord. 92-61, 8-18-1992; Ord. 92-
92, 11-17-1992; Ord. 97-79, 10-7-1997; Ord. 99-83, 7-20-1999)
Chapter 11-700
RULES OF THE ROAD
6-11-700: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof.
RULES OF THE ROAD
Drive on the Right Side of Roadway - Exceptions 6-5/11-701
Passing Vehicles Proceeding in Opposite Directions 6-5/11-702
Overtaking Vehicle on the Left 6-5/11-703
When Overtaking on the Right is Permitted 6-5/11-704
Limitations on Overtaking on the Right 6-5/11-705
Further Limitations on Driving to the Left of Center
of Roadway 6-5/11-706
No Passing Zones 6-5/11-707
One Way Traffic and Rotary Traffic Islands 6-5/11-708
Driving on Roadways Laned for Traffic 6-5/11-709
Following Too Closely 6-5/11-710
Restrictions on Use of Controlled Access Highway 6-5/11-711
(1984 Code)
Chapter 11-800
TURNING AND STARTING AND SIGNALS
6-11-800: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois vehicle code1 are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof:
TURNING AND STARTING AND SIGNALS
Required position and method of turning at intersection 6-5/11-801
Limitations on U-turns 6-5/11-802
U-turn prohibited location 6-5/11-802.1
Left turn prohibited location 6-5/11-802.2
Starting parked vehicle 6-5/11-803
When signal required 6-5/11-804
Signal by hand or arm or signal device 6-5/11-805
Method of giving hand and arm signals 6-5/11-806
(1984 Code; amd. Ord. 2001-106, 8-21-2001)
6-11-802.1: U-TURN PROHIBITED LOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 193/702
U-turns are specifically prohibited on North Avenue between Eastern Avenue and Tatge. (Ord. 80-32)
6-11-802.2: LEFT TURN PROHIBITED LOCATION:
Left turns are specifically prohibited from westbound Congress Drive onto southbound Route 59. (Ord. 2001-106, 8-21-2001)
Chapter 11-900
RIGHT OF WAY
6-11-900: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof.
RIGHT OF WAY
Vehicles Entering or Approaching Intersection 6-5/11-901
Vehicles Approaching or Entering a "T" Intersection 6-5/11-901.1
Vehicles Turning Left 6-5/11-902
Vehicles Entering Stop Crosswalk 6-5/11-903
Vehicle Entering Stop or Yield Intersection 6-5/11-904
Merging Traffic 6-5/11-905
Vehicle Entering Highway From Private Road or
Driveway 6-5/11-906
Operation of Vehicles and Streetcars on Approach
of Emergency Vehicles 6-5/11-907
Vehicle Approaching Highway Construction or
Maintenance Area 6-5/11-908
(1984 Code)
Chapter 11-1000
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
6-11-1000: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof.
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Pedestrian Obedience to Traffic Control Devices 6-5/11-1001
Pedestrian Right of Way at Crosswalks 6-5/11-1002
Crossing at Other Than Crosswalks 6-5/11-1003
Drivers to Exercise Due Care 6-5/11-1003.1
Blind or Hearing Impaired Pedestrian Right of Way 6-5/11-1004
Pedestrians to Use Right Half of Crosswalks 6-5/11-1005
Pedestrians Soliciting Rides or Business 6-5/11-1006
Pedestrians Walking on Highways 6-5/11-1007
Right of Way on Sidewalks 6-5/11-1008
Pedestrians Yield Right of Way to Emergency Vehicles 6-5/11-1009
Pedestrians Under Influence of Alcohol or Drugs 6-5/11-1010
Bridge and Railroad Signals 6-5/11-1011
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 194/702
Driving Through Safety Zones 6-5/11-1104
(1984 Code)
Chapter 11-1200
SPECIAL STOPS
6-11-1200: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois vehicle code1 are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof:
SPECIAL STOPS:
Obedience to indicate approach of train 6-5/11-1201
Stop and yield signs 6-5/11-1204
Schedule I, through streets 6-5/11-1204.1
Schedule II, stop intersections 6-5/11-1204.2
Schedule III, yield right of way intersections 6-5/11-1204.3
Schedule IV, one-way streets and alleys 6-5/11-1204.4
Emerging from alley, building, private road or driveway 6-5/11-1205
Driving from alleys on sidewalks 6-5/11-1205.1
(1984 Code)
6-11-1204.1: SCHEDULE I, THROUGH STREETS:
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to be through streets:
Army Trail Road at Fairfax Lane
Army Trail Road at Old Forge Road
Auburn Lane at Norfolk Avenue
Bartlett Avenue at South Hickory Street
Bayberry Drive at Devon Avenue
Berteau Avenue at Hillcrest Lane
Bittersweet at Trillium Drive
Blue Heron Circle at Angelica Lane (east end)
Blue Heron Circle at Angelica Lane (west end)
Blue Heron Circle at Blue Heron Circle (westbound)
Blue Heron Circle at Kingfisher Road
Blue Heron Way at Fountain Grass Circle (north end)
Blue Heron Way at Fountain Grass Circle (south end)
Blue Heron Way at Fountain Grass Court
Blue Heron Way at Osprey Court
Blue Heron Way at Primrose Court
Blue Heron Way at Primrose Lane (north end)
Blue Heron Way at Primrose Lane (south end)
Blue Heron Way at Sundrop Court
Blue Heron Way at Sunflower Lane
Blue Heron Way at Veronica Circle (north end)
Blue Heron Way at Veronica Circle (south end)
Braintree Lane at Norwood
Brewster Creek Boulevard at Hecht Road
Brewster Creek Boulevard at Schiferl Road
Brewster Creek Boulevard at Spitzer Road
Bryn Mawr at Lakewood
Bryn Mawr at Martingale
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 195/702
Chippendale Drive at Briarcliff Lane
Chippendale Drive at Castlewood Drive
Chippendale Drive at Lincoln Drive
Chippendale Drive at Nantucket Court
Chippendale Drive at Sundance Drive
Chippendale Drive at Trailside Lane
Chippendale Drive at Valley View Drive
Chippendale Drive at Woodhollow Lane
Congress Drive at Independence Drive
Congress Drive at Washington
Coral at Voyager
Cottonwood Lane at Bryn Mawr Avenue (eastbound)
Cottonwood Lane at Bryn Mawr Avenue (westbound)
Devon Avenue at Drew Court
Devon Avenue at Giles Court
Devon Avenue at Holly Drive
Devon Avenue at Pinoak Drive
Devon Avenue at Pond View Lane
Devon Avenue at South Hickory Avenue
Devon Avenue at South Oak Avenue
Devon Avenue at South Prospect Avenue
Devon Avenue at South Western Avenue
Devon Avenue at Tanoak Drive
Devon Avenue at Western Avenue (northbound)
Devon Avenue from Main Street to South Oak Glenn Drive, both inclusive
East Morse Avenue at Marion Avenue
Fairfax Lane at Ashford Lane (north end)
Fairfax Lane at Ashford Lane (south end)
Fairfax Lane at Cromwell Circle (north end)
Fairfax Lane at Cromwell Circle (south end)
Fairfax Lane at Gatewood Lane
Fairfax Lane at Harvard Lane
Fairfax Lane at Lenox Court
Fairfax Lane at Penny Lane (north end)
Fairfax Lane at Penny Lane (south end)
Fairfax Lane at Sparrow Lane
Fairfax Lane at Stockton Court
Fairfax Lane at Wentworth Lane
Fairfax Lane at Wildberry Lane
Foster Avenue and Chelsea Drive
Foster Avenue and Eastwick Lane, east entrance
Foster Avenue and Eastwick Lane, west entrance
Foster Avenue at Dartmouth Drive
Foster Avenue at Gardenia Lane
Foster Avenue at Honeysuckle Lane
Foster Avenue at Martingale Drive
Foster Avenue at Poplar Lane
Foster Avenue at Sycamore Lane
Gerber Road at Gatewood Street
Gerber Road at Hawk Hollow Drive
Gerber Road at Jacaranda Drive
Gerber Road at Norway Drive
Gifford Road at Spaulding Road (eastbound)
Golf View Drive at Philip Drive
Harbor Terrace at East Sandpiper Court
Harbor Terrace at Sausalito Court
Harbor Terrace at West Sandpiper Court
Horizon Drive at Peregrine Parkway (north intersection)
Horizon Drive at Peregrine Parkway (south intersection)
Humbracht Circle at Hardt Circle (north intersection)
Humbracht Circle at Hardt Circle (south intersection)
Lake Street (Route 20) at Red Oak Drive
Lambert Lane at Edinburgh Drive (eastbound)
Lambert Lane at Edinburgh Drive (westbound)
Lambert Lane at Thornbury Road
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 196/702
Lambert Lane at Versailles Drive
Lincoln Drive at Castlewood Drive (northbound)
Lincoln Drive at Castlewood Drive (southbound)
Lincoln Drive at Tallgrass Drive (northbound)
Lincoln Drive at Tallgrass Drive (southbound)
Longford Road at Swinford Road
Mayflower Lane at Beacon Lane
Mayflower Lane at Beaumont Circle (east end)
Mayflower Lane at Beaumont Circle (west end)
Mayflower Lane at Blackhawk Lane
Mayflower Lane at Branden Lane
Mayflower Lane at Columbia Circle (east end)
Mayflower Lane at Columbia Circle (west end)
Mayflower Lane at Geneva Court
Mayflower Lane at Marlboro Court
Mayflower Lane at Meridian Court
Mayflower Lane at Mission Court
Mayflower Lane at Mohawk Court
Mayflower Lane at Newcastle Court (west end)
Mayflower Lane at Newcastle Lane
Mayflower Lane at Newcastle Lane (east end)
Mayflower Lane at Richmond Lane
Mayflower Lane at Schick Road
Mayflower Lane at Struckman Boulevard
Mayflower Lane at Trenton Lane
Mayflower Lane at Veron Lane
Miles Parkway at Kenyon Road
Miles Parkway at Slade Road
Morse Avenue at Crest Avenue
Morse Avenue at Eastern Avenue (northbound)
Morse Avenue at Eastern Avenue (southbound)
Morse Avenue at North Berteau Avenue
Morse Avenue at North Chase Avenue
Morse Avenue at North Hale Avenue
Morse Avenue at North Marion Avenue (switching direction)
Morse Avenue at North Prospect Avenue (eastbound)
Morse Avenue at North Tatge Avenue
Morse Avenue at Patricia Lane
Munger Road at Brewster Creek Boulevard
Munger Road at Forest Preserve Drive (westbound)
Munger Road at Humbracht Circle (north intersection)
Munger Road at Humbracht Circle (south intersection)
Munger Road at Schiferl Road
Naperville Road at Golf View Drive
Naperville Road at Philip Drive
Naperville Road at Timberline Drive
Newport Boulevard at both of its intersections with Millwood (east side)
Newport Boulevard at Cove Court
Newport Boulevard at Dunamon Drive
Newport Boulevard at Dunmore Lane
Newport Boulevard at Falmore Drive
Newport Boulevard at Longford Road (northbound)
Newport Boulevard at Longford Road (southbound - east end)
Newport Boulevard at Longford Road (southbound - west end)
Newport Boulevard at Millwood Drive (eastbound - west side)
Newport Boulevard at Valley View Drive
North Avenue at Prospect Avenue (southbound)
Pointsetta Lane at Heather Lane
Prospect Avenue at Amherst Drive
Prospect Avenue at Burnside Circle (north end)
Prospect Avenue at Burnside Circle (south end)
Prospect Avenue at Cleburne
Prospect Avenue at East Country Drive
Prospect Avenue at Ewell Court
Prospect Avenue at Gingerbrook Lane
Prospect Avenue at Hill Avenue
Prospect Avenue at Hood Court
Prospect Avenue at Lido Terrace
Prospect Avenue at Lido Terrace (eastbound)
Prospect Avenue at Lincoln Drive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 197/702
Prospect Avenue at McCook Court
Prospect Avenue at Meade Court
Prospect Avenue at Ord Court
Prospect Avenue at Polk Court
Prospect Avenue at Railroad Avenue
Prospect Avenue at Scott Court
Prospect Avenue at Wilcox Court
Railroad Avenue at Bradbury Lane
Railroad Avenue at Broadmoor Lane
Red Oak Drive at both of its intersections with Crab Tree Lane
Red Oak Drive at both of its intersections with White Oak Lane
Red Oak Drive at its intersection with Hackberry Court
Route 20 at Red Oak Drive (southbound)
Route 59 at Auburn Lane
Route 59 at Red Oak Drive
Route 59 at Red Oak Drive (westbound)
Route 59 at Santa Fe Street
Route 59 at Schick Road (eastbound)
Route 59 at Woodland Hills Parkway (eastbound)
Santa Fe Street at Norfolk Avenue
Sayer Road at Alder Lane
Sayer Road at Auburn Lane
Sayer Road at Crystal Lane
Sayer Road at Locust Court
Sayer Road at Preserve Trail
Sayer Road at Sumac Court
Schick Road at Fairfax Lane
Schick Road at Far Hills Drive
Schick Road at Harmony Drive
Schick Road at Pleasant Drive
Schick Road at Quincy Bridge Road
Schick Road at Southgate Road
Schick Road at Steeplechase Road
Shorewood Drive at Harbor Terrace
South Bartlett Road at Orchard Pass
South Bartlett Road at Partridge Lane
South Bartlett Road at Struckman Boulevard
South Western Avenue at Pinoak Drive
Southwind Boulevard at Abbott Court
Southwind Boulevard at Abbott Lane
Southwind Boulevard at Benchmark Lane
Spaulding Road at Cardinal Drive
Spaulding Road at Ivory Lane
Spaulding Road at Knoll Crest Drive (east end)
Spaulding Road at Knoll Crest Drive (west end)
Spaulding Road at Lambert Lane
Spaulding Road at Monarch Birch Court
Spaulding Road at Monarch Birch Lane
Spaulding Road at Persimmon Court
Spaulding Road at Persimmon Lane
Spaulding Road at River Ash Court
Spaulding Road at Scarlet Court
Spaulding Road at Silk Oak Lane
Spaulding Road at Smoketree Lane (north end)
Spaulding Road at Smoketree Lane (west end)
Spaulding Road at Snow Drift Circle (east end)
Spaulding Road at Snow Drift Circle (west end)
Spaulding Road at Snow Drift Court
Spaulding Road at Summersweet Avenue (north end)
Spaulding Road at Summersweet Avenue (northbound)
Spaulding Road at Summersweet Avenue (southbound)
Spaulding Road at Topaz Lane
Spitzer Drive at Hecht Road
Stearns Road at Bittersweet
Stearns Road at Longford Road
Stearns Road at Tallgrass Drive
Stearns Road at Trillium Drive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 198/702
Stearns Road at Windsor Drive (east entrance)
Stearns Road at Windsor Drive (west entrance)
Struckman Boulevard at Appletree Lane (northbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Appletree Lane (southbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Beechtree Lane (northbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Beechtree Lane (southbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Blackhawk Lane
Struckman Boulevard at Bridge Court
Struckman Boulevard at Buttercup Lane
Struckman Boulevard at Dogwood Lane (northbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Driftwood Lane (northbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Driftwood Lane (southbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Independence
Struckman Boulevard at Ivy Court
Struckman Boulevard at Jasmine Court
Struckman Boulevard at Keim Trail
Struckman Boulevard at Lexington Drive (northbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Lexington Drive (southbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Morning Glory Lane
Struckman Boulevard at Pinetree Lane (northbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Pinetree Lane (southbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Poinsettia Lane
Struckman Boulevard at Princeton Drive
Struckman Boulevard at Rose Court (northbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Rose Court (southbound)
Struckman Boulevard at Sangamon Court
Struckman Boulevard at Schick Road
Struckman Boulevard at Shawnee Circle (north end)
Struckman Boulevard at Shawnee Circle (south end)
Struckman Boulevard at Silver Circle (east end)
Struckman Boulevard at Silver Circle (west end)
Struckman Boulevard at Silver Court
Struckman Boulevard at Skylark Court
Struckman Boulevard at Stonebridge Court
Struckman Boulevard at Strawberry Court
Struckman Boulevard at Superior Circle (north end)
Struckman Boulevard at Superior Circle (south end)
Struckman Boulevard at Tulip Lane
Struckman Boulevard at Windemere Court
Sycamore Lane at Bryn Mawr
Sycamore Lane at Catalpa Lane
Sycamore Lane at Cedar Lane (eastbound)
Sycamore Lane at Cedar Lane (westbound)
Sycamore Lane at Evergreen Lane
Sycamore Lane at Juniper Lane
Sycamore Lane at Spruce Lane
Timberline Drive (west intersection) at Tamarack Drive
Valewood at Congress Drive
Valewood at Lakewood
West Bartlett Road at Bartlett Pointe Drive
West Bartlett Road at Bennington Lane
West Bartlett Road at Blue Heron Way
West Bartlett Road at Miles Parkway
West Bartlett Road at Regency Drive
West Bartlett Road at Ruzich Drive
West Bartlett Road at Southwind Boulevard
West Bartlett Road from Naperville Road to Carlino Drive, both inclusive
West North Avenue at South Hickory Street
West North Avenue at South Western Avenue
Western Avenue at Jervey Lane (westbound)
Western Avenue at Pond View Lane
Westridge Boulevard at Butler Drive (north end)
Westridge Boulevard at Butler Drive (south end)
Westridge Boulevard at Carroll Way
Westridge Boulevard at Cedarfield Drive
Westridge Boulevard at Cummings Drive
Westridge Boulevard at Faircroft Drive
Westridge Boulevard at Grovetown Drive
Westridge Boulevard at Moorehead Drive
Westridge Boulevard at Norwich Drive (north end)
Westridge Boulevard at Norwich Drive (south end)
Westridge Boulevard at Providence Drive
Westridge Boulevard at Ridgemore Drive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 199/702
Williamsburg at Morse
Wilmington Drive at Newport Lane
Woodland Hills Drive at Anvil Court
Woodland Hills Drive at Appaloosa Way (north end)
Woodland Hills Drive at Appaloosa Way (south end)
Woodland Hills Drive at Ascot Way
Woodland Hills Drive at Bridle Lane
Woodland Hills Drive at Churchill Road (east)
Woodland Hills Drive at Churchill Road (west)
Woodland Hills Drive at Deerfield Lane
Woodland Hills Drive at Fieldstone Lane
Woodland Hills Drive at Forest Preserve Drive (eastbound)
Woodland Hills Drive at Horseshoe Lane (east end)
Woodland Hills Drive at Horseshoe Lane (west end)
Woodland Hills Drive at Hunter Drive
Woodland Hills Drive at Longmeadow Lane
Woodland Hills Drive at Morgan Lane
Woodland Hills Drive at Northgate Drive (east)
Woodland Hills Drive at Northgate Drive (west)
Woodland Hills Drive at Old Forge Road
Woodland Hills Drive at Polo Drive (east)
Woodland Hills Drive at Polo Drive (west)
Woodland Hills Drive at Saddlebrook Road
Woodland Hills Drive at Saddleridge Place (east end)
Woodland Hills Drive at Saddleridge Place (west end)
Woodland Hills Drive at Schick Road (westbound)
Woodland Hills Drive at Steeplechase Drive
Woodland Hills Drive at Stonegate Court
Woodland Hills Drive at Windgate Court
Woodland Hills Drive at Woodland Hills Parkway (westbound)
(Ord. 78-69, 11-7-1978; amd. Ord. 83-58, 9-6-1983; Ord. 85-9, 1-15-1985; Ord. 87-57, 11-11-1987; Ord. 88-109, 11-15-1988; Ord. 90-118, 11-20-1990;
Ord. 90-126, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-33, 5-7-1991; Ord. 91-38, 6-4-1991; Ord. 91-54, 7-16-1991; Ord. 91-59, 8-6-1991; Ord. 91-90, 11-19-1991; Ord. 92-40,
6-2-1992; Ord. 92-62, 8-18-1992; Ord. 93-105, 9-7-1993; Ord. 93-121, 11-2-1993; Ord. 94-83, 8-16-1994; Ord. 95-100, 11-7-1995; Ord. 97-63, 7-15-1997;
Ord. 98-103, 10-20-1998; Ord. 2002-14, 2-5-2002; Ord. 2004-28, 3-16-2004; Ord. 2004-152, 10-19-2004; Ord. 2005-115, 10-18-2005; Ord. 2006-68, 6-20-
2006; Ord. 2007-12, 1-16-2007; Ord. 2010-69, 9-7-2010; Ord. 2015-93, 11-17-2015; Ord. 2019-04, 1-15-2019)
6-11-1204.2: SCHEDULE II, STOP INTERSECTIONS:
The following intersections are hereby designated as four-way stops:
Baytree Drive at Doral Drive
Braintree Lane and Auburn Lane
Bryn Mawr at Cuyahoga
East Morse and Elroy Avenue
Ford Lane at Lela Lane
Grant Street at Lincoln Drive
North Avenue and Oak Avenue
Railroad Avenue at Berteau Avenue
South Bartlett and Stearns Road
Western Avenue at North Avenue
(1984 Code; amd. Ord. 85-97, 11-19-1985; Ord. 2003-70, 6-3-2003; Ord. 2004-28, 3-16-2004; Ord. 2006-68, 6-20-2006; Ord. 2007-12, 1-16-2007; Ord.
2018-115, 10-2-2018)
6-11-1204.3: SCHEDULE III, YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS:
The following streets are hereby designated as yield right of way streets:
Bartlett Avenue at South Hickory Street
Prospect Street northbound at Country Drive
West North Avenue at Hickory Street and at Western Avenue
(1968 Code § 17.207; amd. Ord. 82-1)
6-11-1204.4: SCHEDULE IV, ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle on the following streets in the direction indicated: (Ord. 81-60)
Bartlett Avenue in an easterly direction between Oak Avenue and 325 feet east of Eastern Avenue. (East entrance to the Metro Commuter Parking
Lot.)
(Ord. 91-96, 12-3-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 200/702
Chapter 11-1300
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
6-11-1300: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
Sections 11-1301 through 11-1308 of the Illinois Vehicle Code1 are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. (Ord. 2018-
98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1300.1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this part, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle of the second division, as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-146, used for the transportation of
persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for hire or not for hire, having a gross weight, as evidenced by the weight
and use classification code contained on the license plate, in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds (B truck registration plate), having a maximum
length in excess of two hundred sixty four inches (264"), and having a maximum height and width in excess of ninety six inches (96") (exclusive of mirrors);
construction equipment; and permanently mounted equipment trailers, not including however, a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially. (Ord. 2019-02, 1-15-2019)
6-11-1301: CROSS REFERENCE BETWEEN IVC AND BARTLETT MUNICIPAL CODE:
Pertinent to this part 11-1300 of title 6 of the Bartlett Municipal Code is chapter 11, Rules of the Road, article XIII of the Illinois Vehicle Code entitled
"Stopping, Standing and Parking", 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, sections 5/11-1301 through 5/11-1308.
The following table includes Illinois Vehicle Code ("IVC") section numbers and in some cases corresponding section numbers and cites in the Bartlett
Municipal Code for the authority to adopt such violations of the IVC that are adopted as prohibitions and violations of the Bartlett Municipal Code as a local
ordinance violation.
Stopping, standing and parking:
Powers of local authorities 625 ILCS 5/11-208 6-11-208
Uniformity 625 ILCS 5/11-208.1 6-11-208.1
Limitation on home rule units 625 ILCS 5/11-208.2 6-11-208.2
Administrative adjudication of violations 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 6-11-208.3
Powers of municipalities and counties to contract with private property owners for
regulation of traffic
625 ILCS 5/11-209 6-11-209
Powers of local authorities - enforcing the provisions of this Code on private
streets and roads
625 ILCS 5/11-209.1 6-11-209.1
Failure to pay fine or penalty for standing, parking compliance 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(f) 6-6-306.5(f)
Suspension of driving privileges 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(g) 6-6-306.5(g)
Stopping, standing or parking outside of Business or Residence District 625 ILCS 5/11-1301(a) 6-11-1301(a)
625 ILCS 5/11-1301(b) 6-11-1301(b)
625 ILCS 5/11-1301(c) 6-11-1301(c)
625 ILCS 5/11-1301(d) 6-11-1301(d)
Persons with disabilities - parking privileges - exemptions 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1 6-11-1301.1
Special decals for parking: persons with disabilities 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2 6-11-1301.2
Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for persons with disabilities 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3 6-11-1301.3
Reciprocal agreements with other jurisdictions 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.4 6-11-1301.4
Fictitious or unlawfully altered disability license plate or parking decal or device 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.5 6-11-1301.5
Fraudulent disability license plate or parking decal or device 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.6 6-11-1301.6
Appointed volunteers and contracted entities; parking violations for persons with
disabilities
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.7 6-11-1301.7
Obstruction of parking places for persons with disabilities 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.8 6-11-1301.8
Officers authorized to remove vehicles 625 ILCS 5/11-1302 6-11-1302
Description
Illinois
Vehicle Code Citation
Bartlett Municipal
Code Citation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 201/702
Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places 625 ILCS 5/11-1303 6-11-1303
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1a
6-11-1303(a)1a
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1b
6-11-1303(a)1b
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1c
6-11-1303(a)1c
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1d
6-11-1303(a)1d
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1e
6-11-1303(a)1e
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1f
6-11-1303(a)1f
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1g
6-11-1303(a)1g
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1h
6-11-1303(a)1h
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1i
6-11-1303(a)1i
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1j
6-11-1303(a)1j
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1k
6-11-1303(a)1k
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)1l
6-11-1303(a)1l
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2a
6-11-1303(a)2a
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2b
6-11-1303(a)2b
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2c
6-11-1303(a)2c
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2d
6-11-1303(a)2d
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2e
6-11-1303(a)2e
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)2f
6-11-1303(a)2f
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)3a
6-11-1303(a)3a
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a)3b
6-11-1303(a)3b
625 ILCS 5/11-1304 6-11-1304
Schedule V, no parking zones 625 ILCS 5/11-
1303(a)3.b.
6-11-1303.1
Schedule VI, time limit parking 625 ILCS 5/11-1303 6-11-1303.2
Schedule VII, parallel, diagonal and perpendicular parking 625 ILCS 5/11-1304(a)(b)
(c)(d)
6-11-1303.3
Schedule VIII, metered parking and daily pay commuter parking areas 625 ILCS 5/11-1307(a)(b)
6-11-1303.4
Schedule IX, permit parking 625 ILCS 5/11 6-11-1303.5
No stopping zones 625 ILCS 5/11-
1303(a)1.i.
6-11-1303.6
No standing zones 625 ILCS 5/11-
1303(a)2.f.
6-11-1303.7
Additional parking regulations parking restricted and limited: 625 ILCS 5/11-1304 6-11-1304
Description
Illinois
Vehicle Code Citation
Bartlett Municipal
Code Citation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 202/702
Overnight parking 6-11-1304.2
Parking in alleys 6-11-1304.3
Parking in loading zones 6-11-1304.4
Parking, snow removal and street cleaning 6-11-1304.5
Parallel, diagonal and perpendicular parking 6-11-1304.6
Metered parking 6-11-1304.7
Permit parking 6-11-1304.8
Residential permit parking area 6-11-1304.8.1
Cab, bus stands 6-11-1304.9
Signs posted 6-11-1304.10
Parking of vehicle with expired registration 625 ILCS 5/1304.5 6-11-1304.11
Lessors of visitor vehicles - duty upon receiving notice of violation of this or local
parking regulations
625 ILCS 5/11-1305 6-11-1304.12
Parking liability of lessor 625 ILCS 5/11-1306 6-11-1304.13
Centralized parking meter system 625 ILCS 5/11-1307 6-11-1304.14
Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for electric vehicles 625 ILCS 5/11-1308 6-11-1304.15
Procedure for issuance of tickets 625 ILCS 5/11-208 1-15-1 through 1-15-10 and 6-11-
1305.1
Settlement procedures 625 ILCS 5/11-208 1-15-1 through 1-15-10 and 6-11-
1305.2
Registration prima facie evidence 625 ILCS 5/11-208 1-15-1 through 1-15-10 and 6-11-
1305.3
Notice to appear; citation 625 ILCS 5/11-208 1-15-1 through 1-15-10 and 6-11-
1305.4
Arrests 625 ILCS 5/11-208 1-15-1 through 1-15-10 and 6-11-
1305.5
Penalties 625 ILCS 5/11-208 1-15-1 through 1-15-10 and 6-11-
1305.6
(Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018; amd. Ord. 2019-02, 1-15-2019)
6-11-1302: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1303.1: SCHEDULE V, NO PARKING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at any time on any of the streets hereinafter named at the locations hereinafter set forth: (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
A. Streets Designated:
SOUTH BARTLETT ROAD at Stearns Road
SOUTH BARTLETT ROAD at Struckman Boulevard
WEST BARTLETT ROAD, along the length of the improvement of FAP Route 77 section 110X-N
BREWSTER CREEK BOULEVARD, from Stearns Road to Munger Road
CREST AVENUE, on the west side from North Avenue to Taylor Avenue
EASTERN AVENUE, on the east side between the north line of North Avenue and the south line of Oneida Avenue from Monday through Friday both
inclusive
SOUTH EASTERN AVENUE
FOSTER AVENUE at Cuyahoga Drive
Description
Illinois
Vehicle Code Citation
Bartlett Municipal
Code Citation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 203/702
FOSTER AVENUE at Martingale Drive
GRANT STREET, on the east side from 395 feet to 725 feet south of the intersection of Grant Street and Lincoln Drive
GRANT STREET, on the west side from 200 feet south of Lincoln Drive to the intersection of Grant and Lincoln Drive
HARBOR TERRACE at Voyager Drive
HARDT CIRCLE, from Humbracht Circle to Humbracht Circle
HECHT COURT, from Hecht Circle to west end
HECHT DRIVE, from Brewster Creek Boulevard to Spitzer Road
HICKORY AVENUE, on the east side from the south line of Oneida Avenue to the south line of Bartlett Avenue
HUMBRACHT CIRCLE, from Munger Road to Munger Road
ILLINOIS ROUTE 59 (INGALTON AVENUE) AND ILLINOIS ROUTE 59 (SUTTON ROAD) from 500 feet south of Army Trail Road to 450 feet north of
Red Oak Drive
LAMBERT LANE on the east side from Versailles Drive to Thornbury Drive
SOUTH MAIN STREET from Devon Avenue to Oak Glenn Drive, both inclusive
SOUTH MAIN STREET, on the east and west sides from the north line of the AT&T property (26 South Main Street) south 110 feet
SOUTH MAIN STREET, on the east side except the 5 spaces from a point 330 feet to a point 460 feet south of the south line of Railroad Avenue to
Devon Avenue
SOUTH MAIN STREET, on the west side from the south line of Railroad Avenue to Devon
MARION AVENUE, on the west side from North Avenue to Taylor Avenue
MEADE COURT, north side, on school days
NAPERVILLE ROAD at Spaulding Road
NEWPORT BOULEVARD at Coral Avenue
NEWPORT BOULEVARD at Harbor Terrace
NEWPORT BOULEVARD, on the west side of Newport Boulevard from its intersection with the north curbline of Coral Avenue to a point 40 feet north
of its intersection with the north curbline of Coral Avenue, and on the west side of Newport Boulevard from its intersection with the south curbline of
Coral Avenue to a point 40 feet south of its intersection with the south curbline of Coral Avenue
NORTH AVENUE at Western Avenue
NORTH AVENUE, between Eastern Avenue and Elroy Street
NORTH AVENUE, on the north side between Chase Street and Crest Street
NORTH AVENUE, on the north side from Oak Avenue to Oliver Street
NORTH AVENUE, on the south side between the west line of Eastern Avenue and the east line of Elroy Street, from Monday through Friday, both
inclusive
EAST NORTH AVENUE from Eastern Avenue to Hale Street, both inclusive
NORWOOD LANE, north and south sides from Route 59 to 350 feet east
OAK AVENUE, on the east and west sides from Bartlett Avenue to Oneida
OAK AVENUE, on the east and west sides from Railroad Avenue to Bartlett Avenue
OAK AVENUE, on the west side from Morse Avenue to the north edge of the Fire Station Drive approaches
OAK STREET, on the west side from Railroad Avenue to Natoma Avenue, as vacated
NORTH OAK STREET from Morse Street to North Hickory Street, both inclusive
SOUTH OAK STREET from Oneida Avenue to Railroad Avenue, both inclusive
ONEIDA AVENUE at Hickory Avenue
ONEIDA AVENUE, on the north side from Oak Avenue to the east end of Bartlett Hills Golf Course
RAILROAD AVENUE from a point 80 feet east of the centerline of Oak Avenue to Oak Avenue
RAILROAD AVENUE from South Oak Street to South Western Avenue, both inclusive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 204/702
RAILROAD AVENUE, on the south side from the southwest corner of the intersection of Railroad Avenue and South Main Street to a point 50 feet west
of said intersection
ROUTE 20 (WEST LAKE STREET) AND ROUTE 20 (EAST LAKE STREET) from 650 feet east of Lambert Drive to 400 feet east of Park Boulevard
ROUTE 59 AT ARMY TRAIL ROAD within the limits of the State project known as 110 T5-N, State Contract 62 F 19
SCHICK ROAD, north and south side from Route 59 to 375 feet east and 375 feet west
SCHIFERL ROAD, from Brewster Creek Boulevard to Munger Road
SCOTT COURT, north side, and south side on school days
SPITZER ROAD, from Brewster Creek Boulevard to north end
STEARNS ROAD at Balsam Lane
STEARNS ROAD at Cottonwood Lane
STEARNS ROAD from Cuyahoga Drive to Munger Road, both inclusive
STEARNS ROAD north and south sides from South Bartlett Road to County Farm Road
SYCAMORE LANE, west side, between Cedar Lane and the Northern Illinois Gas easement, on school days
WESTERN AVENUE, on the west side from the south line of Railroad Avenue to a point 50 feet north of the north line, if extended west, of Bartlett
Avenue, and on the east side of Western Avenue from the south line of Railroad Avenue to the north line of Oneida Avenue (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018;
amd. Ord. 2019-24, 3-19-2019)
B. Areas Designated:
BARTLETT PLAZA, within or upon any of the fire lanes designated on the map below, other than an authorized emergency vehicle:
BARTLETT QUADRO-HOME AREA, within or upon any of the fire lanes designated on the map below, other than an authorized emergency vehicle:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 205/702
FOUR SEASONS TOWNHOME SUBDIVISION, within or upon any of the fire lanes in the Four Seasons Townhome Subdivision designated on the map
below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 206/702
HEARTHWOOD FARMS SUBDIVISION, within or upon any of the fire lanes designated on the map below, other than an authorized emergency vehicle:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 207/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 208/702
JEWEL SHOPPING CENTER, within or upon any of the fire lanes designated on the map below, other than an authorized emergency vehicle:
(Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1303.2: SCHEDULE VI, TIME LIMIT PARKING:
A. Two Hour Parking: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for longer than two (2) consecutive hours on Monday through Friday, both inclusive, in any of
the following locations:
BARTLETT AVENUE, on the north side between its intersection with the east line of Oak Street and the west line of Eastern Avenue, except on
Sundays and legal holidays.
EASTERN AVENUE, on the east side between the south line of Oneida Avenue and the south line of Bartlett Avenue and between the north line of
Morse Avenue and the north line of North Avenue.
EASTERN AVENUE, on the west side between the north line of Morse Avenue and the south line of Bartlett Avenue.
WEST RAILROAD AVENUE, on the north side, between a point 72 feet east of the east line of Oak Street and a point 181 feet east of the east line of
Oak Street.
B. Four Hour Parking:
AREA, described by beginning at the intersection of the north line of North Avenue with the west line of Western Avenue, and running thence east
along the north line of North Avenue to the east line of Eastern Avenue; thence south along the east line of Eastern Avenue, and the prolongation
thereof, to the north line of the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad right-of-way; thence west along the north line of said railroad right-ofway,
to its intersection with the prolongation of the east line of South Main Street; thence south along the prolongation of the east line of South Main
Street and along the east line of South Main Street to the south line of Devon Avenue; thence west along the south line of Devon Avenue and the
prolongation of the south line of Devon Avenue to the west line of Western Avenue; thence north along the west line of Western Avenue to its
intersection with the north line of North Avenue; it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any Village street for more than 4 consecutive hours between
the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M., except on Sundays and legal holidays.
BARTLETT AVENUE, on the south side, between its intersection with the east line of Oak Street and the west line of Eastern Avenue, except on
Sundays and legal holidays.
ONEIDA AVENUE, on the south side from the east line of Eastern Avenue to the west line of Prospect Avenue, for a period of time longer than 4 hours.
POND VIEW LANE, on either side, between its intersections with the east line of Devon Avenue and the west line of Western Avenue.
C. Monday Through Friday: No parking Monday through Friday, inclusive, six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
BERTEAU AVENUE, on either side from the south side of Oneida Avenue to the Milwaukee Road right-of-way on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday and Friday.
ONEIDA AVENUE, on the north side from the east line of Eastern Avenue to the west line of Prospect Avenue.
D. League Play Restriction:
CORAL AVENUE, on the north side, from Newport Boulevard to Voyager Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 209/702
NEWPORT BOULEVARD, on the east side from Coral Avenue to Millwood Drive.
The "no parking" restriction on the above named streets is during regular league play hours only. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1303.3: SCHEDULE VII, PARALLEL, DIAGONAL AND PERPENDICULAR PARKING:
BARTLETT AVENUE, north and south side, diagonal parking shall be permitted from the east line of Oak Street to the west line of Eastern Avenue, where
vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by markings on the pavement. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1303.4: SCHEDULE VIII, METERED PARKING AND DAILY PAY COMMUTER PARKING AREAS:
The following streets and places, depicted in appendix 1 on file in the Village, are hereby declared to be metered parking areas or daily pay commuter
parking areas subject to the regulations of section 6-11-1304.7 of this part, and it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle upon such streets and places except in
compliance with the regulations set forth in said section 6-11-1304.7 of this part:
The parking area on the north side of Railroad Avenue from the east line of Western Avenue easterly to the west line of Oak Avenue, consisting of 58
spaces (Lot 4).
The east 1/2 of Lot 6 (61 spaces) located north of the Metra railroad tracks.
The parking lot located at the southeast corner of Western Avenue and Oneida Avenue consisting of 86 spaces (Lot 11).
The parking area located on the north side of Bartlett Avenue from the east line of Hickory Avenue easterly approximately 100 feet consisting of 12 spaces
(Lot 2, motorcycle parking).
The parking lot located on the north side of East Railroad Avenue from the Metra Station easterly approximately 500 feet east of the east line of Berteau
Avenue consisting of 162 spaces (Lot 15).
The parking lot located on the south side of East Oneida Avenue, adjacent to the Bartlett water tower, directly south of South Elroy Avenue consisting of
39 spaces (Lot 13). (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1303.5: SCHEDULE IX, PERMIT PARKING:
The following described areas, depicted in appendix 1 on file in the Village, are hereby designated as permit parking areas:
The parking area on the south side of West Bartlett Avenue from the east line of Western Avenue easterly to the west line of Oak Avenue consisting of 45
spaces (Lot 3).
The parking lots (Lots 5, the west 1/2 of Lot 6, 7, 12, and 14) located north of the Metra railroad tracks, south of Oneida Avenue, from the east line of
Eastern Avenue easterly to the east line of Berteau Avenue excluding the east 1/2 of Lot 6 and Lot 13 (39 spaces) the east side of Berteau Avenue north of
East Bartlett Avenue south of West Oneida Avenue the northern 6 spaces of Lot 14, and the north side of East Bartlett Avenue, first 10 spaces to the
permit parking area known as Lot 7. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1303.6: NO STOPPING ZONES:
Except where necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, it shall
be unlawful for any person to stop any vehicle at any time on any of the streets hereinafter set forth:
DARTMOUTH COURT
This section shall not apply to a driver of any vehicle which is disabled; school buses; or any second division vehicle used exclusively for the purpose of
collection of garbage, refuse or recyclable material. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1303.7: NO STANDING ZONES:
Except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, it
shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, whether momentary to pick up or discharge passengers or not, or any
other purpose, at any time on any of the streets hereinafter named at the locations hereinafter set forth:
DARTMOUTH COURT;
LAMBERT LANE from Spaulding Road to 500 feet north of Spaulding Road; and
SPAULDING ROAD from Metra railroad tracks west of Lambert Lane to Ivory Lane east of Lambert Lane.
This section shall not apply to a driver of any vehicle which is disabled; school buses; or any second division vehicle used exclusively for the purpose of
collecting garbage, refuse or recyclable material. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304: ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 210/702
6-11-1304.1: PARKING RESTRICTED AND LIMITED:
A. Commercial Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle, vehicle for hire, or machinery on or upon any street, alley or public way within
the corporate limits of the Village, except a commercial vehicle, vehicle for hire, or machinery may park on such streets for the purpose of:
1. Making an immediate delivery or pick up for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes;
2. Loading or unloading passengers of vehicles for hire for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes;
3. Waiting for a passenger of a vehicle for hire for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, when instructed by the passenger to do so;
4. Residential construction and repair and landscaping, while such vehicles are needed for use in conducting the work, during the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.; or
5. Loading or unloading of a person's household belongings when such person is in the process of moving his residence from one location to another,
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight only.
B. On Street Parking Of Recreational Vehicles And Trailers: Parking of all non-motorized recreational vehicles, unattached trailers, boats (whether on a
trailer or otherwise), any camper not mounted on a vehicle, and any motor home or mini-motor home of any length on any public way within the Village
is prohibited. However, a motor home or trailer attached to a tow vehicle may be parked in an otherwise legal manner on the public way for a period not
to exceed twenty four (24) hours for the purpose of loading or unloading.
C. Selling Merchandise From Vehicle: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle
upon any street from which vehicle merchandise is peddled.
D. Inoperative Vehicle Or Machinery: It shall be unlawful to park any inoperative vehicle or any machinery of any kind on any street or public right-of-way
for more than five (5) consecutive hours.
E. Fifteen Minute Parking On Certain Streets: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at any time for more than fifteen (15) minutes on the south side of
Railroad Avenue from the west line of Hickory Street to a point fifty feet (50') west of the west line of Hickory Street.
F. Bartlett Municipal Building Parking Lot: It shall be unlawful for any person who is not visiting the Bartlett Municipal Building on Village or police business
to park any vehicle in the parking lot of the Bartlett Municipal Building, and it shall further be unlawful for any person who is not an officer or employee
of the Village to park any vehicle in the parking lot of the Bartlett Municipal Building for more than four (4) hours within any twenty four (24) hour period.
G. Five Minute Parking On Certain Streets: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at any time for more than five (5) minutes on the east side of Oak Street
within fifty feet (50') of the north line of Bartlett Avenue.
H. Parking On Public Street Or Right-Of-Way: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or right-of-way in any location designated in the
manner hereinafter set forth:
The Village Police Department, or anyone acting under its direction or control, may, if the condition of traffic so warrants or the public safety so demands,
temporarily post or install no parking signs along or upon any public highway, street or parking area in the Village, such parking signs to be temporary in
nature and not to be posted or installed for an unreasonable time. A period of beyond seventy two (72) hours shall be deemed prima facie unreasonable
as to time, unless the circumstances surrounding the need indicate to the contrary. (Ord. 2019-02, 1-15-2019)
6-11-1304.2: OVERNIGHT PARKING:
No person shall park any vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day, except in a residential permit parking area pursuant to a validly issued residential parking permit issued pursuant to section
6-11-1304.8.1 of this part, or physicians on emergency calls; provided, however, that in the event of an emergency, or in the event of mechanical
malfunction of a vehicle, such vehicle may be parked on the street between such hours; provided that the owner or person responsible for the parking of
such vehicle on the Village street shall notify the Bartlett Police Department as to the existence of such emergency situation, the location where such
vehicle shall be parked, the identity of the owner of the premises in front of which such vehicle shall be parked, the identity of the owner and driver of such
vehicle and such additional information as the Bartlett police may require. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles owned by the United States, State of Illinois, any county or municipality which may be subject to
call twenty four (24) hours a day. The Chief of Police is authorized to grant special permission: a) in emergency situations, or b) on a temporary basis,
however, overnight parking permission is limited to three (3) nights per calendar month. (Ord. 2019-02, 1-15-2019)
6-11-1304.3: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of traffic, and no person shall stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to
any abutting property. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.4: PARKING IN LOADING ZONES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 211/702
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to load,
unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes in any place designated by the Village Board as a loading zone and marked as such, or in
any of the following designated places:
A. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
B. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to a public building between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except Sundays.
C. Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time the theater is open for business. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.5: PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL AND STREET CLEANING OPERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in the Village at any time within twelve (12) hours after a snowfall of three inches (3") or more
has occurred, or to park any vehicle on any public street or portion thereof in the Village at any time when such street is being cleaned. Signs indicating
that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be posted immediately before the cleaning of the street, and shall be removed after the cleaning of
the street is finished. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.6: PARALLEL, DIAGONAL AND PERPENDICULAR PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb or street pavement, except on one-way streets.
B. It shall be unlawful to park or stand any vehicle on any street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within six
inches (6") of the curb or established edge of pavement, except as provided in section 6-11-1303.3 of this part. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.7: METERED PARKING:
The following regulations shall govern parking on Village streets, in off street facilities owned, leased, controlled or operated by the Village, or in parking
areas comprised of both Village streets and off street parking facilities owned, leased, controlled or operated by the Village.
A. Parking Meters: The Chief of Police shall cause parking meters to be placed upon the sidewalk or curb adjacent to the metered parking areas
designated for the regulation of the parking of vehicles in such areas in this part. He shall cause such parking areas to be divided and marked for
individual parking spaces for each meter so placed and installed. Each parking meter so installed shall bear a legend indicating the number of legal
hours prior to the legal parking of a vehicle in such parking space, the days and hours that parking regulations are in effect with respect to such meters,
and other information relating to the use of such parking meters. Each meter so placed and used for the regulation of parking in the metered parking
areas hereinafter designated shall be so constructed as to permit the placing of coins therein, and shall display a signal or legend showing legal
parking for the period indicated on a dial therein provided.
B. Procedure On Parking In A Metered Zone Or In Commuter Parking Lot:
1. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a metered parking space in the designated metered parking areas or in designated commuter parking areas
for more than twelve (12) hours for each one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) deposited in the parking meter collection box or deposited in or charged
through an automatic pay station or through the Village authorized mobile parking payment application designated for such parking space.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, and it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to cause, suffer or permit to be parked,
any vehicle in any parking space or stall in any daily pay commuter parking area or lot as described in section 6-11-1303.4 of this part which is
regulated by a parking meter, collection box or automated pay station or through the Village authorized mobile parking payment application
designated for such daily pay commuter parking area, unless there is deposited in such parking meter, collection box or deposited in or charged by
credit card through an automated pay station or the Village authorized mobile parking payment application designated for said space or stall, the sum
of one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) for each day during which said vehicle is parked in said parking space or stall between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. Payment shall be made within thirty (30) minutes of parking the
vehicle.
3. The appropriate Village personnel are authorized and directed to take the necessary steps to cause the parking meter, collection boxes, and/or
automated pay stations or the Village authorized mobile parking payment application to be changed or adjusted in order to conform with the
provisions of this section.
4. Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection, or causes, suffers or permits the violation of any provision of this section shall be fined not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each such violation; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day during which the
vehicle is parked in violation of this section.
C. Parking Hours And Days: The regulations for metered parking shall be in effect between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
on each day from Monday through Friday, both inclusive. Such regulations shall not be in effect on Saturdays, Sundays and the following legal
holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
D. Use Of Slugs: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any meter/collection box any slug, device or metallic substitute for a lawful coin. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park in any space adjacent to a parking meter/collection box where the last coin deposited in such meter is not a lawful coin
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 212/702
of the United States. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open, break or destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking
meter/collection box. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.8: PERMIT PARKING:
The following regulations shall govern permit parking on Village streets, in off street parking facilities owned, leased, controlled or operated by the Village,
or in parking areas comprised of both Village streets and off street parking facilities owned, leased and controlled or operated by the Village:
A. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in any of the permit parking areas described in section 6-11-1303.5, schedule IX of this part, unless there has been
issued for such vehicle a parking permit hanger to allow the parking of such vehicle within such permit parking area. Each such parking permit hanger
issued pursuant to this section shall be visibly displayed by hanging from the rear view mirror inside of the vehicle in such a manner that it is clearly
visible from the outside of the motor vehicle.
B. The application for a permit shall contain the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle, residential address, the motor vehicle's make, model,
color, and registration number.
C. The permit shall be renewed quarterly on or before the first day of the new quarter, January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1. The permit shall display the
quarter number for which the permit is issued. This permit shall entitle the permittee to park in the permit parking area for a twelve (12) hour period.
D. The parking permit hanger will be displayed hanging from the rear view mirror inside of the vehicle in such a manner that it is clearly visible from the
outside of the motor vehicle.
E. The Village Clerk shall cause parking permit hangers to be made available for sale online, and parking permit hangers will be mailed to the requestor at
the rates herein set forth.
F. The following permit fees for permit parking areas described in section 6-11-1303.5 of this part are hereby established:
$90.00 per calendar quarter.
G. It shall constitute a violation of this regulation for any person to make false representation of eligibility for parking permit or to furnish any false
information in an application in order to obtain a parking permit.
H. Any person who shall violate any provision of this regulation shall, upon a finding of guilty of or a conviction, be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars
($25.00) and if not paid within a period of ten (10) days from the date appearing on the violation notice, said person shall be subject to an additional
fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.8.1: RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING AREA:
A. "Residential area" shall mean a contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public highways or parts thereof primarily abutted by residential
property or residential and nonbusiness property (such as: schools, parks and churches).
B. All residents shall be deemed eligible for residential permit parking when the residents would otherwise park the vehicles on the street in violation of the
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. prohibition.
C. "Residential permit parking area" shall mean the residential area west of Berteau Avenue, the north side of East Bartlett Avenue, first ten (10) spaces to
the permit parking area known as Lot 7, and the east side of Berteau Avenue north of East Bartlett Avenue south of West Oneida Avenue. The northern
six (6) spaces of Lot 14 where parking shall be allowed for vehicles owned or leased by a Village resident who has procured and displays a residential
parking permit. This permit parking area is reserved for the use of Village residents who have "residential parking permits" issued one per property on a
first come, first issued basis.
D. The application for a permit shall contain the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle, residential address, the motor vehicle's make, model,
registration number, and proof of residency.
E. The permit shall be renewed quarterly on or before the first day of the new quarter, January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1. The permit shall display the
quarter number for which it is issued. This permit shall entitle the permittee to park in the residential permit area twenty four (24) hours daily.
F. The parking permit hanger will be displayed hanging from the rear view mirror inside of the vehicle in such a manner that it is clearly visible from the
outside of the motor vehicle.
G. No person shall display a parking permit hanger on any vehicle other than the vehicle described in the application for which the residential parking
permit hanger has been made and parking permit hanger issued. Any such use or display of a parking permit hanger on a vehicle as described above
shall constitute a violation of the regulation by the permittee and by the person who so used or displayed such parking permit hanger.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 213/702
H. It shall constitute a violation of this regulation for any person to make representation of eligibility for a residential parking permit or to furnish any false
information in an application in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
I. Any person who shall violate any provision of this regulation shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and if not paid
within a period of ten (10) days from the date appearing on the violation notice, said person shall be subject to an additional fine of twenty five dollars
($25.00). (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.9: CAB, BUS STANDS:
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be
parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.10: SIGNS POSTED:
The Director of Public Works or any other person authorized by the Village Board shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to park a motor vehicle in contradiction to a sign
posted limiting or restricting parking. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.11: PARKING OF VEHICLE WITH EXPIRED REGISTRATION:
No person may stop, park, or leave standing upon a public street, highway, or roadway a vehicle upon which is displayed an Illinois registration plate or
plates or registration sticker after the termination of the registration period. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.12: LESSOR OF VISITOR VEHICLES - DUTY UPON RECEIVING NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a violation of
this part involving such vehicle, shall upon request provide such police officers as have authority of the offense, the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator
and/or the Administrative Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to title 1, chapter 15 of this Code, and/or the court having jurisdiction thereof with a written
statement of the name and address of the lessee at the time of such offense and the identifying number upon the registration plates and registration
sticker or stickers of such vehicle. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.13: PARKING LIABILITY OF LESSOR:
No person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement shall be liable for the violation of any parking or standing regulation of this
part involving such vehicle during the period of the lease; provided that upon the request of the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator or the Administrative
Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to title 1, chapter 15 of this Code, received within one hundred twenty (120) days after the violation occurred, the
lessor provides within sixty (60) days after such receipt the name and address of the lessee. The driver's license number of a lessee may be subsequently
individually requested by either of such officers if needed for enforcement of this part. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1304.14: CENTRALIZED PARKING METER SYSTEMS:
A. As used in this section:
CENTRALIZED PARKING METER SYSTEM: Means a system of regulating the standing or parking of vehicles for the Village public commuter parking
lots and a single parking meter.
PARKING METER: Means a traffic control device which, upon being activated by deposit of currency of the United States, or by electronic or other form
of payment, in the amount indicated thereon or otherwise, either: 1) displays a signal showing that parking is allowed from the time of such activation
until the expiration of the time fixed for parking in the parking meter zone in which it is located, and upon expiration of such time indicates by sign or
signal that the lawful parking period has expired; 2) issues a ticket or other token, or activates a display device, on which is printed or otherwise
indicated the lawful parking period in the parking meter zone in which the parking meter is located, such ticket or token, or display device, to be
displayed in a publicly visible location on the dashboard or inner windshield of a vehicle parking in the Village commuter parking lot, or such ticket to be
affixed on the front lamp of a motorcycle or motor scooter parking in the Village's commuter parking lot; or 3) payment for parking in any Village
commuter parking lot through the Village authorized mobile parking payment application.
VILLAGE COMMUTER PARKING LOTS: Means a certain designated and marked off section of Village owned or leased public property within the
marked boundaries where a vehicle may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain for such period of time as the parking meter attached thereto, or
the ticket or other token issued by the parking meter, or mobile payment application, may indicate.
B. If for any reason the parking meter serving a space or, in a centralized parking meter system, serving a parking meter zone is malfunctioning due to the
accumulation of ice or snow and it has been reported to the local authorities as malfunctioning prior to a violation for the standing or parking of vehicles
being issued, it shall be a valid affirmative defense to such violation until such time as the parking meter is brought back into service. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-
21-2018)
6-11-1304.15: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES RESERVED FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 214/702
A. For the purposes of this section:
ELECTRIC VEHICLE: Means a battery-powered electric vehicle operated solely by electricity or a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle that operates on
electricity and gasoline and has a battery that can be recharged from an external source.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION: Means any facility or equipment that is used to charge a battery or other energy storage device of an
electric vehicle.
B. It shall be prohibited to park a non-electric vehicle in an electric vehicle charging station designated for use by electric vehicles, including an electric
vehicle charging station on any private or public off street parking facility. A person may park only an electric vehicle in an electric vehicle charging
station space designated for use by electric vehicles.
C. Any person or entity owning any public or private off street parking facility may, after notifying the Police Department, remove or cause to be removed to
the nearest garage or other place of safety any non-electric vehicle parked within an electric vehicle charging station space designated for use by
electric vehicles.
D. It shall not be a defense to a charge under this section that the sign or notice posted at the electric vehicle charging station or the designated parking
space does not comply with applicable rules, regulations, or Village ordinances, if a reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or notice on
or near the parking space that the space is reserved for electric vehicles.
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of subsection B of this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to any costs or
charges connected with the removal or storage of the non-electric vehicle. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1305.1: AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS:
Whenever a police officer, community service officer, parking enforcement officer or other authorized personnel witnesses a violation of an ordinance with
respect to any of the following subjects:
A. Prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in a designated area (see sections 6-11-1300 through 6-11-1304.15 of this part);
B. Restricting the length of time a vehicle may be parked (see sections 6-11-1300 through 6-11-1304.15 of this part);
C. Regulating parking in metered parking areas and commuter parking areas (see sections 6-11-1304.7 and 6-11-1304.14 of this part);
D. Regulating handicapped parking (see sections 6-11-1301.1 through 6-11-1301.8 listed in section 6-11-1301 of this part);
E. Prohibiting the parking of a vehicle with expired registration (see sections 6-11-1303(a)1l and 6-11-1304.11 listed in section 6-11-1301 of this part);
he or she may, in lieu of arrest and the filing of a citation complaint and/or a notice of appear in court issue a citation to such alleged violator a parking
citation which contains, but shall not be limited to the information pursuant to subsection 6-20-5D of this title. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1305.2: PENALTIES AND SETTLEMENT OF PENALTY PROCEDURES:
A. Penalties; Parking Tickets: Any person accused of a violation of sections 6-11-1300 to 6-11-1304.15 of this part may settle and compromise the claim
pursuant to subsection B of this section and prior to such person being issued a second notice of violation and/or notice to appear.
B. Parking And Minor Ordinance Violation Penalties; Settlement Of Penalties; Authorization And Procedure: The following procedure regarding settlement
and compromise of parking violations and certain minor ordinance violations as set forth in this section is hereby authorized:
1. Any owner or operator who is issued a parking citation for a violation of any of sections 6-11-1300 to 6-11-1304.15 of this part, excluding sections 6-
11-1301.3 and 6-11-1301.8 listed in section 6-11-1301 of this part may settle and compromise that citation by paying twenty five dollars ($25.00) to
the Village on or before ten (10) days after the date of issuance, not counting the date of issuance. If paid after that date but not less than seven (7)
days before the hearing date, the parking citation can be settled and compromised for fifty dollars ($50.00). After that date, upon a finding of liable by
the Administrative Hearing Officer, the total amount of the fine and penalty shall be a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) not to exceed two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each separate violation. Payments received by mail shall be credited as paid on the date received by the Village.
2. Any owner or operator who is issued a citation (LA ticket) for a violation of section 6-11-1301.3 or 6-11-1301.8 listed in section 6-11-1301 of this part
may settle and compromise that citation by paying two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to the Village on or before ten (10) days after the date of
issuance, not counting the date of issuance. If paid after that date but not less than seven (7) days before the hearing date, the ticket citation or
complaint, as the case may be, may be settled and compromised for two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). After that date upon a determination of
liability by the Administrative Hearing Officer, the total amount of the fine and penalty to be entered by the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
C. Adjudication Fines And Penalties: Pursuant to sections 6-20-13 and 6-20-14 of this title any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in
accordance with the provisions of that chapter remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust administrative remedies created under
said chapter, and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt due and owing the Village and the Village may take the necessary
actions to collect said fines and/or penalties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 215/702
D. Driver's License Suspension: Pursuant to section 6-20-11 of this title, the Village may cause the suspension of a person's driver's license in accordance
with section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code for failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the Village after the exhaustion of
administrative procedures set forth in this part for ten (10) or more vehicular standing and/or parking regulation violations. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1305.3: REGISTRATION PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which is illegally operated or parked is registered with the Secretary of State in the name of said alleged
violator; or, in the alternative, in the event that a vehicle sticker issued by a municipality has been issued in the name of the alleged violator, shall be
considered prima facie proof that said alleged violator was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or vehicle at the time of such alleged
violation. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-11-1305.4: SECOND NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATION:
Pursuant to subsection 6-20-5M of this title, if the citation is not settled in accordance with section 6-11-1305.2 of this part within ten (10) days of issuance,
a second notice of violation and/or notice to appear will be mailed and the respondent shall have the option of avoiding an appearance at an administrative
hearing by paying the fine and penalty amount stated on the second notice at least seven (7) days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Notices shall be
mailed in accordance with subsection 6-20-5P of this title. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
Chapter 11-1400
MISCELLANEOUS LAWS
6-11-1400: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois vehicle code1 are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof:
MISCELLANEOUS LAWS:
Unattended motor vehicle 6-5/11-1401
Limitations on backing 6-5/11-1402
Riding on motorcycles 6-5/11-1403
Riding on motorized pedalcycles 6-5/11-1403.1
Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism 6-5/11-1406
Opening and closing vehicle doors 6-5/11-1407
Following fire apparatus prohibited 6-5/11-1411
Crossing fire hose 6-5/11-1412
Driving upon sidewalk 6-5/11-1412.1
Putting glass, etc., on highway prohibited 6-5/11-1413
Approaching, overtaking and passing school bus 6-5/11-1414
School buses - stopping, loading and discharging
passengers on highways having four (4) or more
lanes 6-5/11-1415
Obstructing persons on highways 6-5/11-1416
Travel regulated 6-5/11-1417
Trucks, other commercial vehicles prohibited
on designated highways2 6-5/11-1418
Funeral processions 6-5/11-1420
Violation penalty 6-5/11-1422
Stop when traffic obstructed 6-5/11-1425
All-terrain vehicles3 6-5/11-1426
(1984 Code; amd. Ord. 91-69, 9-17-1991)
6-11-1417.1: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 216/702
Whenever the weight of vehicles permitted on a street is limited by ordinance and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may
be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose. (1968 Code § 17.338)
6-11-1417.2: POSTING SIGNS:
The director of public works or any other person designated by the village board shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all such through streets,
one-way streets or alleys, yield right of way and stop intersections. (1968 Code § 17.205)
6-11-1417.3: TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
A. It shall be unlawful to drive any truck except for the purpose of making a delivery and then for one block only on any street so designated by ordinance
and properly signposted. (1968 Code § 17.337)
B. It shall be unlawful to drive any truck, at any time, on Prospect Avenue between Oneida Avenue and Devon Avenue. (Ord. 85-92, 11-5-1985)
6-11-1417.3.1: HEAVY VEHICLES CROSSING METRA/MILWAUKEE DISTRICT/WEST LINE RAILROAD CROSSING AT
PROSPECT:
No school or other bus, and no truck which displays or is legally required to display a class F or higher license plate, or any vehicle whose gross weight, as
defined in the Illinois vehicle code, exceeds twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, shall cross the railroad right of way of the Metra/Milwaukee District/West
Line (formerly the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul And Pacific Railroad) at its intersection with Prospect Avenue in the village, with the following exceptions:
A. Firetrucks and other emergency vehicles.
B. Snowplowing and other maintenance trucks of the village, and service vehicles of Commonwealth Edison Company, Nicor, AT&T, Ameritech, Comcast
or other utility providers, while such trucks are actually being used in connection with the maintenance of that portion of Prospect Avenue, and/or
village sewer and/or water systems, or electric, gas, phone, cable TV lines, or other cable and/or telecommunications systems and appurtenances
within the Prospect Avenue right of way. (Ord. 2014-56, 6-17-2014)
6-11-1417.4: BUSES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any bus, at any time, on Prospect Avenue between Oneida Avenue and Devon Avenue. (Ord. 85-92, 11-5-1985)
6-11-1417.4.1: HEAVY VEHICLES AND BUSES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any school or other bus, and any truck which displays, or is legally required to display, a class F or higher license plate, or any
vehicle whose "gross vehicle weight", as defined in the Illinois vehicle code, exceeds twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, to drive on Sayer Road
between Munger Road and Stearns Road, with the following exceptions:
1. For the purpose of making a local delivery or pick up of a load or a passenger, and then for not more than the minimum distance necessary for that
purpose.
2. Firetrucks and other emergency vehicles.
3. Snowplowing and other maintenance trucks of the village, and service vehicles of Commonwealth Edison Company, Nicor, AT&T, Ameritech,
Comcast or other utility providers, while such trucks are actually being used in connection with the maintenance of that portion of Sayer Road and
village sewer and/or water systems, or electric, gas, phone, cable TV lines, or other cable and/or telecommunication systems and appurtenances
within the Sayer Road right of way.
Signs stating, "No Thru Trucks Over 12,000 GVW" shall be posted by the director of public works at appropriate locations.
B. As provided under the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-316, it shall be unlawful for any truck, tow truck in combination with a disabled
vehicle, or other commercial vehicle which displays or is legally required to display a class F or higher license plate, or any vehicle which has a "gross
vehicle weight", as defined in the Illinois vehicle code, that exceeds ten thousand (10,000) pounds, to drive on Spaulding Road between Naperville
Road and Lambert Lane extended, or on Lambert Lane between Spaulding Road and the northernmost village corporate limits on Lambert Lane. The
general local delivery exceptions set forth in section 6-11-1417.1 and subsection 6-11-1418A of this part, or subsection 6-15-101B of this title shall not
be applicable, but the vehicle size and weight limitations while operating on the village streets set forth in this subsection shall not apply to:
1. Firetrucks and other emergency vehicles.
2. Snowplowing and other maintenance trucks of the village, and service vehicles of Commonwealth Edison Company, Nicor, AT&T, Ameritech,
Comcast or other utility providers, while such trucks are actually being used in connection with the maintenance of that portion of Spaulding Road or
Lambert Lane, and the village sewer and/or water systems, or electric, gas, phone, cable TV lines, or other cable and/or telecommunication systems
and appurtenances within the Spaulding Road or Lambert Lane right of way.
3. School buses picking up or dropping off students at locations that are only accessible off of Spaulding Road or Lambert Lane.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 217/702
4. Trucks making a lawful home delivery to or picking up a lawful load from a residential location in the village that is only accessible off of Spaulding
Road or Lambert Lane.
5. Any truck or vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under a valid over size and/or dimension permit issued by the village under the authority of
section 6-15-301 of this title.
Signs stating "No Thru Trucks Over 10,000 GVW" shall be posted by the director of public works at appropriate locations. (Ord. 2014-56, 6-17-2014)
6-11-1418: TRUCKS, OTHER COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON DESIGNATED HIGHWAYS/STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any truck and other commercial vehicles which displays, or is legally required to display, a class F or higher license plate, or any
vehicle whose "gross vehicle weight", as defined in the Illinois vehicle code, exceeds twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, to be operated on the following
streets:
On Mayflower Lane between Struckman Boulevard and Schick Road
On Gerber Road between Army Trail Road and Schick Road
On North Avenue between Prospect Avenue and Western Avenue
On North Oak Avenue between Lake Street and Railroad Avenue
On Schick Road between South Bartlett Road and Mayflower Lane/Woodlake Drive
On South Main Street between Railroad Avenue and Devon Avenue
On Stearns Road between South Bartlett Road and County Farm Road
On West Bartlett Road between IL Route 59 and Devon Avenue
On Railroad Avenue between Devon Avenue and Prospect Avenue
On Devon Avenue between West Bartlett Road and South Main Street/South Bartlett Road
with the following exceptions:
A. For the purpose of making a local delivery or pick up of a passenger, and then for not more than the minimum distance necessary for that purpose.
B. Firetrucks and other emergency vehicles.
C. Snowplowing and other maintenance trucks of the village, and service vehicles of Commonwealth Edison Company, Nicor, AT&T, Ameritech,
Comcast or other utility providers, while such trucks are actually being used in connection with the maintenance of said streets and/or village sewer
and water systems, or electric, gas, phone, cable TV lines, or other cable and/or telecommunications systems and appurtenances located within the
rights of way of said weight restricted streets.
D. School buses picking up or dropping off students at locations that are only accessible using the streets listed in this section.
E. Trucks making a lawful home delivery to or picking up a lawful load from a residential location in the village that is only accessible off of said streets.
F. Any truck or vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under a valid over size and/or dimension permit issued by the village under the authority of
section 6-15-301 of this title.
Signs stating "No Thru Trucks Over 12,000 GVW" shall be posted by the director of public works at appropriate locations. (Ord. 2014-56, 6-17-2014)
6-11-1426: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES:
The following sections of the Illinois vehicle code4 are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof:
5/11-1426 Operation of all-terrain vehicles and off highway motorcycles on streets, roads and highways
5/11-1427 Illegal driving or operation
(Ord. 91-69, 9-17-1991)
Chapter 11-1500
BICYCLES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 218/702
6-11-1500: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof:
BICYCLES
Application of Rules 6-5/11-1501
Traffic Laws Apply to Persons Riding Bicycles 6-5/11-1502
Riding on Bicycles 6-5/11-1503
Clinging to Vehicles 6-5/11-1504
Position on Roadway 6-5/11-1505
Carrying Articles 6-5/11-1506
Lamps and Other Equipment on Bicycles 6-5/11-1507
Lamps on Motorized Pedalcycles 6-5/11-1507.1
Inspecting Bicycles 6-5/11-1509
Left Turns 6-5/11-1510
Turn and Stop Signals 6-5/11-1511
Bicycles on Sidewalks 6-5/11-1512
Bicycle Parking 6-5/11-1513
Bicycle Racing 6-5/11-1514
(1984 Code)
6-11-1514.1: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations set forth in the following sections shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public way within the Village.
(Ord. 75-27, 5-6-75)
6-11-1514.2: BICYCLE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall ride, operate or otherwise use a bicycle in any public way within the Village unless and until such bicycle is licensed and registered with
the Bartlett Police Department; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall require the licensing of a bicycle operated by any person who is
traveling through the Village and whose stay in the Village does not exceed twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 75-27, 5-6-75)
6-11-1514.3: REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES:
Any person who owns a bicycle which is operated upon any public way in the Village shall apply to the Police Department for a license. Such license
application shall set forth the applicant's name and address, name of the manufacturer of such bicycle, its manufacturer's serial number, style and general
description. The Police Department shall file all applications for registration of bicycles, keeping a complete and accurate record of the facts appearing
therein, with the license number assigned to each bicycle. (Ord. 75-27, 5-6-75)
6-11-1514.4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Numbering Bicycles: Before a license shall be issued for a bicycle which does not bear a serial number, or the serial number of which is illegible or
insufficient for identification purposes, the Chief of Police shall cause a number to be stamped on the frame of such bicycle.
B. Stickers or Plates: Upon issuance of a license under this Chapter, the Chief of Police shall cause to be delivered to the applicant a metal plate or sticker
bearing a number. This plate or sticker shall be permanently affixed to the bicycle for which it is issued. (Ord. 75-27, 5-6-75)
6-11-1514.5: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for such registration and license shall be fifty cents ($0.50) which shall be paid to the Chief of Police or other delegated authority at the time of the
issuance thereof. All revenues derived from bicycle license fees shall be paid to the village director of finance within twenty four (24) hours. Such revenues
shall be used for the purpose of providing for the actual cost of issuing licenses to the owners and operators of bicycles in the village. (Ord. 75-27, 5-6-
1975; amd. Ord. 2008-108, 10-21-2008, eff. 4-30-2009)
6-11-1514.6: SALE OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 219/702
A. Upon the sale or transfer of any bicycle registered hereunder, it shall be the duty of a purchaser who is a resident of the village, within ten (10) days of
such sale or transfer, to register such bicycle in his name in a manner provided for in the case of an original registrant.
B. Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the police department of every bicycle
purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased, to whom sold, a description of such bicycle by
name or make, the frame number thereof, and the registration number, if any, found thereon. (Ord. 75-27, 5-6-1975)
6-11-1514.7: PARENTS' RESPONSIBILITY:
The parent or guardian of any minor shall not knowingly authorize or permit any such minor to violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 75-27, 5-6-1975)
6-11-1514.8: PENALTY:
The penalty provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this code shall be applicable to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 75-27, 5-6-1975)
Chapter 12
VEHICULAR COMPLIANCE CITATIONS
6-12-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The following sections of chapter 625, acts 5, 25 and 40 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes; known and cited as the "Illinois Vehicle Code", are hereby
adopted by reference to the Bartlett Municipal Code, and violations thereof described as follows shall be subject to the procedures described herein.
Illinois Vehicle
Code
(625 ILCS) Description
Bartlett Municipal Code
Citation
5/3-112(b) Failure to transfer title within 20 days 6-12-1:5/3-112(b)
5/3-411(a) Failure to carry registration card or reciprocity permit - second division vehicle 6-12-1:5/3-411(a)
5/3-413(a) No front/rear registration plate 6-12-1:5/3-413(a)
5/3-413(b) Improper display license plates/sticker 6-12-1:5/3-413(b)
5/3-413(b) Improper display (tinted or obscured plastic covers) 6-12-1:5/3-413(b)
5/3-413(f) Operation of vehicle with expired registration plate or sticker 6-12-1:5/3-413(f)
5/3-416 Failure to notify the Secretary of State of name/address change 6-12-1:5/3-416
5/3-417(a) Failure to immediately apply for lost, stolen, damaged registration card, plate, or registration sticker 6-12-1:5/3-417(a)
5/3-701(a)(1) No valid registration - no valid plate or sticker obtained 6-12-1:5/3-701(a)(1)
5/3-701(a)(2) No valid registration - reciprocity, prorate or apportionment 6-12-1:5/3-701(a)(2)
5/5-201(h) No in-transit plates 6-12-1:5/5-201(h)
5/5-202(e) Failure to display tow truck plate (towed vehicle) 6-12-1:5/5-202(e)
5/11-1404 Riding motorcycle without special equipment 6-12-1:5/11-1404
5/11-1405 No passenger footrests on motorcycles 6-12-1:5/11-1405
5/11-1419.01 Failure to carry single trip revenue permit 6-12-1:5/11-1419.01
5/11-1419.02 Failure to display Motor Fuel Tax identification card 6-12-1:5/11-1419.02
5/11-1419.03 Failure to display valid external Motor Fuel Tax decals 6-12-1:5/11-1419.03
5/11-1426.1(e) Improper operation of non-highway vehicles without proper equipment as required 6-12-1:5/11-1426.1(e)
5/11-1426.2(f) Improper operation of low speed vehicle without proper equipment as required 6-12-1:5/11-1426.2(f)
5/11-1507(a) Bicycle without lamps and other equipment 6-12-1:5/11-1507(a)
5/11-1507(b) Bicycle shall not be equipped with a siren 6-12-1:5/11-1507(b)
5/11-1507.1 Lamps on motorized pedal-cycles 6-12-1:5/11-1507.1
5/12-101(a) Operation of vehicle with unsafe equipment 6-12-1:5/12-101(a)
5/12-201(a) Operation of motorcycle without lighted headlamp 6-12-1:5/12-201(a)
5/12-201(b) Driving vehicles other than motorcycles without 2 lighted headlamps and tail lamps when required 6-12-1:5/12-201(b)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 220/702
5/12-201(c) No rear registration plate light 6-12-1:5/12-201(c)
5/12-202(a) Insufficient clearance, identification or side marker lamps and reflectors - second division vehicle 6-12-1:5/12-202(a)
5/12-202(b) Trailers and semitrailers without required red reflectors 6-12-1:5/12-202(b)
5/12-203(a) Failure to use parking lights while vehicle is standing on highway 6-12-1:5/12-203(a)
5/12-204 Improper lamp or flag on projecting load 6-12-1:5/12-204
5/12-205 Improper use of lamps on towing and towed vehicles 6-12-1:5/12-205
5/12-205.1 Implements of husbandry or slow moving vehicles - display of amber signal lamp 6-12-1:5/12-205.1
5/12-207(a) Improper use of more than 1 spot lamp 6-12-1:5/12-207(a)
5/12-207(b) Improper use of more than 3 auxiliary driving lamps 6-12-1:5/12-207(b)
5/12-208(a) No stop signal lamp or signal device - no stop light 6-12-1:5/12-208(a)
5/12-209(c) Defective backup lights 6-12-1:5/12-209(c)
5/12-210(a) Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 500 feet on approach of vehicle 6-12-1:5/12-210(a)
5/12-210(b) Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within 300 feet of vehicle in same direction 6-12-1:5/12-210(b)
5/12-211(a) Improper lighting on vehicles other than motorcycles - only 1 headlamp 6-12-1:5/12-211(a)
5/12-211(b) Improper use of more than 4 lighted headlights/auxiliary driving lamps 6-12-1:5/12-211(b)
5/12-212(a) Improper use of red light visible from front of vehicle 6-12-1:5/12-212(a)
5/12-212(b) Unlawful use of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights 6-12-1:5/12-212(b)
5/12-401 Unlawful use of metal studded tire 6-12-1:5/12-401
5/12-405(c) Use of unsafe tire 6-12-1:5/12-405(c)
5/12-501(a) Operation of vehicle without windshield 6-12-1:5/12-501(a)
5/12-502 Operation of vehicle without rear reflecting mirror 6-12-1:5/12-502
5/12-503(a) Obstructed view of windshield or side windows adjacent to driver 6-12-1:5/12-503(a)
5/12-503(b) Unlawful application of tinted film to windshield or window(s) adjacent to driver - all vehicles
manufactured after December 31, 1981
6-12-1:5/12-503(b)
5/12-503(c) Obstructed view of any window by stationary or suspended object(s) 6-12-1:5/12-503(c)
5/12-503(d) Operation of vehicle without windshield cleaning device; operation of vehicle with view obstructed by
snow, ice or moisture
6-12-1:5/12-503(d)
5/12-503(e) Obstructed view due to defective condition or repair of any window 6-12-1:5/12-503(e)
5/12-601(a) Operation of vehicle with defective horn 6-12-1:5/12-601(a)
5/12-601(b) Unlawful possession or use of siren 6-12-1:5/12-601(b)
5/12-602 Operation of vehicle with defective or modified exhaust system 6-12-1:5/12-602
5/12-603(b) Operation of vehicle without 2 front seat safety belts - vehicles of 1965 or later model years 6-12-1:5/12-603(b)
5/12-603.1 Failure of driver/front seat occupant(s) to use seat safety belt 6-12-1:5/12-603.1
5/12-604.1(a) Operation of vehicle with television receiver visible to driver 6-12-1:5/12-604.1(a)
5/12-606 Operation of tow truck without: 6-12-1:5/12-606
A. Identifying sign attached on each side
B. Required equipment - 1 broom, shovel, trash can and fire extinguisher
C. Removing roadway debris and spreading dirt or sand on oil/grease deposits
D. Insurance policy in cab
5/12-607(a) Operation of vehicle with unlawfully altered vehicle suspension system - body lifted in excess of 3
inches from chassis
6-12-1:5/12-607(a)
5/12-610(a) Operation of vehicle while wearing headset receiver 6-12-1:5/12-610(a)
5/12-702(a) Operation of second division vehicle without carrying flares/warning devices 6-12-1:5/12-702(a)
5/12-702(c, d, e,
f, g)
Failure to use flares/warning devices when second division vehicle is disabled 6-12-1:5/12-702(c, d, e, f,
g)
5/12-707 Overloaded school bus, commuter van or motor vehicle used for hire 6-12-1:5/12-707
5/12-709(a)(b) Slow moving vehicle emblem violation 6-12-1:5/12-709(a)(b)
5/12-710 Inadequate or no rear fender splash guards 6-12-1:5/12-710
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 221/702
5/12-711 Operation of garbage truck, roll-off hoist or roll-on container without audible backing warning system
6-12-1:5/12-711
5/12-712(a) Failure to display company name on construction equipment 6-12-1:5/12-712(a)
5/12-713(a) Failure to display company name on commercial trucks: construction contractors or subcontractors 6-12-1:5/12-713(a)
5/12-806 Failure to cover school bus sign 6-12-1:5/12-806
5/12-807 Seat belt for driver (school bus) 6-12-1:5/12-807
5/12-808 No fire extinguisher in a school bus 6-12-1:5/12-808
5/12-809 No first aid kit in a school bus 6-12-1:5/12-809
5/12-810 No restraining device for disabled passenger 6-12-1:5/12-810
5/15-106 Failure to fasten loose projecting component 6-12-1:5/15-106
5/15-108 Failure to plank edge of pavement for any vehicle in excess of 8,000 pounds 6-12-1:5/15-108
5/15-109(b) Spilling load on highway or load not secure 6-12-1:5/15-109(b)
5/15-109.1 Failure to cover load when required 6-12-1:5/15-109.1
5/18c-4604(1) Operation without current cab card and Illinois identifier stamp 6-12-1:5/18c-4604(1)
5/18c-4604(2) Transfer a cab card and identifier to a vehicle other than the vehicle for which it was originally
executed
6-12-1:5/18c-4604(2)
5/18c-4604(3) Use of a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp issued to another carrier 6-12-1:5/18c-4604(3)
5/18c-4604(4) Failure to display or present a cab card and Illinois identifier stamp 6-12-1:5/18c-4604(4)
5/18c-4701(1) Operating without trade name, license and registration number of carrier painted or affixed to both
doors of power unit
6-12-1:5/18c-4701(1)
25/4 Transporting child under age of 8; restraint system 6-12-1:25/4
25/4a Children 8 years of age or older but under the age of 19; seat belts 6-12-1:25/4a
40/3-1 Operation of unnumbered snowmobile 6-12-1:40/3-1
40/4-1 Operation of snowmobile without required equipment: 6-12-1:40/4-1
1. 1 white headlamp during darkness
2. 1 rear taillight during darkness
3. Brake system in good mechanical condition
4. Reflective material on each side of cowling
5. Adequate sound suppression equipment
40/5-1(D) Operation of snowmobile without lighted headlamp and taillight 6-12-1:40/5-1(D)
Local ordinance violations of any of the foregoing shall be cited "6-12-1" followed by the applicable act and section number of the Illinois Vehicle Code as
set forth in the left hand column of the above table, and any such citation shall include a description of the violation. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-12-2: AUTHORITY AND PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS:
Whenever a police officer, community service officer, parking enforcement officer or other authorized personnel witnesses a violation of this chapter he or
she may, in lieu of arrest and the filing of a citation complaint and/or a notice of appear in court, issue a citation to such alleged violator a vehicular
compliance citation which contains, but shall not be limited to the information pursuant to subsection 6-20-5D of this title. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-12-3: PENALTIES AND SETTLEMENT OF PENALTY PROCEDURES:
A. Violations: Any person accused of a violation listed in section 6-12-1 of this chapter may settle and compromise the claim pursuant to subsection B of
this section and prior to such person being issued a second notice of violation and/or notice to appear.
B. Vehicular Compliance Citation Violation Penalties; Settlement Of Penalties; Authorization And Procedure: The following procedure regarding settlement
and compromise of vehicular compliance citation violations as set forth in this section is hereby authorized:
1. Any operator or occupants who are issued a vehicular compliance citation for a violation listed in section 6-12-1 of this chapter, may settle and
compromise that citation by paying twenty five dollars ($25.00) to the Village on or before ten (10) days after the date of issuance, not counting the
date of issuance. If paid after that date but not less than seven (7) days before the hearing date, the vehicular compliance citation can be settled and
compromised for fifty dollars ($50.00). After that date, upon a finding of liable by the Administrative Hearing Officer whether by default judgment or
after an administrative adjudication hearing, the total amount of the fine and penalty shall be a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) not to exceed two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each separate violation. Payments received by mail shall be credited as paid on the date received by the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 222/702
C. Adjudication Fines And Penalties: Pursuant to sections 6-20-13 and 6-20-14 of this title any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in
accordance with the provisions of that chapter remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust administrative remedies created under
said chapter, and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt due and owing the Village and the Village may take the necessary
actions to collect said fines and/or penalties. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-12-4: REGISTRATION PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which is registered with the Secretary of State in the name of said alleged violator shall be considered prima
facie proof that said alleged violator was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or vehicle at the time of such alleged violation. (Ord. 2018-98,
8-21-2018)
6-12-5: SECOND NOTICE OF VEHICULAR COMPLIANCE VIOLATION:
Pursuant to subsection 6-20-5M of this title, if the citation is not settled in accordance with subsection 6-12-3B of this chapter within ten (10) days of
issuance, a second notice of violation and/or notice to appear will be mailed and the respondent shall have the option of avoiding an appearance at an
administrative hearing by paying the fine and penalty amount stated on the second notice at least seven (7) days prior to the scheduled hearing date.
Notices shall be mailed in accordance with subsection 6-20-5P of this title. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
Chapter 13-100
INSPECTION OF VEHICLES
6-13-100: STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof:
INSPECTION OF VEHICLES
Operation Without Certificate of Valid Safety Test
Attached to Windshield - Second Division Vehicle 6-5/13-111
Failure to Display Valid Unexpired Emission Inspection
Sticker (affected Illinois counties only) 6-5/13A-104( c)
(Ord. 91-69, 9-17-91)
Chapter 15-100, 15-300
VEHICLE WIDTH, LENGTH AND WEIGHT
6-15-100: STREET OR HIGHWAY DEFINED:
The entire width between boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature maintained by the Village of Bartlett when any part thereof is open to
the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic. (1984 Code)
6-15-101: SCOPE AND EFFECT OF TITLE:
A. It is unlawful for any person to drive or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on, upon or across
any street or highway, any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the limitations stated in this Title or otherwise in violation of this Title.
B. The provisions of this Title governing size, weight and load do not apply to fire apparatus, equipment designed for snow and ice removal operations on
highways and streets owned or operated by the State of Illinois or any political subdivision thereof, or to any service vehicle making one service
delivery per day on any Village street or highway. (1984 Code)
6-15-102: WIDTH OF VEHICLES:
The maximum width of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed eight feet (8'). (1984 Code)
6-15-103: HEIGHT OF VEHICLES:
The height of a vehicle from the under side of the tire to the top of the vehicle, inclusive of load, shall not exceed thirteen feet six inches (13'6"). (1984
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 223/702
6-15-105: PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES:
No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any highway with any load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of
such vehicle nor extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof. (1984 Code)
6-15-107: LENGTH OF VEHICLES:
A. No vehicle, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of forty two feet (42') extreme overall dimension.
B. No truck tractor and semitrailer, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of fifty five feet (55') extreme overall dimension, except that such
combination when specially designed to transport motor vehicles may have a length of sixty feet (60') extreme overall dimension, subject to those
exceptions and special rules otherwise stated in this Title. No other combination of vehicles, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of sixty feet
(60') extreme overall dimension, except that a truck trailer with semitrailer drawing one trailer, unladen or with load, or a tractor and stinger-steered
semi-trailer, or any combination when specially designed to transport motor vehicles, with load, may have a length of sixty five feet (65') extreme overall
dimension on any four (4) lane highway. (1984 Code)
6-15-109: SPILLING LOADS AND DEPOSITING DEBRIS ON HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED:
A. No vehicle shall be driven upon a Village street or highway in such a manner as to cause any dirt, clay, mud, stones or any other material to be
deposited upon such street or highway. The owner or operator of any vehicle which deposits dirt, clay, mud, stones or other material upon a street or
highway shall promptly remove the same, prior to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the day on which such material is so spilled or deposited.
B. No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless said load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent said
covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. (1984 Code)
6-15-111: WHEEL AND AXLE LOADS AND GROSS WEIGHTS:
The Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 5/15-111) is hereby expressly incorporated herein and made part of this Section by this
reference, as if fully set forth herein; provided, however, that the weight restriction set forth in Section 6-11-1417.31 of this Title, shall be applicable to the
Prospect Street/Soo line railroad crossing. (Ord. 88-90, 9-20-88)
6-15-112: OFFICERS TO WEIGH VEHICLES AND REQUIRE REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOADS:
A. Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of
the same either by means of a portable or stationary scales. If such scales are not available at the place where such vehicle is stopped, the police
officer shall require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest available scale that has been tested and approved by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture.
B. Whenever any officer, upon weighing a vehicle and the load, determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer shall require the driver to stop the
vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the
limit permitted under this Title and shall forthwith arrest the driver or owner or both. All material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator
of the vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator.
C. Whenever any axle load of a vehicle exceeds the weight limits permitted by this Title by one thousand (1,000) pounds or less, the owner or operator of
the vehicle must shift or remove the excess so as to comply. No arrest ticket shall be issued to the owner or operator of the vehicle by any officer if the
excess weight is either shifted or removed as required by this paragraph. (1984 Code)
6-15-301: SPECIAL PERMITS:
A. The corporate authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction may, in their discretion, upon application in writing and good cause being
shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in this Title or otherwise not in conformity with this Title upon any highway under Village jurisdiction
and for the maintenance of which the Village is responsible, only upon the conditions heretofore set forth. Except for an application to move directly
across a highway, the application shall show that the load to be moved by such a vehicle or combination of vehicles cannot reasonably be dismantled
or disassembled.
B. The application for any such permit shall: 1) state if the applicant is an authorized carrier under the Illinois Motor Carrier of Property Law, if so, his
certificate, registration or permit number issued by the Illinois Commerce Commission; 2) specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles (including the
vehicle's make, serial number, Illinois registration number, empty weight, number of axles) and load to be operated or moved and whether such permit
is requested for a single trip or for limited continuous operation; 3) state the points of origin and destination of overweight vehicles or loads and of
oversize vehicles or loads including estimated number of movements per day on each Village street; and 4) state if the vehicles or loads are being
transported for hire; and 5) identify the owner of the vehicle and give owner's address and phone number. No permits for the movement of a vehicle or
load for hire shall be issued to any applicant who is required under the Illinois Motor Carrier of Property Law to have a certificate, registration or permit
and does not have such certificate, registration or permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 224/702
C. The corporate authorities, when not inconsistent with traffic safety, may issue such permit or, if such permit is issued, they may prescribe the route or
routes to be travelled, limit the number of trips, establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicles described may be operated on the
highways indicated, or otherwise limit or prescribe conditions of operations of such vehicle or vehicles, when necessary to assure against undue
damage to the road foundations, surface or structures and may require such undertaking or other security as may be deemed necessary to
compensate for any injury to any road way or road structure.
D. Every permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer or
authorized agent of any authority granting the permit and no person shall violate any of the terms or conditions of such special permit.
E. Whenever any vehicle is operated or movement made under a permit fraudulently obtained or in violation of a permit issued in accordance with this
Section, the person to whom such permit was granted, in addition to the driver of such vehicle, is guilty of such violation and either or both persons may
be prosecuted for such violation.
Penalties for violation of this Section shall be in addition to any penalties for violation of other sections of this Title.
F. The Village, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, shall collect a fee from the applicant for the issuance of a permit to operate or move a vehicle
or combination of vehicles or load as authorized in Section 6-15-301 of this Title. The charge for each permit shall consist of 1) an issuance fee, 2) fees
for any dimension, axle weight or gross weight in excess of the maximum size or weight specified in this Title, and 3) additional fees for special
investigations and special police escort when required.
With respect to issuance fees, the charge shall be sufficient to cover the cost of processing, issuing, analyzing and enforcing the special permit. With
respect to overweight fees, the charge shall be sufficient to compensate in part for the cost to the Village of making repairs necessitated by the extra
wear and tear on that portion of the highways over which the load is to be moved.
With respect to overdimension permits, the fee shall be sufficient to compensate in part for the special privilege of transporting oversize vehicle or
vehicle combination and load, and the additional cost to the Village of providing standby police protection.
Fees to be paid by the applicant are to be at the rates specified in this Title and in determining the fees, all dimensions shall be to the next nearest foot
except as otherwise stated, all weights shall be to the next highest one thousand (1,000) pounds, and all distances shall be to the nearest tenth of a
mile as determined from the Official Bartlett Map. (1984 Code)
1. Fees for special permits to move vehicles with overweight axle loads, gross weight or oversized loads shall be paid by the applicant to the Village,
which shall credit them to the road and bridge fund. Such fees shall be at a flat rate for a single trip or a limited continuous operation not to exceed
ninety (90) days in duration.
The fee for a single trip of any overweight axle load, gross weight or oversized load shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The fee for a limited continuous
operation not to exceed ninety (90) days shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 88-90, 9-20-88)
G. No permit shall be issued to operate a vehicle in excess of the weight limits set forth in Section 6-15-111 upon a gravel road (and any special permit
issued pursuant to this Title shall be revoked) unless and until the applicant causes to be spread upon such road sufficient oil, calcium chloride or other
dust control chemicals to provide a dust-free surface. (1984 Code)
6-15-113: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
Whenever any vehicle is operating in violation of the provisions of this Title, the owner or driver or both of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such
violation and either or both the owner and the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
A. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of Section 6-15-111 of this Title shall be fined in an amount equal to two cents ($0.02) per
pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000) pounds or less; four cents
($0.04) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or
less; six cents ($0.06) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds three thousand (3,000) pounds and is four thousand
(4,000) pounds or less; eight cents ($0.08) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds four thousand (4,000) pounds and is
five thousand (5,000) pounds or less; and ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds five thousand
(5,000) pounds; provided, however, that in no event shall the penalty computed pursuant to the provisions of this Section exceed the maximum penalty
which a Village is authorized by law to impose.
B. Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions of Section 6-15-301 of this Title, by operating
under a fraudulent permit or under a permit not specifically covering the move, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such
violation and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. When any person, firm or corporation is convicted of
such violation, the permit shall be null and void and such person, firm or corporation shall be fined in an amount not less than ten cents ($0.10) per
pound for each pound the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds the gross weight of such vehicles allowable under Section 6-15-111 of this Title.
Penalties for violations of this subsection shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for violation of Section 6-15-301 of this Title.
C. Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions of Section 6-15-301 of this Title by operating with
axle weights in excess of those authorized in such permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either the
owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of such violation shall be fined in an
amount not less than five cents ($0.05) nor more than ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound of excess weight on such axle or tandem axle in
excess of the weight authorized in the permit when the excess is one thousand (1,000) pounds or less; not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than
fifteen cents ($0.15) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000)
pounds or less; not less than fifteen cents ($0.15) nor more than twenty cents ($0.20) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess
exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; not less than twenty five cents ($0.25) nor more than thirty cents
($0.30) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds three thousand (3,000) pounds and is four thousand (4,000) pounds or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 225/702
less; not less than thirty five cents ($0.35) nor more than forty cents ($0.40) per pound for each pound or excess weight when the excess exceeds four
thousand (4,000) pounds and is five thousand (5,000) pounds or less; and not less than forty cents ($0.40) nor more than fifty cents ($0.50) per pound
for each pound or excess weight when the excess exceeds five thousand (5,000) pounds. (1984 Code)
6-15-114: ADDITIONAL STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof:
Failure to Fasten Loose Projecting Member 6-5/15-106
Failure to Plank Edge of Pavement for any Vehicle in
Excess of 8,000 Pounds 6-5/15-108
Operating Loading Vehicle Without Securely Fastening
Covering 6-5/15-109(b)
Unlawful Pushing of Disabled Vehicle 6-5/15-114
(Ord. 91-69, 9-17-91)
Chapter 18C-4000
MOTOR CARRIERS OF PROPERTY
6-18C-4000: STATE LAWS ADOPTED:
The following sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes) are hereby expressly incorporated herein by reference and made a part
hereof:
Operation Without Registration - Intra-State or
Interstate 6-5/18c-4104(a)
Operation Without Current Cab Card and Illinois
Identifier Stamp 6-5/18c-4604(1)
Use of a Cab Card and Illinois Identifier Stamp
Issued to Another Carrier 6-5/18c-4604(3)
Failure to Display or Present a Cab Card and Illinois
Identifier Stamp 6-5/18c-4604(4)
Operating Without Trade Name, License and
Registration Number of Carrier Painted or Affixed
to Both Doors of Power Unit 6-5/18c-4701(1)
(Ord. 91-69, 9-17-91)
Chapter 19-100
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN THE COMMISSION OF
CERTAIN OFFENSES
6-19-100: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in chapter 1, section 5/1-101 through 5/1-300 as subsequently renumbered of the Illinois vehicle code1 are hereby expressly
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-19-101: VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Any motor vehicle operated, used, or in the physical control of any person, with the express or implied permission of the owner of record (as registered
with the secretary of state, state of Illinois), on any public highway within the village of Bartlett during the commission of or in furtherance of any offense or
violation set forth in section 6-19-102 of this part shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the village of Bartlett and the owner of record of said
vehicle shall be liable to the village for a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any towing and storage fees
as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2012-48, 6-5-2012)
6-19-102: VIOLATION OR OFFENSES SUBJECT TO SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 226/702
Violation Or Offense Statute Reference
A.
Driving while driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, excluding a
suspension for unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing
625 ILCS 5/6-303
B.
Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compounds, or any combination thereof or
similar provision of this code
625 ILCS 5/11-501
C.
Aggravated fleeing or attempt to elude a police officer 625 ILCS 5/11-
204.1
D.
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-17, 2-21-2017)
E.
Firearms offenses including unlawful use of a weapon 720 ILCS 5/24-1
Unlawful use or possession of weapons by a felon 720 ILCS 5/24-1.1
Aggravated discharge of a firearm 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2
Reckless discharge of a firearm 720 ILCS 5/24-1.5
Aggravated unlawful use of a weapon 720 ILCS 5/24-1.6
F.
Possession of a controlled substance 720 ILCS 570/402
G.
Possession of cannabis in excess of 30 grams 720 ILCS 550/4(c),
(d), (e), (f), and (g)
H.
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-17, 2-21-2017)
I. (Rep. by Ord. 2017-17, 2-21-2017)
J.
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-17, 2-21-2017)
K.
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-17, 2-21-2017)
L.
Any crime defined as a "forcible felony" when it also involves the use of a vehicle 720 ILCS 5/2-8
M.
Driving without a valid driver's license: 625 ILCS 5/6-101
1. Except a person that had a valid driver's license that is expired for less than 1 year
2. Except a person who is less than 17 years of age operating a motor vehicle on any street or highway whose license
may be invalid because of a violation of the Child Curfew Act1
Note:
1.625 ILCS 5/6-107.1(b). See also section 5-5-1 of this Code.
(Ord. 2017-17, 2-21-2017)
6-19-103: EXISTING REGULATIONS NOT ABROGATED:
A. The provisions of this part shall be in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing State or Federal law or Village ordinance that
relates to the seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any penalty provided herein shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may be
assessed or imposed by a court for violation of any criminal offense or local ordinance violation offense.
B. Any and all fees incurred for towing and/or storage of a vehicle seized under this part or part 4 of this title shall be those approved by the Chief of Police
for all towing companies authorized to tow for the Village, which shall be charged in addition to the civil penalty imposed by section 6-19-101 of this
part. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-19-104: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this part shall not apply if at the time of the offense the vehicle was stolen and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authority
within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered, or the vehicle was otherwise operated without the knowledge and express or implied consent
of the registered owner, or as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-19-105: NOTICE; TOWING; RELEASE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 227/702
A. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this part and the police officer
has arrested the operator or person in physical control of the vehicle for any of the offenses set forth in section 6-19-102 of this part, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the Village. Prior to or at the time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify
or make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee or any person identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any
person who is found to be in the physical control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's or
lessee's right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted in accordance with subsection 6-19-106A of this part and hearing
pursuant to subsection 6-19-106B of this part. The vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearing(s) provided for in subsections 6-
19-106A and B of this part, unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or someone on his, her or their behalf, or a lienholder, posts with the Village a
cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays the towing and storage charges.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the arresting police officer may release the vehicle prior to towing if the vehicle subject to
seizure and impoundment was not owned or leased by the person placed under arrest and the registered owner or some other person legally
authorized to possess the vehicle shall arrive at the scene of the arrest prior to the actual removal or towing of the vehicle and the lawful owner or
person lawfully entitled to possession of the vehicle possesses a valid operator's license, proof of ownership or registration, proof of liability insurance
and would not, as determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner, or who would
otherwise, by operating the motor vehicle, not be in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code. If the vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment is owned or
leased by the person under arrest, the arresting officer may, prior to the actual removal or towing of the vehicle, release the vehicle to another person
with the written consent of the owner or lessee, provided that such other person possesses a valid operator's license, proof of liability insurance and
would not, as determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner or who would otherwise,
by operating the motor vehicle, not be in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2012-48, 6-5-2012)
6-19-106: HEARINGS:
A. Preliminary Hearing: The owner of record or lessee of a vehicle seized and impounded may contest the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle by
requesting a preliminary hearing. The owner or lessee must make a request for a preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours of the seizure. The
request shall be deemed filed upon delivery to the Chief of Police of the Bartlett Police Department. The preliminary hearing request shall be in writing
and the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall conduct the preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the request, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, or Village holidays, in which case the preliminary hearing shall be heard on the next business day after the request. All interested
parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after
the hearing, the Chief of Police or his/her designee determines that there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment, he/she shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as herein provided, unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or lienholder,
posts with the Village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and pays any and all applicable towing and storage fees. If the
Chief of Police or his/her designee determines that there is no such probable cause to believe the vehicle was used or operated during the commission
or attempted commission of the offense set forth in section 6-19-102 of this part, the vehicle shall be returned to the registered owner or lessee without
penalty. (Ord. 2012-48, 6-5-2012)
B. Notice; Procedures; Hearings: Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall notify the
registered owner of record, lessee of record, and any lienholder of record, of the seized and impounded vehicle either by personal service or by first
class mail, to the interested party's address as recorded with the Secretary of State, of the date, time and location of the hearing to be conducted. The
initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than forty five (45) days after the date of the mailing of the notice of the hearing. The owner,
lessee and/or lienholder shall appear at the hearing and shall enter a determination to contest or not contest the basis of the seizure and impoundment.
If the owner, lessee or lienholder elects to contest the basis for the impoundment and seizure, a hearing shall be held immediately, unless continued by
order of the Hearing Officer. Continuances shall only be granted for good cause shown. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the hearing date, the Hearing Officer may, at the request of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, lienholder of record, or the Village, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. Subpoenas for the production of witnesses
and records may be issued upon request of any interested party. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the
Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used or operated in connection with or during the commission or
attempted commission of any offense set forth in section 6-19-102 of this part, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record
and/or lessee of the vehicle civilly liable to the Village for an administrative penalty in an amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and the Hearing
Officer shall order the vehicle to remain impounded until the owner, lessee or someone on the owner's or lessee's behalf, or the lienholder, pays the
administrative penalty to the Village plus any and all fees to the towing entity or Village for the towing and storage of the vehicle as the case may be. At
the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment. If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the Administrative Hearing Officer, any administrative fee or bond posted to
secure the release of the impounded vehicle shall be forfeited to the Village. Unless the Administrative Hearing Officer overturns the basis for the
vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid. If after proper service of notice, the owner of record, lessee, and/or lienholder of record fails to appear at the hearing, the Hearing
Officer shall conduct the hearing in absentia and, if appropriate, enter a default order in favor of the Village, a copy of which default order shall be sent
to the registered owner and/or lessee of record by first class mail or personal service. If at the hearing held in absentia the Hearing Officer finds that no
such violation occurred, the Hearing Officer shall order the immediate return of the vehicle and cash bond, if posted, to the owner or lessee without
assessing any penalty. If the Administrative Hearing Officer finds that the Village impounded a vehicle exceeding its authority under this Code, the
Village shall be liable to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle for the cost of storage fees and reasonable attorney's fees.
C. Official Record: All hearings shall be recorded and said recording shall be the official record of the proceedings. All findings, decisions and orders of the
Hearing Officer shall be reduced to writing, signed by the Hearing Officer at the conclusion of the administrative hearing, with a copy given to the
owner, lessee and/or lienholder who is or are present, and otherwise served upon all interested parties within seven (7) days after the hearing by first
class mail or personal service. (Ord. 2018-30, 4-3-2018)
6-19-107: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY:
If an administrative penalty is imposed, the penalty, or balance of the penalty, shall constitute a debt due and owing to the Village of Bartlett. All fines or
penalties shall be paid into the General Corporate Fund of the Village of Bartlett. If a cash bond has been posted the bond shall be forfeited and applied to
the penalty. If a vehicle is impounded when a penalty is imposed, and no cash bond has been posted or the bond posted is insufficient to pay the full
amount of the penalty imposed, the Village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicle as provided by law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 228/702
Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty or administrative fee imposed under this title which remains unpaid in whole or in part
after the deadline for seeking judicial review under the Administrative Review Law may also be enforced against the owner or lessee in the same manner
as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. Except as may otherwise be provided in this part, all vehicles shall continue to be impounded
until the penalty is paid to the Village and any applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the towing entity or Village, as the case may be, in which
case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle, or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to
satisfy a judgment and lien as provided by law. If the vehicle is not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility and the administrative penalty
imposed and applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after the expiration of time in which administrative review of the
Hearing Officer's determination may be sought, or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the
Village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned or unclaimed. The vehicle may be disposed of in the manner provided by law for
the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles under article II, chapter 42, of the Illinois Vehicle Code, and section 6-4-308 of this title and further
provided all required notices have been sent in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2018-30, 4-3-2018)
6-19-108: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Except as may otherwise be provided by law or by order of the Hearing Officer, no owner, lienholder of record, or other person shall be legally entitled to
take possession of a seizure and impoundment vehicle until the bond, administrative penalty and towing and storage fees have been paid. The foregoing
notwithstanding, whenever a person or other entity with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure or repossession
proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if the lienholders of record, each agree in writing to refund to the Village the amount of
the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lienholders of record, not to exceed the administrative penalty, plus the
applicable towing and storage fees. (Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-19-109: HEARING OFFICER:
The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Village Board of the Village of Bartlett. The Hearing
Officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for a minimum of three (3) years next preceding the date of his/her appointment.
(Ord. 2010-79, 10-19-2010)
6-19-110: DECISION REVIEW:
Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the Hearing Officer may appeal that decision under the Illinois Administrative Review Law3. (Ord. 2018-30, 4-3-
2018)
Chapter 20
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF PARKING AND VEHICLE COMPLIANCE
VIOLATIONS
6-20-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be entitled the ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF PARKING AND VEHICLE COMPLIANCE VIOLATIONS. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-
2018)
6-20-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and efficient enforcement through administrative adjudication of violations of ordinances regulating the
standing and parking of vehicles (title 6, part 11-1300, "Stopping, Standing And Parking", of this title); and the condition and use of vehicle equipment
(section 6-12-1 of this title). The administrative adjudication system set forth in this chapter is established pursuant to the authority conferred by section 1-
2.1-1 et seq., of the Illinois Municipal Code1 and section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code2. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-3: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created a system providing for the administrative adjudication of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance
violations. For the purposes of this chapter "compliance violation" or "compliance regulation violations" means a violation of an ordinance governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or non-moving vehicular regulations. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations shall provide for an Ordinance
Enforcement Administrator, an Administrative Hearing Officer, a System Coordinator/Computer Operator, and hearing room personnel with the power,
authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth:
A. Ordinance Enforcement Administrator: The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall be the Fiscal Services Manager or his designee. The Ordinance
Enforcement Administrator shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 229/702
2. Adopt, distribute and process vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance citations and other notices as may be required under
this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
3. Collect money paid as fines and penalties assessed for violations of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations
ordinances.
4. Certify copies of final determinations of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations liability and factual reports
verifying that the final determination of standing, parking, and compliance regulation violations liability was issued in accordance with this chapter
and section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.
5. Certify reports to the Illinois Secretary of State concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, hereinafter set forth, and those of section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.
6. Review final determinations of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations liability, or validity of notice of impending
driver's license suspension, in an administrative review capacity in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, hereinafter set forth.
7. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
8. Obtain the Village Attorney's advice and consent regarding the method of collecting unpaid fines and penalties through the Illinois Debt Recovery
Offset Portal (IDROP) program through the Illinois State Comptrollers' Office or by either filing complaints in the Circuit Court or selecting or
appointing an individual or agency to act on behalf of this Village in filing complaints seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all
post judgment remedies available by current law.
B. Administrative Hearing Officer: The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Village
Board and shall serve pursuant to the terms set forth in an employment agreement for such services approved by the Corporate Authorities of the
Village. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be subject to removal by the Corporate Authorities. In making selections, the Corporate Authorities
shall consider all pertinent information, including at a minimum:
1. A candidate's ability to comply with job description as set forth herein.
2. Background and performance data to the Village Administrator on file with the Village, or otherwise obtained by the Village.
3. Whether the candidate meets the statutory criteria as an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
4. Demonstrate a minimum of three (3) years' experience as an Administrative Hearing Officer for a program of administrative adjudication of Municipal
ordinance violations; or
5. Successfully complete a formal training program, which includes instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which they will
conduct; orientation to each subject area of the Code violations that they will adjudicate; observation of administrative hearings; and participation in
hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders pursuant to chapter 65, act 5, section 1-2.1-4(c) of the Illinois Municipal
Code3, as amended.
C. Duties: The Administrative Hearing Officer shall:
1. Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the adjudicator.
2. Administer oaths.
3. Hear testimony and/or accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of an ordinance violation.
4. Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant papers or documentation provided the applicable witness
fees provided in section 4.3 of the Circuit Courts Act, as amended, have been paid by the party requesting the subpoena.
5. Rule upon objections and the admissibility of evidence.
6. Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violations set forth in section 6-20-10 of this
chapter.
7. Make a final determination of the liability for any vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations.
8. Provide for the accurate recording of the administrative adjudication hearings, and preserve and authenticate all evidence introduced on the record
of the hearing, including all exhibits.
D. System Coordinator/Computer Operator: The System Coordinator/Computer Operator shall be appointed by the Village Administrator and is hereby
authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer programs for the administrative adjudication system created in this chapter. The System
Coordinator/Computer Operator shall be responsible for entering and tracking data and producing and when applicable, generating written
documentation pertaining to:
1. Citation information.
2. Hearing dates and notice dates.
3. Fine and penalty assessments and payments.
4. Issuance of payment receipts.
5. Succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of liability, and notice of impending driver's license suspension, as directed by the
Ordinance Enforcement Administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
6. Records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 230/702
E. Hearing Room Personnel: The hearing room personnel shall be appointed by the Village Administrator and shall otherwise be employed as full time
Village police officers. The hearing room personnel are hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Maintain hearing room decorum.
2. Have and execute the authority granted to courtroom deputies of the Circuit Court.
3. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the Administrative Hearing Officer or Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator.
F. Multiple Positions: Nothing in this chapter shall be intended to prohibit one person from holding and fulfilling the requirements of one or more of the
above stated positions or offices, or prohibit an Administrative Hearing Officer appointed to hear matters under this chapter from serving as the
Administrative Hearing Officer appointed to hear matters pursuant to title 1, chapter 15, of this Code.
G. Compensation: Compensation to be paid for each of the above stated positions and office(s) shall be as determined and approved by the Corporate
Authorities of the Village. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-5: PROCEDURE:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations shall be in accordance with the
following procedures and final determinations of liability of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations, validity of notice of
impending driver's license suspension, and collections shall be made only in accordance with the provisions set forth below:
A. Violation Citation Or Ticket: A vehicular standing and parking violation and vehicle compliance violation citation or ticket ("citation") shall be issued by
the persons authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.
B. Authorization: All police officers, community service officers, the parking enforcement officer and other authorized personnel shall have the authority to
issue citations.
C. Detection Of Violations: Any individual authorized to issue a citation pursuant to this chapter who detects a violation of any applicable provision of this
Code shall issue and serve a citation as set forth in this chapter.
D. Contents Of Citation: The vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations citation shall contain, but shall not be limited to,
the following information:
1. The date, time and place of the violation.
2. The particular vehicular standing, parking, or vehicle compliance regulation violated.
3. The vehicle make and state registration number.
4. The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
5. The identification number of the person issuing the citation and his or her signature which shall certify the correctness of the specified information as
provided in section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.
6. Information as to the availability of an administrative hearing at which the registered owner or lessee may appear in person and contest the citation
on its merits and the time and manner in which such hearing may be had.
7. Payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
8. Information as to the availability for an adjudication in writing by which the registered owner or lessee may contest in writing without personally
appearing the merits of the citation and the manner in which such contest in writing may be had.
E. Service Of Citations: Service of the citations shall be made by the person issuing such notice by either:
1. Affixing the original or a facsimile of the citation to an unlawfully standing or parked vehicle.
2. Handing the citation to the registered owner, operator or lessee of the vehicle, if present.
F. Certification Of Facts Alleged In Citation: The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation citations shall
be certified by the person issuing said notice by either:
1. Signing his or her name to the citation at the time of service.
2. Signing a single certificate, to be retained by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all citations or printed records
produced by the device while under his/her control when the citation is produced by a computer device.
G. Retention Of Citations: The original or a facsimile of the citation or in the case of a notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record
generated by the device showing the facts entered on the notice shall be retained by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and kept as a record in
the ordinary course of business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 231/702
H. Prima Facie Evidence Of Correctness: Any violation notices, citations issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice or the
computer generated record, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
I. Admissibility: The violation notices, citations, copies, or computer generated records shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal
proceeding.
J. Action Upon Receiving Citation: A person to whom a citation has been served pursuant to this section shall within ten (10) days from the date of the
citation: 1) pay the indicated fine; or 2) complete and submit the Request for Parking Citation Review form to have his or her citation reviewed by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee; 3) submit a request to contest the citation in writing and the materials set forth in subsection 6-20-9A of this
chapter to obtain an adjudication in writing; or 4) request an administrative hearing date as set forth in subsection L of this section to contest the
charged violation.
If a respondent has completed and timely submitted the "Request for Parking Citation Review" form to have his or her citation reviewed by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, the respondent will receive a copy of the Chief of Police's decision on whether the citation should be dismissed or remain
in effect.
K. Contest In Writing: If the respondent submits documentary evidence to contest in writing pursuant to section 6-20-9 of this chapter, the respondent shall
be served with a copy of the Administrative Hearing Officer's determination of liability or nonliability in accordance with subsection 6-20-9D of this
chapter.
L. Administrative Hearing: If the respondent requests an administrative hearing date to contest the citation, the respondent shall be served with notice of
hearing which will include the date, time and location of the hearing in accordance with subsection P of this section. A submitted, complete "Request
for a Local Adjudication Hearing Date" form shall be deemed timely if postmarked and mailed or delivered before the due date on the parking or
compliance citation.
Where a respondent who has requested an administrative hearing date either fails to pay the indicated fine prior to the hearing or fails to appear at a
hearing, a default judgment and determination liability shall be entered and a fine imposed in the applicable amount of the fine indicated on the notice
of violation, unless the Administrative Hearing Officer enters a determination of nonliability based on the testimony or other evidence presented during
the prove up resulting in a default judgment. Failure to pay the fine within twenty one (21) days of issuance of a determination of liability by default will
result in the imposition of a late payment penalty pursuant to section 6-20-10 of this chapter. Upon the occurrence of a final determination of liability,
any unpaid fine and penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the Village. The respondent shall be served with a notice of the final determination of
liability in accordance with section 6-20-7 of this chapter.
M. Second Notice Of Parking, Standing, Or Compliance Violation: If no response is made in accordance with subsection J of this section, the Village
Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall cause a second notice of parking, standing, or compliance violation to be sent to the respondent in
accordance with subsection P of this section. The notice shall specify the date and location of the violation, the make and State registration number of
the cited vehicle, the Code provision violated, the applicable fine, and the time and manner in which the respondent may obtain an adjudication in
writing or appear at the scheduled hearing to contest the violation.
The second notice of parking, standing, or compliance violation shall also state that failure to pay the indicated fine and any applicable penalty, or to
appear at a hearing or contest a vehicular standing, parking, or vehicle compliance violation in writing on the merits in the time and manner specified,
will result in a default judgment and final determination of liability for the cited violation in the amount of the fine or penalty indicated, and that upon the
occurrence of a final determination of violation liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, available administrative or judicial
procedures for review, or any unpaid fine or penalty, or both, will constitute a debt due and owing the Village.
The respondent shall have the option of avoiding an appearance at an administrative hearing by completing either of the following options at least
seven (7) days prior to the scheduled hearing date set forth in the second notice of parking, standing, or compliance violation: 1) paying the fine and
penalty amount, or 2) file a request to contest the citation in writing pursuant to subsection 6-20-9B of this chapter. Payment of the fine is an admission
of liability and will act as a final disposition of the violation.
N. Final Determination Of Liability: A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or vehicle compliance liability shall be sent following a
determination of liability, or upon conclusion of any administrative or judicial review, as is hereinafter set forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following information and warnings:
1. A statement that the unpaid fine or penalty, or both is a debt due and owing the Village.
2. A warning that failure to pay the fine or penalty due and owing the Village within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the final determination of
liability may result in the Village utilizing the Illinois Debt Recovery Offset Portal (IDROP) program through the Illinois State Comptrollers' Office as a
lawful means of collecting the judgment, or the filing of a petition in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty, or both, rendered a judgment
as provided by this section.
3. A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended for failure to pay fines and/or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing and/or
parking regulation violations under section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code4, as amended, and incorporated herein by reference.
O. Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension: A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license shall be sent to any person
determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing, or both, on ten (10) or more vehicular standing and/or
parking regulation violations:
1. The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing, or both, within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice will result in the
Village's notifying the Illinois Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under section 6-306.5 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, as amended, and incorporated herein by reference.
2. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
Illinois Secretary of State.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 232/702
3. The notice shall also state the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an original citation or, in the case of a ticket produced by a computerized
device, a signed single certificate of the citation imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the Village along with a
request to the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator for the photostatic copy or certificate.
P. Notices: The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall serve the notice of hearing, the second notice of parking, standing, or compliance violation, the
Administrative Hearing Officer's notice of determination of liability, the notice of final determination of liability, and the notice of impending driver's
license suspension, where applicable, by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as recorded with
the Secretary of State or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office
approved database, or, under section 11-1306, or subsection (p) of section 11-208.6 or 11-208.9, or subsection (p) of section 11-208.8 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database. The service shall be
deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
If the vehicle is registered in a state other than Illinois, the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall send the appropriate notice to the address of the
registered owner as recorded in such other state's registry of motor vehicles. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations on its merits shall be
conducted in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Persons Entitled To Hearings: The registered owner or operator of a vehicle cited for a vehicular standing and/or parking regulation violation or a vehicle
compliance violation shall be entitled to an administrative hearing pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, and may
contest the merits of the alleged violation, and during which formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply. The lessee of the cited vehicle shall
also be entitled to an administrative hearing pursuant to section 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, both statutory provisions being
incorporated into this chapter by reference.
B. Hearing Dates: Hearing dates shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in the citation issued and served, or such additional notices issued in
accordance with this chapter.
C. Recordings: Hearings shall be recorded.
D. Failure To Appear: Persons who do not appear on their scheduled administrative hearing date shall have a default judgement entered against them.
E. Administrative Hearing Officer's Determination: Hearings shall result in a default judgment or a determination of liability or nonliability, made by the
Administrative Hearing Officer, who shall consider facts, testimony and/or other evidence without the application of formal or technical rules of
evidence.
The Administrative Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and/or penalties in accordance with section 6-20-10 of this
chapter.
The notice of the determination of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be served either in person at the administrative hearing or by first class mail,
postage prepaid. If mailed, service of the notice of determination shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States mail.
F. Representation By Attorney: Persons appearing to contest the alleged vehicular standing and parking violation and vehicle compliance violation on its
merits may be represented by counsel at their own expense, present witnesses, and cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request the
Administrative Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant
documents.
G. Review: The final determination of any matter which may be decided by the Administrative Hearing Officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-7: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations liability shall occur following the failure to pay the total
assessed fine and penalty after the Administrative Hearing Officer's determination of liability and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any judicial
review procedures set forth in section 6-20-12 of this chapter; or the failure to file a petition to vacate a default judgment as set forth in section 6-20-8 of
this chapter.
In regard to final determinations of liability of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations made under this chapter, the
Administrative Hearing Officer's determination of liability shall become final upon denial of a timely petition to vacate and/or set aside that determination, or
upon expiration of the period for filing the petition to vacate without a filing have been made where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the
alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-8: VACATE DEFAULT JUDGMENT:
A petition to vacate or set aside a default judgment and determination of liability may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the manner
and subject to the restrictions and grounds hereinafter set forth:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 233/702
A. A petition to set aside a default judgment and determination of liability must be filed with the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator in the Police Records
Department within, but not later than, twenty one (21) days from the date the determination of liability is made.
B. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall act upon the petitions timely filed and render a decision thereon within thirty (30) days of the date filed.
C. The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be limited to the following:
1. The person against whom the determination of liability is made was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the vehicular standing
and parking violation or vehicle compliance violation citation was issued.
2. The person having paid the fine and any penalty.
3. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
D. Should the default judgment and determination of liability by the Administrative Hearing Officer be set aside, the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator
shall:
1. Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that the determination of liability has been set aside.
2. Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of the date, time and place for a new hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.
3. Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address
set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of liability.
4. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notices are deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-9: CONTEST IN WRITING PROCEDURES:
Any person who has been served a vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation citation, in accordance with this chapter, may contest the validity
of the alleged violation without personally appearing at an administrative hearing by:
A. Complete Contest Citation Portion: Completing, in full the "Contest a Citation in Writing" portion of the "Request for a Local Adjudication Hearing Date"
form, and filing it with the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator in the Police Records Department, postmarked and mailed or delivered before the due
date on the parking or compliance citation.
Signing the space on the "Request for a Local Adjudication Hearing Date" form and acknowledging that his or her personal appearance at the
administrative hearing is waived and thereby consents to the Administrative Hearing Officer making his/her determination of liability decision based on
the statement/testimony and any documentation that was provided by the respondent with his or her request; or
B. Complete Hearing Request Form: Completing, in full the "Request for a Written Local Adjudication Hearing" form, and filing it with the Ordinance
Enforcement Administrator in the Police Records Department, postmarked and mailed or delivered not less than seven (7) days before the scheduled
hearing date set forth in the second notice of parking, standing or compliance violation issued pursuant to subsection 6-20-5M of this chapter.
Signing the space on the "Request for a Written Local Adjudication Hearing" form and acknowledging that his or her personal appearance at the local
adjudication hearing is waived and thereby consents to the Administrative Hearing Officer making his/her determination of liability decision based on
the statement/testimony and any documentation provided by the respondent with his or her request.
C. Determination Of Liability: Upon review of the materials submitted in accordance with subsection A or B of this section, the Administrative Hearing
Officer shall make a determination of liability or nonliability. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and
penalties in accordance with section 6-20-10 of this chapter.
The Administrative Hearing Officer's decision will be final and the respondent has the right to appeal the Administrative Hearing Officer's decision by
filing for judicial review under the provisions of the Illinois Administrative Review Law5.
D. Notice Of Determination Of Liability: Notice of the determination of liability of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be served upon the person
contesting a citation in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at the address set forth in the materials submitted in
accordance with subsection A or B of this section.
E. Service Of Notice: Service of the notice of determination for the contest in writing procedures submitted in accordance with this section shall be deemed
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
F. Other Provisions Applicable: All other provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to persons contesting the citation in writing. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-
2018)
6-20-10: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES:
A. Citations issued pursuant to section 6-11-1305.1 of this title are subject to the fines and/or penalties and settlement time periods set forth in section 6-
11-1305.2 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 234/702
B. Citations issued pursuant to section 6-12-1 of this title are subject to the fines and/or penalties, and settlement time periods set forth in section 6-12-3 of
this title.
C. Settlement: The person receiving said notice of such of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations may pay the fine
and penalty imposed for such ordinance violation by paying the amount specified in said notice or citation to the Village up until seven (7) days before
the administrative hearing date. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-11: CERTIFIED REPORT; CONTESTING IMPENDING DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
Certified reports shall be made to the Illinois Secretary of State, in accordance with section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, when a person fails to pay
ten (10) or more vehicular standing and/or parking regulation violations in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the Village after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for ten
(10) or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall make a certified report to the Secretary of State, in
accordance with section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, stating that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and
owing the Village as a result of ten (10) or more violations of Village vehicular standing and/or parking regulations and thereby cause the suspension of
that person's driver's license.
B. The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall assess a fee against the person named in the certified report to reimburse the Village for the expense
of filing the certified report with the Secretary of State.
C. If a person named in a certified report has paid the previously reported fine or penalty or if the report is determined by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator to be in error, the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall notify the Secretary of State in accordance with section 6-306.5(d) of the
Illinois Vehicle Code. A certified copy of such notification shall be given, upon request and at no charge, to the person named therein. Upon receipt of
the Municipality's or County's notification or presentation of a certified copy of such notification, the Secretary of State shall terminate the suspension.
D. Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report within seven (7) days after receiving notice from the Secretary of State by completing the
"License Suspension Review" form available from the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator. The license suspension review request shall specify the
grounds on which such challenge is based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:
1. The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle receiving ten (10) or more citations on the date or dates such notices were issued; or
2. The person has paid the fine and any penalties for the ten (10) or more violations indicated on the certified report.
E. The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall render a determination within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the license suspension review
request and shall notify the objector of the determination.
F. A person may contest an impending suspension or a suspension thru the Secretary of State's adjudication hearing process upon filing a timely written
request with the Secretary of State in accordance with the Secretary of State's rules and/or procedures therefor. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-12: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of determinations of liability of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations made under this chapter shall be
subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law as set forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., as amended and incorporated
herein by reference. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-13: DEBT TO VILLAGE:
Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or
the failure to exhaust administrative remedies created under this chapter, and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt due and
owing the Village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with the applicable law, including, but not limited to, the utilization of the Illinois Debt
Recovery Offset Portal (IDROP) program through the Illinois State Comptrollers' Office. Any fees or costs incurred by the Village with respect to attorneys
or private collection agents retained by the Village for the collection of debts, or filing certified reports with the Secretary of State pursuant to this chapter
shall be charged to the offender. Payment in full of any fine, or penalty resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a final
disposition of that violation. (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
6-20-14: JUDGMENT:
The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall, following the expiration of the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for a
final determination of violation, take all necessary actions, execute all required documents and subject to the advice and consent of the Village Attorney,
appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect monies from the persons who have been assessed
fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a debt due and owing the Village in accordance with this chapter and section 11-208.3 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended, by:
A. Filing a complaint in the Circuit Court praying for the entry of a judgment against the person for whom a final determination of vehicular standing and
parking violations and vehicle compliance violations liability has been made.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 235/702
B. The complaint filed by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator or individual or agency on behalf of the Village seeking entry of a judgment against an
individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final determination of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance
violations shall have appended thereto:
1. A certified copy of the final determination of the vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations; and
2. A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the final determination of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance
violations were issued in accordance with this chapter and section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended.
C. Nothing shall prevent the Village from consolidating multiple final determinations of vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance
violations liability in an action in the Circuit Court against an individual or an entity.
D. Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money judgments.
E. Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the person or entity against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of
this chapter by any method provided under section 2-203 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, as amended, incorporated by reference, or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, provided the total amount of fines and penalties for final determination of vehicular standing and parking violations and
vehicle compliance violations does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 2018-98, 8-21-2018)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTIES
Chapter 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
7-1-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works. He shall have supervision
over all work thereon, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such public places
(except traffic ordinances) and is hereby authorized to enforce such ordinances. (1968 Code, § 8.101)
7-1-2: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley or non-Municipal building facilities or other
public way or to repair the same without having first secured a permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be made to the Building Director and
shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the actual construction work. (1968
Code, § 8.012; amd. 1983 Code)
B. Bond: Each applicant shall file:
1. A guarantee in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of the proposed work as estimated by the Village Engineer with
sureties to be approved by the President and Board of Trustees, conditioned to indemnify the Village from any loss or liability or damage resulting
from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same; and (1968 Code, § 8.103)
2. Any contractor intending to perform any work over, upon, across or through any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public way shall defend,
indemnify, protect and save harmless the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers working on behalf of the
Village, from and against liability, losses, physical damage to property, and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under any
worker's compensation law, which may arise out of the contractor's acts and/or omissions and the acts and/or omissions of his, her, or its employees,
agents, subcontractors and material suppliers. Each such contractor not covered by the Village Telecommunications Ordinance shall carry and
maintain commercial general liability and business automobile liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State,
said insurance company having a rating of B+:VII or better in the latest edition of the Best & Co. Insurance Guide. The policy limits for the
commercial general liability insurance shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury,
personal injury and property damage with a general aggregate not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) or a project specific limit of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The policy limits for the business automobile liability insurance shall be not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage. Such insurance to be utilized to protect the licensee and
the Village, its official, officers, employees, agents, consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, as their interests may appear,
from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities, including without limitation attorney's fees which may arise
or result directly or indirectly from or by reason of any such liability, loss, injury or damage. Said policy shall contain a provision requiring the insured
to notify the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to cancellation or change of any policy. The Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents,
consultants and volunteers while acting on behalf of the Village, shall appear as additional named insureds under each policy. At least ten (10) days
prior to commencing any operations in the village, the licensee shall provide the village with certificates of insurance for each policy. Each contractor
shall also carry such insurance as may be necessary to protect it and the village from all claims under the workers' compensation laws from time to
time in effect that may be applicable to the licensee. All insurance required by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect until after the work
over, upon, across, under or through the public street(s), alley(s), sidewalk(s), public way(s) is completed. The certificate(s) of insurance, and, if
requested by the village attorney, the policies of insurance, or a certified copy of copies thereof, shall be approved by the village attorney and shall
be deposited with and kept on file by the village clerk. (Ord. 96-14, 2-6-1996)
C. Specifications: All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with the specifications established from time to time by the president and
board of trustees. (1968 Code, §8.104)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 236/702
7-1-3: DAMAGED PAVEMENTS:
A. Damage To Pavements: It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or cause damage in any way to any newly laid concrete
street, sidewalk or alley pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any street, sidewalk or alley
pavement. (1968 Code, §8.105)
B. Repairs: All public street, alley and sidewalk pavements shall be maintained in good repair. Such repair work, whether done by the village or the
abutting owner, shall be under the supervision of the director of public works. (1968 Code, §8.106)
C. Defects: It shall be the duty of every village officer or employee who becomes aware of any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk or any obstruction
thereof to report the same to the director of public works immediately. (1968 Code, §8.107)
7-1-4: BARRICADES:
A. Barricades Maintained: Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, or making any excavation in any
such place, shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work. Such barricades shall be protected by
suitable and sufficient electric battery operated flashing lights. Such lights shall be kept burning from twilight in the evening through the night. Flares,
lanterns, "bombs" or other devices using a flame shall not be permitted. (1968 Code, §8.108)
Defects in pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury, and any person properly maintaining an opening or excavation in such place shall guard
such opening or excavation while the same remains open by proper barricades and lights as described in the preceding paragraph of this subsection.
(1968 Code, §8.109)
B. Disturbing Barricades: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or
excavation or opening in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. (1968 Code, §8.110)
7-1-5: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS RESTRICTED:
A. Private Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to
write or mark any signs or advertisements on any such pavement. (1968 Code, §8.111)
B. Encroachments: It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property. (1968 Code,
§8.112)
C. Poles And Wires: It shall be unlawful to erect or install any poles, wires, ropes or banners or maintain any poles, wires, ropes or banners over any
"public street", defined as the area measured from the back of a curb across the street to the back of the opposite curb for any purpose including, but
not limited to, erecting holiday displays. (Ord. 2002-109, 11-5-2002)
D. Gas Pumps: It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in any public street, alley or sidewalk. (1968 Code, §8.115)
E. Openings: It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, alley or sidewalk or other public place without a
permit from the director of public works.
All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the director of public works. (1968 Code,
§8.116)
F. Mailboxes: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section making it unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street, mailboxes and supporting structures may be installed in public rights of way, without a permit from the village,
provided said mailbox and supporting structure is erected and located in accordance with the requirements of the United States postal service and
subject to the following conditions:
1. No part of the structure on which the mailbox rests or which holds or supports it or the face of the mailbox shall be closer than eight inches (8") from
the back of curb or edge of pavement (if there is no curb).
2. The supporting post for other than brick or masonry mailbox structures shall be no closer than eighteen inches (18") from the back of a curb or edge
of pavement (if there is no curb), and posts shall be constructed of materials having sufficient strength to withstand forces of snow applied during
normal roadway snow plowing operations.
3. Mailboxes constructed of brick or a masonry material shall not exceed the dimensions of two feet (2') in width, two feet (2') in depth and five feet (5')
in height.
4. Residents should take all necessary precautions to prevent damage to any existing utilities located in the parkway. It shall be unlawful to install,
maintain or connect utility lines to mailbox structures for any purpose.
5. The owner of the mailbox shall be responsible for all costs of installing and maintaining the mailbox. Maintenance provisions shall comply with
section PM-300.2 of the Bartlett maintenance code.
6. The village will not repair or replace any damaged mailbox unless said damage was caused solely by the village or unless said mailbox is removed
due to parkway maintenance, road widening or utility installation by the village or its contractors. The village may, at its sole option, elect to pay the
reasonable cost of replacement therefor, or to cause said damaged or removed mailbox to be replaced with a mailbox of like kind, except that the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 237/702
replacement cost and the replacement of a brick or masonry monument mailbox shall be limited by and/or conform with the dimension restrictions set
forth in subsection F3 of this section.
7. All structures other than mailboxes and public utility facilities and appurtenances constructed and located in accordance with all village codes and
ordinances are prohibited from being located in the public right of way.
8. Notice is hereby given that in the event of any claim, lawsuit, cause of action or liability against the village arising out of any damage to persons or
property caused by or alleged to be caused by any such mailbox and/or its supporting structure which has been installed in the public right of way,
the village shall seek indemnification, contribution and/or otherwise seek to recover its expenses in defending any such action and/or damages
suffered from the owner of the premises and/or any other party or parties responsible for installing such mailbox and/or structure in the public right of
way. (Ord. 94-50, 5-17-1994)
7-1-6: VIEW AT CORNERS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain or permit to remain any fence or other structure, or any bushes or other plants on a corner lot within fifty feet
(50') of the street line of any street which obstructs the view of the adjacent street pavement.
Any person violating the provision of this Section shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such obstruction to view is permitted to remain after notice
from the Police Department or any official of the Village to remove the same. (1968 Code, §8.122)
7-1-7: DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Deposits on Streets: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof or any waste material or
any glass or other articles which may cause injury to any person, animal or property.
Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery for use; provided, that such deposit does not reduce the usable width of the
street or roadway at that point to less than eighteen feet (18'), and provided that such material or coal other than material used in actual building
construction shall not be permitted to remain in such street for more than three (3) hours. Any such material or coal shall be guarded by lights if the
same remains upon any street after nighttime. (1968 Code, §8.118)
B. Deposits in Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste
material, or any glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or property.
Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery, providing that the usable width of the sidewalk is not thereby
reduced to less than four feet (4'); and provided, that no such article shall remain on such walk for more than one-half (1/2) hour. (1968 Code, §8.119)
7-1-8: OFFENSES TO PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Obstruction: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way except as
may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Director of Public Works. (1968 Code, §8.108)
B. Drains: It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley. (1968 Code, §8.113)
C. Barbed Wire Fences, Electric Current Fences: It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or in part of barbed wire or with
any similar materials designed to cause injury to persons or any wire charged with electrical current anywhere within the Village, except to protect
industrial property, in which case barbed wire must be at least six feet (6') above the sidewalk and extend inward of property. (1968 Code, §8.117)
7-1-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code, §8.121)
ARTICLE A. DRIVEWAYS
7-1A-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
No person shall construct a driveway across any sidewalk in the village without first having obtained a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall
be made to the building director and shall be accompanied by the required fee. (1968 Code, §8.201)
7-1A-2: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
A. Grade Surfaces: Driveways that cross a public sidewalk shall conform to the sidewalk grade. The maximum grade of any driveway shall be five percent
(5%). (1983 Code)
B. Specifications: Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with specifications adopted by the village board. (1968 Code, §8.204)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 238/702
7-1A-3: REPAIRS:
It shall be the duty of the person maintaining a driveway to keep the same in good repair and free from obstruction and openings where it crosses the
sidewalk. (1968 Code, §8.205)
7-1A-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code, §8.206)
ARTICLE B. SKATEBOARDS
7-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT: Any property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or any commercial subdivision or commercial PUD in any PD planned development
district or commercial area in any planned unit development under the Bartlett zoning ordinance.
KNOWINGLY: Having a general knowledge of or reason to know or ground firm belief which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state (but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act).
PARENT: A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
SKATEBOARD: Any device with a combination of wheels connected by a platform designed for standing and which is propelled by human power.
UNEMANCIPATED MINOR: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years still under the care and custody of his or her parents. (Ord. 2002-103, 10-1-
2002)
7-1B-2: PROHIBITED USES:
It shall be unlawful to ride, operate, or propel any skateboard upon any street, sidewalk, and/or public right of way in any commercial district within the
village of Bartlett. (Ord. 2002-103, 10-1-2002)
7-1B-3: SKATEBOARDING ON PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, operate or propel any skateboard upon any sidewalk, street, or public right of way so as to endanger any person
or property, obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and/or to fail to yield the right of way to any pedestrians using any sidewalk, crosswalk or
public right of way. (Ord. 2002-103, 10-1-2002)
7-1B-4: PENALTY:
A. Fines: Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation hereunder.
B. Liability Of Parent Or Legal Guardian Of Minor Offender: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who has custody of such minor shall
be liable for any fine, condition, or restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for a violation of any provision of this article; provided the
minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that said parent or guardian has
been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause as provided by law. (Ord. 2002-103, 10-1-2002)
Chapter 2
TREES AND SHRUBS
7-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate trees and shrubs in the public right-of-way and on public property owned by the Village to enhance the public
portion of the community forest by assuring the proper establishment of new trees, the protection and maintenance of existing trees, and the timely
removal of hazardous or infectious diseased trees on such public property. Section 4-3-5, "Infected Trees Or Dangerous Trees", of this Code which
regulates injured and dangerous trees on private property throughout the Village, and title 10, chapter 11A, "Landscaping, Screening And Tree
Preservation", of this Code, which is applicable to the development of property in the Village, regulate the private property portion of the community forest.
Said chapters complement each other and together with the regulations set forth in this chapter are intended to enhance the total community forest in
Bartlett.
It is the intent of the Village of Bartlett President and Board of Trustees that the terms of this chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 239/702
A. The planting, preservation, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable trees, shrubs and other plants within the Village rights-of-way and on
Village owned property; and
B. The protection of residents from personal injury and/or property damage, and the protection of the Village from property damage, caused or threatened
by the improper planting, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs or other plants located within or encroaching upon Village rights-of-way or on other
public property owned by the Village. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter provides full power and authority over all trees, plants and shrubs located within street and other rights-of-way, including parkways under the
jurisdiction of the Village, and property owned by the Village; and to trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that encroach upon Village rightof-
way or property or otherwise constitute a hazard or threat as described in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-3: AUTHORITY AND POWER:
The administration of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Public Works Director or his/her designee. The Village Forester (formerly the Village
Arborist) shall determine appropriate tree and shrub species, sizes, planting locations, and spacing distances for all plantings in the Village right-of-way of
any street and on all property owned or maintained by the Village. The Village Forester, is a position in the Village's Public Works Department and is under
the supervision of the Director of Public Works, but based on his/her unique and specialized training and experience, shall have the power to promulgate
and enforce rules, regulations and specifications concerning the planting, pruning, removal, spraying, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs
upon the Village right-of-way of any street and upon all property owned or maintained by the Village. The "Arboricultural Specifications Manual" shall be
amendable with the approval of the Village Forester and the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE (Hereinafter Called ANSI): The primary organization for fostering the development of workplace
standards in the United States.
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL: A manual prepared and updated by the Village Forester and incorporated by reference into an
ordinance passed by the Village Board, and which may be amended from time to time with the approval of the Village Forester and the Director of Public
Works, which more specifically carry out the enforcement provisions and intent of this Code and contain regulations and standards for the preservation,
planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants upon the public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the Village and upon Village
owned property and trees on private property regulated by this chapter.
CANOPY: The portion of the tree above the trunk including leaves and branches, sometimes called the crown.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: An area on the ground extending out from the trunk of the tree in all directions a distance of at least one foot (1') for every inch
dbh.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (Hereinafter Called DBH): The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured in inches at a point four and one-half feet (41/2')
above ground line. This forestry standard measurement is used for established and mature trees. All reference to diameter size shall be to the dbh.
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY OF ARBORICULTURE: The accredited forestry industry body that promotes the professional practice of arboriculture and
fosters a greater worldwide awareness of the benefits of trees. Certification through their organization is the international standard for tree care
professionals.
PRIVATE TREE: Any tree that is located on privately owned property within the Village limits.
PUBLIC TREE: Any tree that is located on any public right-of-way or Village owned property.
TREE: Any self-supporting woody plant, together with its root system, trunk, and canopy; growing upon the earth usually with one trunk, or a multistemmed
trunk system, supporting a definitely formed crown.
VILLAGE FORESTER: An employee of the Village of Bartlett, appointed by the Director of Public Works to the position of Village Forester (formerly known
as the Village Arborist). This individual shall be trained and experienced in the profession of arboriculture or a related field, and shall be a certified arborist
through the International Society of Arboriculture. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-5: TREE CARE STANDARDS:
All tree care practices with respect to trees growing upon or planted in any Village right-of-way and on any Village owned property shall be accomplished
under the direction of the Village Forester and in compliance with the most current edition of the ANSI A300 Standards, including, without limitation, the
following:
A. Pruning:
1. Low hanging branches of the canopy will be removed to permit clearance of approximately fifteen feet (15') on the street side of the tree and eight
feet (8') on the sidewalk side of the tree to allow passage of motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
2. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for the Public Works Department or for any person or entity, to top any tree upon the Village right-of-way or
upon Village owned property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's
crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 240/702
3. No person working on any public tree shall use shoes with spikes or any other footwear which will injure the trees while work is being performed. At
no time shall any person working on any public tree for pruning purposes wear spurs or climbing irons. Said provisions shall not apply to any public
trees determined by the Village Forester to be dead or a tree the Village reasonably determines is a "dangerous tree" or "infected tree" as those
terms are defined in subsection 4-3-5B of this Code, that must be removed.
B. Planting:
1. All species of trees planted within the Village right-of-way and on Village owned property shall be chosen from the latest edition of the Illinois
Department of Agriculture's list of recommended trees.
2. All trees planted within the Village right-of-way or upon Village owned property shall be planted in accordance with the minimum standards and
procedures therefor in the most recent edition of the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1).
3. Spacing for newly planted trees will be determined by the Village Forester. Planting locations will be based on projected size of the tree, existing
vegetation, underground utilities, street lights, proximity to driveways and street intersections, and other factors as determined by the Village Forester
or the Village Public Works Director.
C. Removal: The Village will remove in its entirety (tree and stump) any public tree that is dead, dying (50 percent or more of canopy dead or diseased), or
deemed a hazard/nuisance to the public. Trees marked for removal will be determined by the Village Forester, and will be removed within a reasonable
period of time, taking into account the level of hazard posed by said dead tree, and normal budget constraints when the loss of trees is due to a blight
or disease that affects a large percentage of a certain species of tree throughout the Village and the geographic region in which the Village is located.
(Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-6: INTERFERENCE WITH THE VILLAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to prevent, delay, or interfere with the Village or any of its employees, contractors, or agents, while engaging in
and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any public trees. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-7: PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to plant any tree in the Village right-of-way or parkway or upon any Village owned property without first
obtaining a written permit from the Village Forester or the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-8: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC TREES:
No person or entity, without lawful authority, shall willfully injure, deface, disfigure, cut, carve, transplant, remove, destroy, attach any rope, wire, nail,
advertising posters, election posters or other contrivance to any public tree or other tree or shrub on any public right-of-way or Village owned property, or
apply or, allow any gaseous liquid, chemical or solid substance which is harmful to such public trees, shrubs, grass and flowers to come in contact with
them; or set fire to, or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat therefrom will injure any portion of any public tree, or shrub, grass or flower,
located on any public right-of-way, parkway, or thoroughfare, or Village owned property.
All trees along any street, or in any public right-of-way, or on other Village owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure, or
street construction shall be protected so as to avoid all injury to the trunk, crown, and unnecessary injury to the root system of the tree.
The critical root zone of a public tree shall be at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the dbh of the tree trunk in inches, and shall be designated and
protected using snow fencing or other protective measures approved by the Village Forester, except when the Public Works Director determines that a
public tree cannot be preserved and considering the nature, cost, importance of a proposed public improvement, and whether there is a practicable
alternative.
Building materials, stone, brick, sand, concrete, soil, or other debris shall not be placed or stored on or in the critical root zone area of any public tree or
other tree or shrub on public right-of-way or Village owned property, without written authorization from the Village Forester obtained prior to storing any
such materials or debris.
New driveway construction shall be placed at least ten feet (10') from the trunk of any public tree and shall be relocated to another location when
practicable, or at the discretion of the Public Works Director after consulting with the Village Forester. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-9: RIGHT-OF-WAY CLEARANCE OF PRIVATE TREES:
Every owner of a privately owned tree overhanging any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or Village owned property within the Village shall prune the
branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the view of any street light or street intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet
(8') above the surface of the sidewalk and fifteen feet (15') above the street. The owners of said privately owned trees which overhang any street,
sidewalk, or public right-of-way shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous privately owned trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The Village, in accordance with applicable law, shall have the right to prune any private tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or
is an immediate threat to the safety of the public. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
7-2-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Whoever violates this chapter, in addition to any other fines or fees, shall be subject to the following provisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 241/702
A. Fines: First offense, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); second offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00); third and subsequent offense, seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
B. Violations: All violations that are committed by the same person or any firm controlled by such person shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the
violations occur at the same time.
Any entity or person who injures a public tree shall be held responsible for the cost of the repairs, such as pruning or cabling, if the injured tree will not
die as a result of such injuries. In cases where the tree has been damaged beyond repair and cannot remain in the public right-of-way because it is
determined by the Village Forester to be a "dangerous tree" as defined in section 4-3-5 of this Code, the entity or person responsible for the damage
shall also pay the cost the Village incurs to remove and replace the tree.
In addition to any fines that may be assessed for violation of this section, the person or entity found liable shall pay to the Village a sum equal to the
value or partial value of the tree lost as a result of the violation. The value or partial value of the tree lost shall be as determined by the Village Forester
in accordance with the reasonable cost of replacement thereof as set forth in a current publication of the International Society of Arboriculture, if
available, otherwise based on the average of two (2) written price quotes procured by the Village Forester from at least two (2) different area nurseries.
The collection of this fee shall be deposited into a Tree Planting Fund to be administered by the Public Works Department. (Ord. 2018-72, 6-5-2018)
Chapter 3
BARTLETT CEMETERY
7-3-1: SALE OF LOTS TO RESIDENTS ONLY:
The sale of lots in the Village-owned and maintained Bartlett Cemetery shall be restricted to residents of the Village or owners of real estate subject to
taxation in the Village. (Ord. 76-10, 3-16-1976, eff. 3-16-1976)
7-3-2: FEES:
The price of all lots sold in the Bartlett Cemetery shall be computed at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per square foot. Said price shall remain in effect until
such further time as a new price for said cemetery lots shall be established by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-49, 6-4-1996)
Chapter 4
VILLAGE PARKS
7-4-1: PARK DISTRICT TO CONTROL:
The Village hereby relinquishes and turns over to the Bartlett Park District the function of planning, establishing and maintaining the Municipal recreation
program within the boundaries of the Village, and further relinquishes any and all powers which it may have to levy and collect a tax known as the
"Playground and Recreation Tax" pursuant to the provisions of division 95, article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code,1 as heretofore and hereafter amended.
(Ord. 72-3, 1-18-72)
Chapter 5
VILLAGE WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
7-5-1: SEPARATE UTILITIES:
It is hereby found, determined and declared necessary that the waterworks system of the Village be operated as a separate utility pursuant to the
provisions of division 129, article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code1 and that the sewerage system of the Village be operated as a separate utility pursuant
to the provisions of division 141, article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code.2 All property, real, personal and mixed, comprising said waterworks system and
said sewerage system is hereby found, determined and declared to constitute the separate properties of said respective waterworks system and sewerage
system of the Village.
From and after the effective date of this Section, said waterworks system and said sewerage system shall be owned and operated by the Village as
separate utilities known as the waterworks system and the sewerage system of the Village, and all improvements and extensions to said waterworks
system or to said sewerage system shall be considered as improvements and extensions to said particular utility improved or extended; and all the
properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of all kinds of said waterworks system and of said sewerage system existing, outstanding and accruing or to
accrue, shall be held, used, confessed and acknowledged as the properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of said separate utilities. (Ord. 73-3, 2-6-73)
ARTICLE A. WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
7-5A-1: APPLICATION FOR WATER:
A. No water from the Village water supply shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person but the Director of Public Works or some person
authorized by him to perform this service. (1968 Code § 20.101)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 242/702
B. Applications to have water turned on shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by and
accept all of the provisions of this chapter as conditions governing the use of the Village water supply. (1968 Code § 20.102; amd. 1984 Code)
7-5A-2: COMPLY WITH PLUMBING REGULATIONS:
No water shall be turned on for services in premises in which the plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the Village; provided that water may be
turned on for construction work in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter. (1968 Code § 20.104)
7-5A-3: SERVICE CONNECTIONS; DIRECTOR TO INSPECT:
No connections with a water main shall be made without a permit being issued and twenty four (24) hours' notice having been given to the Director of
Public Works. All such connections shall be made by or under the supervision of the Director of Public Works and no connections shall be covered until
the work has been inspected by the Director of Public Works. (1968 Code § 20.105)
7-5A-4: SERVICE PIPES:
A. Installation: All service pipes from the Village mains to the premises to be served shall be installed by and at the cost of the owner of the property to be
served or the applicant for the service. Such installations shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works, and in accordance with
section 8.6 of the current recommended standards for the Great Lakes - Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers or the 1976 Illinois
State Plumbing Code. (1968 Code § 20.201; amd. 1984 Code)
B. Conform To Specifications: No service pipe shall be installed unless it conforms to specifications prepared by the Village Engineer and approved by the
Village Board of Trustees. A copy of such specifications shall be kept on file with the Village Clerk and shall be open to inspection by any person
interested. (1968 Code § 20.202)
C. Maintenance Responsibility: All repairs for service pipes and plumbing systems of buildings to the owner's side of the "B box" (including any portion of
such pipes and systems located within the right-of-way of Village streets) shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises served.
The Village may, in case of an emergency, repair any service pipes and if this is done the cost of such repair work shall be repaid to the Village by the
owner of the premises served. (Ord. 88-7, 2-2-1988)
D. Excavations: Excavations for installing service pipes or repairing the same shall be made in compliance with the ordinance provisions relating to making
excavations in streets, and in accordance with section 8.6 of the current recommended standards for the Great Lakes - Upper Mississippi River Board
of State Sanitary Engineers or the 1976 Illinois State Plumbing Code. (1968 Code § 20.204; amd. 1984 Code)
E. Shut-Off Boxes: Shut-off boxes or service boxes shall be placed on every service pipe, and shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line
where this is practicable. Such boxes shall be so located that they are easily accessible and shall be protected from frost. (1968 Code § 20.205)
7-5A-5: WATER METERS:
A. Meters Required: All premises using the Village water supply must be equipped with an adequate water meter furnished by the Village but paid for by
the consumer. (1968 Code § 20.301)
B. Installation: Meters shall be installed in a location that will be of easy access. (1968 Code § 20.302)
C. Reading Meters: The Director of Public Works shall read or cause to be read every water meter used in the Village at such times as are necessary that
the bills may be sent out at the proper time. (1968 Code § 20.303)
7-5A-6: WATER CONSERVATION REGULATIONS:
A. During the period between May 15 and September 15, inclusive, the outside use of running water from a hose or sprinkling system, for the purpose of
watering or sprinkling of lawns and gardens shall be limited in the following manner:
1. Outside use of water, as described in this section, for buildings which bear odd-numbered street addresses is permitted only on the days of the
month having an odd number.
2. Outside use of water, as described in this section, for buildings which bear even-numbered street addresses is permitted only on the days of the
month having an even number.
3. In addition to the odd/even restrictions set forth in subsections A1 and A2 of this section, the sprinkling or watering of lawns and gardens, as
described in this section, is prohibited between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
4. The following exception to this subsection A is permitted: Watering of sod and/or newly seeded lawns for a ten-day period following authorization by
the Water Supervisor. Watering with this authorization shall not take place between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M.
5. For the purpose of this section, washing of cars is permitted at any time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 243/702
6. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to open a fire hydrant except for the below listed reasons:
a. The hydrant is opened for the purpose of extinguishing a fire; or
b. The fire hydrant is open by authorized Village personnel; or
c. The fire hydrant is opened by any person authorized by the Public Works Director or the Public Works Director's designee.
7. All water consumers supplied by the combined waterworks and sewage system of the Village shall be supplied water through water meters only.
Such meters shall be as required by the Village, and shall be kept in proper operating condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful to tamper with
such water meters or damage the same in any manner. In the event any present water consumers do not have water meters, the same must be
installed, and the failure to do so will result in such water service being discontinued in the manner provided by law.
8. No person, firm, or corporation, whether Municipal, private, or not for profit, shall use potable water to flush any sanitary sewers within the Village
unless such flushing is performed through use of a high velocity type sewer jet.
9. Water saving plumbing fixtures shall be required and labeled as a WaterSense product for new and replacement fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall also
follow the Village of Bartlett Code and Illinois State Plumbing Code. In addition, new/replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a
WaterSense labeled irrigation controller and shall be in compliance with section 2.5(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law1.
10. In addition to the requirements in subsection A7 of this section, in all new construction and in all repairs or replacement of air conditioning systems
shall require the installation of closed system air conditioning.
11. In addition to the requirements in subsections A7 and A8 of this section, in all new construction and in all repairs or replacement of fixtures in
lavatories intended for public use, the faucets of such lavatories located in rest rooms intended for public use shall be of metering or self-closing
type.
12. In all new construction or replacement of fixtures in car wash facilities, car wash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling system or
other water conservation system as approved by the Director of Public Works.
B. In the event of a water supply emergency, the Director of Public Works may cause a Village-wide lawn or garden sprinkling restriction.
C. The settlement and compromise of water use violations shall take place in the following manner:
1. Any person accused of violating any provision of this section relating to the outdoor use of water may be issued a citation without the filing of a
complaint in court against him for such violation.
2. Such citation shall be in a form suitable for mailing, shall state the specific section that was violated, and shall inform the alleged violator upon
payment of an amount prescribed in this section in full settlement for his liability for such violation.
3. Payment shall be due on or before the date set forth in the citation and in any event not more than fifteen (15) days from the date the violation was
committed. Such payment shall be made at the Village Hall during normal business hours, either in person or by mail.
4. If no payment is received during the period set forth in the citation, then the individual issuing the ticket shall cause a notice to appear to be served
upon the alleged violator and shall file and prosecute a complaint for the violation in the local adjudication court.
5. The liability of any person for any violation specified in a citation issued pursuant to the provisions of this section may be settled without court action
upon payment by the violator of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for such violation, on or before the date set forth in the citation. (Ord. 2017-117, 9-5-
2017)
7-5A-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code § 20.107)
ARTICLE B. WATER RATES AND CHARGES
7-5B-1: WATER RATES:
Effective May 1, 2019, the amount to be charged to each user of water from the Bartlett water distribution system shall be computed at the rate of eleven
dollars seventy six cents ($11.76) per thousand gallons with a minimum charge of twenty nine dollars forty cents ($29.40) monthly to reimburse the Village
for the cost of operating and maintaining a water distribution system ready to serve each user. All Bartlett residents who are age sixty five (65) and over
and who are responsible for the payment of their own water charges shall receive a ten percent (10%) discount on all water charges. (Ord. 2018-107, 9-
18-2018)
7-5B-2: PREMISES OUTSIDE VILLAGE:
The charge for water furnished to premises outside the Village limits, where authorized by the Village Board, shall be computed at two (2) times the fee
charged for water service within the corporate limits. (Ord. 85-86, 10-1-1985)
7-5B-3: WATER RATES DURING CONSTRUCTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 244/702
During the construction of any building and before any water is installed, as is hereinafter provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be
permitted to use the Municipal water supply by making application therefor and paying the required fees. (1968 Code § 20.306)
7-5B-4: BILLS RENDERED:
Bills for water used shall be sent out at such times as may be directed by the Village President and Board of Trustees. (1968 Code § 20.306)
7-5B-5: NONPAYMENT; LIEN:
A. Effective May 1, 1998, a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the user's statement shall be added to the bill of any user who does not pay his
combined bill for water use and wastewater (sewage) treatment on or before the due date indicated thereon. (Ord. 98-14, 2-17-1998)
B. The water supply may be shut off from any premises for which the water bill remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after the bill is rendered and
mailed. When shut off, the water shall not be turned on except upon payment of the usual fee for turning on water. No water service shall be shut off
without giving the user an opportunity to have an administrative hearing before the Director of Public Works.
C. Charges for water shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by statute1. Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid sixty (60) days after it
has been rendered, the Village Clerk may file a statement of lien claim with the Recorder of Deeds of the County in which the property is located. This
statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the Village claims lien for this
amount as well as for all charges for water served subsequent to the period covered.
If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the Clerk has notice of this, then notice shall be mailed to the owner
of the premises, if his address is known to the Clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. The
failure of the Clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose
the lien for unpaid water bills as mentioned in the following section. (Ord. 76-3, 1-20-1976)
7-5B-6: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the
charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the Village.
The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute proceedings, in the name of the Village, in any court having jurisdiction over such
matters, against any property for which a water bill has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered. (1968 Code § 20.311)
7-5B-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code § 20.312)
ARTICLE C. WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS
7-5C-1: PRELIMINARY ENGINEERING STUDY:
When the owner of a parcel or tract of land within the corporate limits of the Village, which is not served by the Municipal water and sewer systems,
requests permission to construct, at his expense, an extension of the existing Village water and sanitary sewer systems to serve his property, the Village
Engineer, with the authorization of the corporate authorities, shall make a preliminary study of the project and report to the corporate authorities as to the
feasibility of such construction and connection to the Municipal water and sanitary sewer systems. The cost of such preliminary engineering study shall be
paid by the property owner requesting such connection. (Ord. 69-18, 5-20-1969)
7-5C-2: AUTHORIZE EXTENSION:
If it appears from the report of the Village Engineer that the Municipal water and sewer systems, as they then exist, are of ample size and design to
provide service for the property to be served by such extension, the Village Board may authorize the property owner(s) requesting such extension to
proceed in accordance with the provisions of either of the following subsections, as the owner(s) may select:
A. The owner(s) shall cause to be prepared engineering plans, specifications and cost estimates for the construction of the proposed water and sanitary
sewer systems extension. These items shall be forwarded to the Village Engineer for his approval and no work shall proceed without such approval.
The Village Engineer shall review such engineering plans, specifications and cost estimates and shall make written recommendations to the Board
approving or disapproving such plans, specifications and cost estimates, stating in writing his reasons for disapproval in case he disapproves the
proposed plan.
B. The owner(s) may request that the Village Board direct the Village Engineer to prepare the plans, specifications and cost estimates for the construction
of the proposed water and sanitary sewer system extension.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 245/702
7-5C-3: COSTS REIMBURSED:
The owner(s) shall reimburse the Village for engineering fees charged by the Village Engineer for the preparation or examination and approval of
engineering plans, specifications and cost estimates.
7-5C-4: PROCEDURES FOR EXTENSION AND CONNECTION:
After engineering plans, specifications and cost estimates have been approved or prepared by the Village Engineer, the owner(s) may proceed in
accordance with provisions of either of the following subsections, as he may select:
A. At the request of the owner(s), the corporate authorities may take bids for the construction work specified in the plans and specifications prepared or
approved by the Village Engineer and exhibit such bids, when received, to the owner(s). If any of the bids is acceptable to him, the owner(s) shall
deposit with the Village Treasurer an amount of money sufficient to pay the entire cost of constructing said extension, including extra inspection and
legal fees, if any, and the Village Treasurer shall hold the money so deposited with him in a separate bank account to be used for no purpose other
than to pay for the cost of constructing the said water and sewer extension. The owner(s) shall authorize the corporate authorities to, and the corporate
authorities may, enter into a contract with the successful bidder for the construction of the proposed extension, and all work shall be done under the
supervision of the Village Engineer. Payments for the work shall be made by the Village Treasurer, only from funds deposited with him by the owner(s),
upon receipt of payout orders approved by the Village Engineer and the corporate authorities.
B. The owner(s) may elect to retain his own contractor to proceed with the construction work, and in that event, the owner(s) shall provide a performance
guarantee as required by the Village. Work shall be done by the owner's contractor under the supervision of the Village Engineer. If work is done by a
contractor retained by the Village, payments for work shall be made by the Village Treasurer only upon receipt of written payout orders from the Village
Engineer which have been approved by the corporate authorities. If work is done by the owner's contractor, payments shall be made by the escrowee
only upon receipt of written payout orders from the Village Engineer which have been approved by the corporate authorities.
7-5C-5: EXTENSIONS PROPERTY OF VILLAGE:
A. Upon the completion of the work, approval by the Village Engineer, and acceptance by the corporate authorities, the sewer and water system
extensions shall become the property of the Village, and shall be under its sole control and supervision and subject to all of its ordinances, rules and
regulations; provided, however, that anything to the contrary notwithstanding, the improvements shall in all events become the property of the Village
whenever the Village shall adopt an ordinance or resolution accepting the improvements or within three (3) years after the start of construction,
whichever first occurs.
B. Upon completion of the water and sewer extension improvements, the Village Engineer shall certify to the corporate authorities the final total cost of
such improvement and shall further certify to the corporate authorities the cost per lineal foot of such water and sewer system extension.
7-5C-6: BENEFITED OWNER FEES:
The owner(s) of the property benefited by any improvements constructed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter (herein called "the benefited owner")
hereafter seeking to connect his property to any of the Village sanitary sewer or water mains extended by a private party, pursuant to this Chapter, shall
pay to the Village Treasurer an amount equal to the regular customary connection fees charged by the Village and, in addition thereto, shall pay to the
Village Treasurer that portion of the total cost of the improvements extended pursuant to this Chapter, which the property of the benefited owner(s) bears
to the total frontage of all property benefited by the improvement extension, with interest on such portion computed at the rate of six percent (6%) per
annum from the date of completion of such improvement for a period of not to exceed five (5) years.
7-5C-7: INTENT OF PROVISIONS:
A. This Chapter shall apply to and inure to the benefit of private parties who have heretofore extended the Village sanitary sewer and water mains and a
benefited owner(s) and defined in Section 7-5C-5B of this Chapter, shall be required to pay his portion of the cost of such extension computed, as set
forth in Section 7-5C-5B hereof, before connecting to the Village sanitary sewer and water system.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as creating an obligation on the part of the Village to pay Village funds to a private party who extends the
Village sewer and water mains except to the extent that such have previously been paid to the Village Treasurer by a benefited owner(s) who seeks to
connect to the Village sewer and water mains. The obligation of the Village is limited to the safekeeping and transmittal of funds so deposited with the
Treasurer pursuant to this Chapter. The Village shall not be obligated to engage in litigation to enforce the provisions of this Chapter unless the cost of
such litigation is borne by the party who seeks to have this Chapter enforced. (Ord. 69-18, 5-20-69)
ARTICLE D. SEWERAGE SYSTEM REGULATIONS
7-5D-1: GENERAL PURPOSE AND INCORPORATION OF MWRD AND FRWRD ORDINANCES:
The purpose of this article is to:
A. Restrict or prohibit the discharge of certain substances into the sanitary sewer system owned and operated by the village of Bartlett.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 246/702
B. Establish equitable charges for the treatment of domestic wastewater and equitable surcharges for the treatment of industrial wastewater, and to
establish equitable charges for the treatment of "overflows" in order to defray the cost of the maintenance, operation and repair of the village sanitary
sewer system, and to pay the cost of treating domestic and industrial wastewater admitted to or discharged into the Bartlett Wastewater Treatment
Facility in DuPage County (the "Bartlett treatment facility"), including, but not limited to, maintenance, operating expense, depreciation and amortization
of construction cost and modification cost.
C. The metropolitan water reclamation district of Greater Chicago ("MWRD") sewage and waste control ordinance, effective November 18, 2010, amended
February 16, 2012 (the "MWRD-SWCO"), as the same may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and expressly incorporated herein by
reference by the village of Bartlett, as authority for administration and enforcement of the industrial waste pretreatment program within areas of the
village of Bartlett that are within the corporate limits of the MWRD (Cook County) and those areas that are not within the corporate limits of the MWRD,
but are subject to the agreement for sewerage services between the MWRD and the village of Bartlett and amendments thereto (the "MWRD
contracted areas").
D. The requirements of the MWRD-SWCO are hereby expressly made applicable to the sewage and industrial waste admitted to or discharged into the
sewerage systems and waters under the jurisdiction of the MWRD as provided in the MWRD-SWCO.
E. The requirements of the MWRD-SWCO are hereby expressly made applicable to all industrial waste discharges within the served areas of the village of
Bartlett within the corporate limits of the MWRD (Cook County) and within the MWRD contracted areas, in addition to all local ordinances relating to
industrial waste discharges to the village's sewerage system. Where provisions of the MWRD-SWCO applicable to areas of the village of Bartlett within
the corporate limits of the MWRD (Cook County) and to the MWRD contracted areas, are in conflict with provisions of any local ordinances, the more
stringent provisions will apply, except for the concentration limits set forth in subsection 7-5D-5A5 of this article, the surcharge limits set forth in
subsection 7-5D-5C, and section 7-5D-12 of this article, which shall only be applicable to industrial waste discharges admitted to or discharged into the
Bartlett treatment plant.
F. The Fox River water reclamation district (the "FRWRD") enacted an ordinance enacting a general pretreatment program regulating use of public and
private sewers and drains and providing penalties for violations thereof effective April 1, 1993, including, without limitation, section 200, wastewater
treatment and pretreatment regulations (the "FRWRD pretreatment and sewer use ordinance"), as the same has been and may be amended from time
to time, is hereby adopted and is expressly incorporated herein by reference by the village of Bartlett as authority for administration and enforcement of
the industrial waste pretreatment program within areas of the village of Bartlett that are within the corporate limits of the FRWRD and those areas of the
village that are not within the corporate limits of FRWRD, but are subject to agreement for sewerage services between FRWRD and the village of
Bartlett and amendments thereto, if any (the "FRWRD contracted areas").
G. The requirements of the FRWRD pretreatment and sewer use ordinance are hereby expressly made applicable to the sewage and industrial waste
admitted to and discharged into the sewerage systems and waters under the jurisdiction of the FRWRD as provided in the FRWRD pretreatment and
sewer use ordinance, including the publicly owned treatment works owned by FRWRD (the "FRWRD POTW") and any interceptor sewers that convey
wastewater to the FRWRD POTW treatment plant regardless of ownership but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to
a FRWRD facility providing treatment. For purposes of this article, FRWRD POTW also includes sewers that convey wastewater to the FRWRD POTW
from persons and users outside the boundaries of FRWRD, who are by contract with the FRWRD, users of FRWRD.
H. The requirements of the FRWRD pretreatment and sewer use ordinance are hereby made applicable to all industrial waste discharges within the served
areas of the village of Bartlett within the corporate limits of FRWRD (Kane County) and within the FRWRD contracted areas, if any, in addition to all
local ordinances relating to industrial waste discharges to the village's sewer system. Where provisions of the FRWRD pretreatment and sewer use
ordinance applicable to areas of the village of Bartlett within the corporate limits of the FRWRD (Kane County) and to the FRWRD contracted areas,
are in conflict with the provisions of this article, the more stringent provisions will apply, except for the concentration limits set forth in subsection 7-5D-
5A5 of this article, and the surcharge limits set forth in subsection 7-5D-5C, and section 7-5D-12 of this article, which shall only be applicable industrial
waste discharges admitted to or discharged into the Bartlett treatment plant. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS; APPLICABLE DISCHARGES; AND BARTLETT TREATMENT FACILITY BOUNDARIES:
A. General Provisions: This article, as the same may be amended from time to time, sometimes referred to as the "Bartlett sewerage system regulations"
which regulate wastewater and industrial waste discharged into the Bartlett treatment facility and which regulate discharges into the village's sanitary
sewer system, including not only the Bartlett treatment facility but also all sewers, pipes, and other conveyances located within the corporate limits of
the village of Bartlett that convey wastewater and/or industrial waste, but not including MWRD interceptor sewers and FRWRD interceptor sewers. The
objectives of this article are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Bartlett treatment facility that will or could interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate
the resulting sludges and biosolids;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Bartlett treatment facility that will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
3. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment system that will pose a health or safety threat to the general public or to the
Bartlett treatment facility collection system field crew or wastewater treatment plant personnel;
4. To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and biosolids from the Bartlett treatment facility;
5. To establish how surcharges for excessive strength wastewater discharged into the Bartlett treatment facility are calculated;
6. To enable the Bartlett treatment facility to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, biosolids use and disposal requirements, and any other federal
or state laws to which its wastewater treatment plant is subject.
7. To protect the Bartlett sanitary sewer system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 247/702
B. Bartlett Treatment Facility Boundaries: The boundaries of the service area of the village served by the Bartlett treatment facility are hereby described as
that portion of the village lying in DuPage County and those areas outside of the village and/or areas outside of DuPage County where the owners or
operators of properties, by contract or agreement with the village of Bartlett are users of the Bartlett treatment facility (the "Bartlett treatment facility
boundaries"). The provisions of this article regulating the discharge of wastewater and industrial waste to the Bartlett treatment facility shall be
applicable to the Bartlett treatment facility boundaries and to any user that is the source of any sewage, industrial waste, and other waste that is
admitted into the sanitary sewerage system of the village and is discharged into the Bartlett treatment facility, and shall not apply to users located within
the boundaries or under the jurisdiction of the MWRD or FRWRD, or any user that is the source of sewerage, industrial waste, and/or other wastes that
are admitted to or discharged into any sewer system, interceptor, or sewer treatment facility owned and/or operated by the MWRD or the FRWRD or
discharges into any waters under the jurisdiction of the MWRD or the FRWRD.
C. Applicability To Bartlett Sanitary Sewer System: The corporate authorities of the village of Bartlett hereby declare and establish that the village, acting
by and through its director of public works, shall have jurisdiction over the Bartlett treatment facility boundaries area and over the Bartlett sanitary
sewer system.
D. Administration:
1. The provisions of this article regulating the use of the Bartlett sanitary sewer system shall apply to the sanitary sewer trunk lines, collector line, and
laterals used to transmit wastewater and industrial waste lying within the corporate limits of the village, whether located within DuPage, Cook or Kane
County portion of the village.
2. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-3: ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS:
A. Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BMR Baseline monitoring report
CBOD5 Carbonaceous 5 day biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of federal regulations
gpm Gallons per minute
HEM Hexane extractable material
IEPA Illinois environmental protection agency
mg/l Milligrams per liter
Mgd Million gallons per day
NCPS National categorical pretreatment standard(s)
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
O&G Oils and grease
P-HEM Polar hexane extractable material
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
PSNS Pretreatment standards for new sources
RCRA Resource conservation recovery act
SGT-HEM Silica gel treated hexane extractable material
SIC Standard industrial classification
SIU Significant industrial user
SMR Self-monitoring report
SWDA Solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
.g/l Micrograms per liter
USC United States Code
USEPA United States environmental protection agency
B. Definitions: Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases used in this article shall have the following meanings:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 248/702
ACT: The federal water pollution control act, as amended by the clean water act and the water quality act of 1987. (33 USC 1251 et seq.)
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: 1. A principal executive officer or at least the level of vice president, or proprietor if the
user is a corporation;
2. A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
3. A manager or member/manager if the industrial user is a limited liability company, a duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above. A person is a duly authorized representative only if the authorization is made in writing to the village of Bartlett by a person described in
subsections 1, 2 or 3 of this definition.
BARTLETT TREATMENT FACILITY: The wastewater treatment facility owned and operated by the village and located on Stearns Road, which will
treat domestic wastewater, industrial wastewater and "overflows".
BASELINE MONITORING REPORT OR BMR: The report required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-7).
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD5: The quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
carbonaceous (organic) matter over a five (5) day period using laboratory procedures as described in standard methods.
BIOSOLIDS: The liquid containing solids or semisolid wastewater treatment plant byproduct that has been processed to allow its disposal or land
application in accordance with applicable federal and state regulations.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR CBOD5: See definition of Biochemical Oxygen Demand Or BOD5.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The combined waste stream formula as found at 40 CFR 403.6(e).
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: Ammonia nitrogen, CBOD5, P-HEM, TSS, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The numerical average of all grab samples or the result of an analysis of a single sample formed by combining all individual
aliquots. A daily composite sample must be based upon at least four (4) grab samples taken at different times and representative of the user's flow.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DIRECTOR: The duly appointed or acting village of Bartlett director of public works.
ECONOMIC BENEFIT: The difference between the cost of on time compliance and delayed compliance. Economic benefits realized by the user
which fails to comply by a required deadline can be measured by:
1. The money that the user would expect to earn by delaying the purchase of pretreatment equipment and investing the money in more profitable
projects; or
2. The annual cost the user avoids, and the expected return on avoided costs during the period of noncompliance; or
3. Any competitive advantage the user may gain, such as increased market share over competitors already in compliance, because of cost
advantages attributed to delayed compliance.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge, which is not a new source.
FRWRD: The Fox River water reclamation district.
FATS, OILS AND GREASES (FOG): Organic polar and nonpolar compounds. Polar compounds are derived from animal and/or plant sources that
contain multiple carbon triglyceride molecules. Organic nonpolar fraction of oil and grease (petroleum hydrocarbons) is identified as silica gel treated
n-hexane extractable materials (SGT-HEM) in the pretreatment standards.
FECAL COLIFORM: Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an
indicator of pollution.
FLOW: Volume of wastewater per unit of time.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from commercial handling, storage
and sale of produce.
GRAB: A sample which is collected from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to the waste stream flow and without consideration of
time.
HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL OR HEM: The oil and grease extracted from a wastewater sample using USEPA method 1664 as found in
USEPA document EPA-821-B-94-004, October 1994.
HYDRAULIC LOADING: The quarterly wastewater flow volume, as measured by a flow meter at the point of discharge, if such meter is installed by
the user to meet village specifications; otherwise, as measured by the water meter on the water supply line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 249/702
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT: All pollutants other than the compatible pollutants as defined in this section.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the Bartlett treatment facility and/or into the village of Bartlett sanitary
sewer system from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act, state law, or this article.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge, including, but not limited to, a manufacturing or process facility or other facility engaged in the
purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business or who otherwise renders services to the public.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
1. Inhibits or disrupts the Bartlett treatment facility including, but not necessarily limited to: the collection and conveyance of wastewater to the
treatment plant, the processes or operations of the wastewater treatment plant, or the use or disposal of sludges and biosolids produced by the
wastewater treatment plant; and
2. Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Bartlett treatment facility NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations
or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the clean water act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA)
(including title II, most commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the clean air act, the toxic substances control act, and the
marine protection, research and sanctuaries act.
MWRD: The metropolitan water reclamation district of Greater Chicago.
MAY: Permissive.
MEDICAL WASTE: Any isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites,
etiological agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any pretreatment regulation specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants which
may be discharged to a publicly owned treatment works by industrial users promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of
the act (33 USC 1317). This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5 or any revision thereto.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT OR STATE DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued for the direct
discharge to navigable waters of the United States pursuant to section 402 of the federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1342).
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced after
the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
If national categorical pretreatment standards are not applicable, "new source" shall mean any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the remodeling (if that remodeling results in a new SIC code being assigned to the industrial user) or
the construction of which commences after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this article.
OIL AND GREASE: Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other material that is extracted with an extraction solvent as
prescribed by standard methods.
ORGANIC LOADING: The quantity of BOD5 and/or suspended solids contained in wastewater discharged by any user.
OVERFLOWS: Any stormwater which overflows from the Cook County portion of Bartlett into the DuPage County portion of the Bartlett sanitary
sewer system.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the Bartlett treatment facility into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of Bartlett's NPDES permit (including
an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, limited liability company, association, society, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the
singular shall include the plural where indicated by context.
pH: The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
POLAR HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL OR P-HEM: Vegetable oils, animal fats, other highly degradable oils and other polar hydrocarbons as
determined by subtracting a sample's SGT-HEM content from its HEM content.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial, agricultural
waste, or any other contaminant.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the Bartlett treatment facility. This can
be accomplished by physical, chemical or biochemical processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 250/702
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard,
imposed on an industrial user.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the act. This definition includes any devices
and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature that convey
wastewater to the POTW regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected to the POTW.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: Any sanitary sewer trunk line, collector line or lateral, used to transmit wastewater to either: 1) the Bartlett treatment
facility, 2) the MWRD interceptor system, or 3) the FRWRD interceptor system.
SELF-MONITORING REPORT OR SMR: The report required by 40 CFR 403.12(e) to be submitted by the industrial user every six (6) months to the
director.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to the Bartlett treatment facility and/or the Bartlett sanitary sewer system which
causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or surface runoff.
SEWER, COMBINED: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
SEWER, PUBLIC: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.
SEWER, SANITARY: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER OR SIU: Any industrial user of the Bartlett treatment facility system who:
1. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater into the wastewater treatment system
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
2. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant; or
3. Is designated as such by the director on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the Bartlett treatment
facility system's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)).
4. Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N.
Upon finding by the director that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsections 1 through 3 of this definition has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the Bartlett treatment facility or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Bartlett treatment facility may, at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(F)(6), determine that
such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE OR SNC: 1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein as those in which sixty six percent
(66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit for the same pollutant parameter by
any amount; or
2. Technical review criterion (TRC) violations defined herein as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken during a six (6) month monitoring period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by an
applicable TRC factor. The TRC factor for CBOD5, TSS, O&G is 1.4. The TRC factor for all other pollutants, except pH, is 1.2; or
3. Any other discharge violations that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interferences or passthrough
(including endangering the health of Bartlett treatment facility personnel or the general public); or
4. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge under this article; or
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit
enforcement action for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; or
6. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance
reports, self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
8. Any other violation or group of violations which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the provisions of
this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 251/702
SILICA GEL TREATED HEXANE EXTRACTABLE MATERIAL OR SGT-HEM: The total petroleum hydrocarbons extracted from a wastewater sample
using USEPA method 1664 as found in USEPA document EPA-821-B-94-004, October 1994.
SLUDGE: The settleable solids separated from liquids during the wastewater treatment process.
SLUG: Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD METHODS: The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of standard methods for the examination of
water and wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Water Environment Federation; and other procedures as recognized by the USEPA and IEPA.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STORM SEWER OR DRAIN: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
STORMWATER: Any water originating from rainfall or melting ice or snow.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of sewer and water of the village of Bartlett.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR TSS: The total filterable residue, expressed in milligrams per liter that either floats on the surface of, or is in
suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by filtration as prescribed in standard methods.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants identified as toxic pursuant to section 307(a) of the federal water pollution control act
or other federal statutes or in regulations promulgated by the state under state law.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent quality criteria set forth in 35 Illinois administrative code part 304 or water
that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards set forth in 35 Illinois administrative code parts 302 and 303 and would not be
benefited by discharge to sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the Bartlett treatment facility and/or the Bartlett sanitary
sewer system.
WASTEWATER: The combination of the liquid and water carrying industrial or domestic wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, or institutions including polluted cooling water, whether treated or untreated.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: The document(s) allowing discharge into the Bartlett treatment facility and issued to a user by the director in
accordance with the terms of this article.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems,
drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state of Illinois or any portion thereof.
C. Incorporation Of MWRD-SWCO And The FRWRD Pretreatment Sewer Use Ordinance Abbreviations And Definitions: Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the definitions set forth in this section are hereby amended and supplemented by the addition thereto of the definitions and abbreviations set forth in
article II of the MWRD-SWCO, as the same may be amended from time to time, which are hereby expressly incorporated herein, and by the definitions
and abbreviations set forth in section 100 of the FRWRD pretreatment and sewer ordinance, as the same may be amended from time to time, which
are expressly incorporated herein. In the event of any conflict between the definitions written above and the definitions in the MWRD-SWCO and/or in
the FRWRD pretreatment and sewer ordinance incorporated herein, the more expansive definition and meaning shall apply.
In the event of a conflict between the definitions written above and the definitions in the MWRD-SWCO, as the same may be amended, the definitions
written above shall apply to the sewage, wastewater and industrial waste admitted to or discharged to the Bartlett treatment facility, and the definitions
in the MWRD-SWCO, as amended from time to time shall apply for sewerage, wastewater and industrial wastewater admitted to or discharged into the
sewerage system and waters under the jurisdiction of the MWRD.
In the event of a conflict between the definitions written above and the definitions in the FRWRD pretreatment and sewer treatment ordinance, as the
same may be amended, the definitions written above shall apply to the sewerage, wastewater and industrial waste admitted to or discharged into the
definitions in the FRWRD pretreatment and sewer treatment ordinance as amended, shall apply to the sewerage, wastewater and industrial waste
admitted to or discharged into the sewerage system and waters under the jurisdiction of FRWRD. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-4: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. User Of Wastewater Facilities:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge, or to cause to be deposited or discharged, directly or indirectly to the Bartlett treatment
facility, any solid, liquid or gaseous waste unless through a connection or discharge point approved by the director in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
3. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 252/702
4. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
5. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within
one hundred feet (100') of the property line.
6. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any water of the state located within the corporate limits of the village without an NPDES permit or state discharge
permit.
B. Prohibited Discharges:
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, foundation drainwater, groundwater, roof runoff, surface drainage, noncontact
cooling waters, or any other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer, unless specifically authorized by the director.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge sanitary and industrial wastewater into any storm sewer in the village.
3. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director.
4. It shall be unlawful to bypass if not in accordance with this article.
5. It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to violate any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
6. The general prohibition found in subsection B7 of this section and specific prohibitions found in subsections B8a through B8o of this section,
inclusive, shall apply to all users of the Bartlett treatment facility whether or not a user is subject to national categorical standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
a. A user shall have an affirmative action defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in
subsection B7 of this section and the specific prohibitions in subsections B8c, B8d, B8e, B8f, and B8g of this section where the user can
demonstrate that:
(1) It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or other discharges from other sources,
would cause pass-through or interference; and
(2) A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference, as the case may be, was developed for each pollutant in the user's
discharge that caused pass-through or interference, and the user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the
pass-through or interference; or
(3) If a local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference, as the case may be, has not been developed for the pollutant that caused
the pass-through or interference, and the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the Bartlett treatment facility was regularly in compliance with
its NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal.
7. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the Bartlett treatment facility or will pass through the sanitary sewer system.
8. In addition, the following pollutants shall not be introduced into the Bartlett treatment facility or the sanitary sewer system:
a. Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the wastewater collection system, including, but not limited to:
(1) Waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty degrees centigrade (60°C) using
the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; or
(2) At no time shall two (2) successive lower explosion limit (LEL) readings of five percent (5%) nor any single reading of ten percent (10%) occur
at any point in the wastewater treatment system.
b. Any wastewater which will cause corrosive structural damage to the wastewater treatment system or sanitary sewer system, but in no case
wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 units, or any wastewater having a pH greater than 10.0 units which is not in accordance with the notification
requirements of this article.
c. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal guts, or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud, glass, grinding or polishing wastes, tumbling or deburring stones, or any material which can be disposed
of as trash.
d. Any wastewater containing pollutants, released at a flow or concentration, either singly or by interaction with other sources, to injure or cause
interference with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, cause pass-through resulting in a violation of the
water quality standards of the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facilities, exceed any limitation set forth in a national categorical
pretreatment standard (when effective) or in this article or create a public nuisance.
e. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference; in no case
shall wastewater be discharged which causes temperatures at the head of the wastewater treatment facilities to exceed one hundred four degrees
Fahrenheit (104°F) or forty degrees centigrade (40°C).
f. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
g. Any pollutant(s), which either singly or by interaction with other wastewater, resulting in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes in the
wastewater treatment facilities in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems to occur.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 253/702
h. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director.
i. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastewaters are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sanitary sewer system for their maintenance and repair.
j. In no case shall a substance be discharged into the Bartlett treatment facility which causes the Bartlett treatment facility to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act; any criteria guidelines or regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the RCRA, SWDA, the clean air act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method
being used.
k. Any wastewater containing compatible pollutants of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant; provided, however, that a user may be permitted by specific written agreement with the director or MWRD
or FRWRD, which agreement to discharge such compatible pollutants may provide for special charges, payments or provisions for treating or
testing equipment.
l. Any discharge exceeding the standards established in 35 Illinois administrative code 307.
m. Any slug discharged into the Bartlett treatment facility, any other wastewater treatment facility, or into the sanitary sewer system.
n. Any regulated medical waste as defined by 40 CFR 259.30(a), or residues resultant from treatment and destruction processes of said waste,
except as specifically authorized by the director, the MWRD or FRWRD in a discharge permit.
o. Any wastewater containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the Bartlett treatment
facility or any wastewater treatment facility.
9. Compliance with the provisions of this section shall be required on the effective date of promulgation of this article.
C. Sampling And Analysis Procedures To Be Used: Wastewater sampling and analysis procedures to determine compliance with the limits found in this
article shall conform to those specified at 40 CFR 136. The director may designate sampling and analysis procedures for those pollutants not specified
at 40 CFR 136.18 with respect to the Bartlett treatment facility.
D. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards:
1. The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated into this
article by reference.
2. Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standard (NCPS) for a particular user, the said standard, if more stringent than the
limitations imposed under this article for sources in that category, shall, when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and conditions
imposed under this article. The director shall notify all known affected users of the Bartlett treatment facility of the applicable reporting requirements
under 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1-6).
E. State Requirements: Illinois pretreatment program requirements, found at title 35 of the Illinois administrative code, parts 307 and 310, are hereby
incorporated into this article by reference. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-5: WASTES REQUIRING PRETREATMENT (BARTLETT TREATMENT FACILITY):
A. Local Limits:
1. Compliance with the provisions of this section for new sources shall be required on the effective date of this article.
2. Compliance with the provisions of this section for existing sources shall be required within two (2) years of the effective date of this article where
such limits for a given pollutant(s) are new or are more stringent than the limits they are superseding. Limits which are being superseded shall
remain in effect until two (2) years past the effective date of this article approving of this amended article.
3. Unless otherwise indicated, concentrations in this section are expressed in milligrams per liter and refer to the total amount of the constituent present
in all phases, whether solid, suspended or dissolved, elemental or combined, including all oxidation states. Where constituents may be measured as
other than total, the word "total" is indicated for clarity.
4. The hexane extractable material, indicated in this article, refers to the sum of polar hydrocarbons (such as vegetable oils, animal fats, and other
highly biodegradable oils) and nonpolar hydrocarbons (such as petroleum based oils and greases) as determined by HEM and SGT-HEM analyses.
The silica gel treated hexane extractable material in this section refers to petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin
and other nonpolar hydrocarbons as determined by HEM and SGT-HEM analyses.
5. Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as measured under the provisions of this article shall not contain in excess of the following
concentrations based upon a composite (24 hour) or a grab sample as shown below:
Wastewater
Constituent
Limit
mg/l
Sample
Type1
Ammonia (NH3-N) 25.00 C
Arsenic (T) 0.25 C
Barium (T) 2.00 C
CBOD5 1000.00 C
Cadmium (T) 0.15 C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 254/702
Chromium (+6) 0.30 C
Chromium (T) 1.00 C
Copper (T) 1.00 C
Cyanide (T) 0.025 G
Iron (T) 20.00 C
Lead (T) 0.10 C
Manganese (T) 1.00 C
Mercury (T) 0.0005 C
Molybdenum (T) 0.27 C
Nickel (T) 0.86 C
Oil (HEM) 400.00 G
pH, range2 5 - 102 C
Phenols (T) 0.30 G
SGT-HEM3 10.00 G
Selenium (T) 0.46 C
Silver (T) 0.10 C
TSS 1000.00 C
Zinc (T) 1.00 C
Notes:
1. C = composite sample (24 hour), G = grab sample.
2. The pH limitation is not subject to averaging and must be met at all times.
3. SGT-HEM is silica gel treated hexane extractable material.
B. Notice Of Violation/Resampling Requirement:
1. The user shall notify the director within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of any violation of the wastewater discharge limits noted in this
article if such violation was discovered through sampling performed by the user. The user shall also conduct an additional sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the additional analysis to the director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation, except if:
a. The director performs sampling of the industrial user at least once per month; or
b. The director performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the
results of this initial sampling.
C. Surcharge Program:
1. The village has determined that certain pollutants are compatible with the wastewater treatment process. The director reserves the right to recover
the treatment costs for those compatible pollutants that exceed the surcharge levels listed in this section.
Compatible Pollutant Surcharge Level
Ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) 20 mg/l
Biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD5) 200 mg/l
Hexane extractable materials (HEM) 100 mg/l
Total suspended solids (TSS) 250 mg/l
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed as authority to the user to exceed the local limits of said pollutants set forth in subsection A of this section.
3. The excessive strength sewage surcharges for these pollutants shall be calculated using the following formula:
PS = (PAVG - PSL) x Q x 8.345 x TCP
Where:
PS =
The excessive strength surcharge for the given compatible pollutant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 255/702
PAVG
=
The average concentration of the compatible pollutant for the wastewater discharge in question.
PSL =
The surcharge level concentration of the compatible pollutant as indicated in any Bartlett treatment facility ordinance or rate schedule
in effect at the time the surcharge is calculated.
Q =
The industrial user wastewater flow in millions of gallons (MG).
8.345
=
A factor which converts the product of concentration (mg/l) and flow (MG) into pounds of compatible pollutant.
TCP =
The treatment cost charge per pound of the compatible pollutant, such charge being stipulated by any village ordinances or rate
schedules in effect at the time the surcharge is calculated.
BOD $0.30 per lb. BOD above stated surcharge level (200 mg/l)
HEM $1.00 per lb. HEM above stated surcharge level (100 mg/l)
NH3-N $2.00 per lb. NH3-N above stated surcharge level (20 mg/l)
TSS $0.30 per lb. TSS above stated surcharge level (250 mg/l)
4. The director reserves the right to include, at his discretion, other parameters which he determines are compatible with the wastewater treatment
process with respect to the Bartlett treatment facility. The village of Bartlett does not consider industrial wastewater concentrations of compatible
pollutants above the surcharge levels listed to be discharge violations except for those concentrations or slug loadings which would cause
interference or pass-through at the Bartlett treatment facility.
D. Right Of Revision: The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director, more stringent
standards or requirements on discharges into the Bartlett treatment facility.
E. Inspection, Sampling And Records Keeping:
1. The village and its representatives may inspect the facilities of industrial users to ascertain whether the purposes of this article are being met and if
all requirements of this article are being complied with pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(v). Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
discharged, or a treatment system is located, or where records required by this article are kept, shall allow the village and its representatives ready
access upon presentation of credentials, at reasonable times to all parts of said premises where wastewater is generated, treated, or discharged, or
chemicals are stored, or records are kept, for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying of records required to be kept by
this article, and in the performance of their duties.
2. The village and its representatives shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
monitoring and metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require suitable identification, necessary
arrangements must be made with the user's security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the village shall be
permitted to enter immediately for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
3. Users of the Bartlett treatment facility shall each maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this article or,
in the case of industrial users, by 40 CFR 403.12(n). The village, to the extent such records have been filed with the village, and industrial users shall
maintain such records for a minimum of three (3) years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation
regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user.
F. Monitoring Facilities:
1. The village shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems to facilities and users of the Bartlett treatment facility.
2. Whenever required by the village with respect to facilities and users of the Bartlett treatment plant, an industrial user shall install a large manhole or
sampling chamber for each separate discharge in the building's sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village engineer,
installed and maintained at all times at user's expense, which shall have ample room in each sampling chamber to permit the director or his nominee
to take accurate composite samples for analysis.
a. The monitoring facility will normally be situated on the user's premises but, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to
the user, the facility may seek approval from the director to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping, parked vehicles, or other activities of the user.
b. The monitoring facility shall be safely, easily and independently accessible to authorized representatives of village any time of the week.
3. Where required by the village, additional control manholes or sampling chambers shall be provided at the end of each industrial process within an
industrial user's facility suitable for the determination of compliance with "end of process" pretreatment standards.
G. Dilution: No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained within the national categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), or in any
other pollutant specific limitations developed by the village with respect to the Bartlett treatment facility.
H. Pretreatment Facilities: Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in this article within the time limitations specified by the EPA or village with respect to the
Bartlett treatment facility, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 256/702
expense. Detailed plans, describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the village for review before such facilities are
constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the village at the Bartlett treatment facility under the provisions of this article.
I. Slug/Spill Prevention Control And Countermeasure (SSPCC) Plans:
1. Each industrial user having the ability to cause interference with the Bartlett treatment facility or to violate the regulatory provisions of this article shall
provide protection from accidental discharge into the Bartlett treatment facility of prohibited materials. Such protection shall be provided and
maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense.
2. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
3. The village shall evaluate each significant industrial user that utilizes the Bartlett treatment facility at least once every two (2) years, and other
industrial users as necessary, to determine whether such users need a slug/spill prevention, control and countermeasure (SSPCC) plan. If it is
determined an SSPCC plan is required, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
a. A description of discharge practices, including periodic or nonroutine discharges;
b. A description of stored chemicals;
c. The procedures for immediately notifying the village of a slug/spill in accordance with the procedures outlined in this article; and
d. If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
4. Industrial users that store hazardous materials shall not discharge into the Bartlett treatment facility or the village sanitary sewer system unless an
SSPCC plan has been approved. Approval of such plans shall not relieve the industrial user from complying with all other laws and regulations
governing the use, storage, and transportation of hazardous materials.
J. Notification:
1. Slug/spill incidents:
a. In the case of an accidental or deliberate discharge of compatible or incompatible pollutants which may cause interference or pass-through at the
Bartlett treatment facility or violate any requirements of this article, it shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and
notify the village of the incident. The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of the discharge, the type of wastewater,
the concentration and volume, and any corrective actions taken by the user.
b. Within five (5) days following such an accidental or deliberate discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the village a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Follow up reports may be
required by the village as needed.
c. Such report, or reports, shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to
the wastewater treatment system, fish kills, or any damage to person or property; nor shall such report relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed by the village under this article, the IEPA or other governmental entity with jurisdiction, or otherwise. Failure
to report accidental or deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the village, result in the revocation of the
discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
2. All industrial users shall give a thirty (30) day notice in writing to the village in the event type, quality, or volume of wastewater, including hazardous
waste notification, from the property is expected to materially and substantially change.
K. Notification Of Hazardous Waste Discharge:
1. Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the village, the IEPA, and the EPA region 5 authorities in writing of
any discharge into the sanitary sewer of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a listed or characteristic hazardous waste under 40
CFR 261.
a. Such notification shall include:
(1) The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261;
(2) The EPA hazardous waste number; and
(3) The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
b. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
c. In addition, if the industrial user discharges more than one hundred kilograms (100 kg) of such waste per calendar month into the Bartlett
treatment facility, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is readily available to the industrial user:
(1) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;
(2) An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during the calendar month; and
(3) An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 257/702
2. Industrial users are exempt from the requirements of subsection K1a of this section during the calendar months in which they discharge no more
than fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 40 CFR 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen
kilograms (15 kg) of nonacute hazardous waste in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous waste, requires a onetime notification.
3. In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste, the industrial user must
notify the Bartlett treatment facility, the IEPA, and EPA region 5 authorities of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such
regulations.
4. In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
L. Confidential Information:
1. Information and data relating to an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless otherwise restricted in subsection L3 of this section, or the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the village, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user, and is otherwise exempt under the Illinois freedom of information act and/or
any similar federal laws. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. All information and data,
confidential or otherwise, shall be made available to the IEPA and the USEPA for use in judicial review and enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report.
2. Information and data provided to the village which is effluent data shall not be recognized as confidential and shall be made available to the public,
IEPA, and USEPA without restriction unless otherwise restricted in subsection L3 of this section.
3. Investigatory records or compliance information compiled for federal, state, county or the village enforcement purposes shall be exempt from
inspection and copying; but limited to the extent that the disclosure would interfere with pending or actually and reasonably contemplated
enforcement proceedings.
4. Information accepted by the village as confidential shall not be transmitted to the general public by the village unless agreed to by the industrial user,
or required to be disclosed under the Illinois freedom of information act.
5. The village shall implement measures to prevent the negligent release of confidential information; however the village shall not be held legally
responsible for release of information if it acted in good faith.
M. Tenant Responsibility:
1. Where an owner of property leases, grants an easement, or license to use premises to any other person as a tenant or grantee under any rental or
lease agreement, grant of easement or easement agreement, license or other use agreement, if either the owner or tenant or grantee is an industrial
user, each of them shall be held responsible for compliance with this article, and shall be jointly and severally liable for any fines and penalties as a
result of a violation or violations hereunder.
N. Vandalism:
1. No person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment, or other part of the Bartlett treatment facility, or the sanitary sewer system works, or to the sanitary sewer system. Any
person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions (enforcement remedies) set forth in this article. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-
2016)
7-5D-6: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the village.
B. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) for residential and commercial, and 2) for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or any other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the village engineer, director or the building
director.
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" or "T" branch if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the
public sewer is twelve inches (12") in diameter or less and no properly located "Y" or "T" is available, the owner shall, at his expense, install a "Y" or "T"
branch in the public sewer or a saddle connection to the public sewer at the location specified by the director or any other duly appointed official.
Where the public sewer is greater than twelve inches (12") in diameter, and no properly located "Y" or "T" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut
into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty five degrees (45°). A forty five
degree (45°) ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The
invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer.
E. All building sewers shall comply with the requirements therefor as set forth in the building code, as amended. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and
the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the
director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 258/702
F. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the building director or his representative.
G. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. (Ord. 2016-
44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-7: SUMP PUMPS, OVERHEAD SEWERS, AND BELOW GRADE IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Sump pumps used to drain basements and floating drains shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer system, but shall discharge in a manner as
specified in section 9-10-7 of this code.
B. In houses with overhead sewers, a separate sump pump will be required for laundry facilities and inside floor drains. This is to be discharged into the
sanitary sewer.
C. Wherever toilets are installed in basements or below the ground level, there must be a sewage ejector pump between the toilet and the house lateral
sewer (including an access pit to make the mechanism accessible), unless the Village Engineer certifies that such devices are not necessary.
D. Gravity sewers draining any basement, below grade area or crawl space shall not be connected to any public storm sewer or other drain lines
connected to the public storm sewer unless the Village Engineer certifies that a gravity sewer is feasible and a sump is not necessary. (Ord. 2016-44,
6-7-2016)
7-5D-8: SEWER RATE CHARGES:
Effective May 1, 2019, the amount to be charged monthly to each user of the Bartlett sanitary sewer system shall be as follows:
A. For the collection and excess flow treatment of Cook County users' wastewater, sixteen dollars thirty seven cents ($16.37) plus one dollar thirty six
cents ($1.36) per thousand gallons with a minimum charge of nineteen dollars seventy seven cents ($19.77) per user per month. All Bartlett residents
who are age sixty five (65) and over and who are responsible for the payment of their own sewer charges shall receive a ten percent (10%) discount on
all sewer charges.
B. For the collection and treatment of DuPage County users' wastewater, twenty dollars eighty six cents ($20.86) plus three dollars seventy three cents
($3.73) per thousand gallons with a minimum charge of thirty dollars nineteen cents ($30.19) per user per month. All Bartlett residents who are age
sixty five (65) and over and who are responsible for the payment of their own sewer charges shall receive a ten percent (10%) discount on all sewer
charges.
C. For the collection of Kane County users' wastewater, twelve dollars eighty three cents ($12.83) plus one dollar six cents ($1.06) per thousand gallons
with a minimum charge of fifteen dollars forty eight cents ($15.48) per user per month. All Bartlett residents who are age sixty five (65) and over and
who are responsible for the payment of their own sewer charges shall receive a ten percent (10%) discount on all sewer charges. (Ord. 2019-14, 2-19-
2019)
7-5D-9: COMPUTING QUARTERLY OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE CHARGES:
The quarterly operational and maintenance charges for the sanitary sewer system and/or the Bartlett Treatment Facility shall be computed in accordance
with section 7-5D-8 of this article, and as follows:
A. For the purpose of computing the maintenance and operation charges and surcharges (as shown in section 7-5D-8 of this article) for a group of
industrial users served by a single water meter:
1. The amount of water as recorded by such single water meter shall be divided by the number of users to determine the average usage.
2. The respective charges per said section 7-5D-8 of this article shall be applied to each user and the total charges determined for the quarter. (Ord.
2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-10: PAYMENT:
Each user shall pay to the Village Director of Finance the amount of his maintenance and operation charges computed in accordance with sections 7-5D-8
and 7-5D-9 of this article, if applicable, within twenty (20) days after his statement is deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-11: REVIEW OF MAINTENANCE AND USER CHARGES:
The Village shall review all operational and maintenance costs, and depreciation at least every five (5) years in order to arrive at current maintenance
costs, user charges and industrial surcharges; however, the failure to review said information every five (5) years shall not be grounds, excuse, defense or
a reason for any user not to pay the sewer rate charges billed by the Village. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 259/702
7-5D-12: DISCHARGE PERMITS (BARTLETT TREATMENT FACILITY):
A. Prohibition Of Discharge Without Permit: It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge wastewater into the Bartlett Treatment
Facility wastewater treatment system without an industrial wastewater discharge permit issued by the Village or contrary to the conditions of the permit
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Wastewater Discharge Permits:
1. All industrial users proposing to connect to or discharge into the Bartlett Treatment Facility shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit at least ninety
(90) days prior to such connection or discharge. All existing industrial users identified by the Village as significant industrial users served by or to be
served by the Bartlett Treatment Facility shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days after notification by Village.
a. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application:
(1) Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the village, an application form, prescribed by the
director, and accompanied by a fee to be determined by the village corporate authorities. The application form shall be duly signed and certified
by an authorized representative of the industrial user.
(2) If additional user operation and maintenance or pretreatment techniques or installations will be required to meet pretreatment standards, the
industrial user shall submit to the village the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the pretreatment standards. The schedule for compliance shall, at a
minimum, contain the following:
(A) Increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation
of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (i.e., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary
plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for the purchase of major components, commencing construction, completing construction,
etc.);
(B) No increment of progress referred to herein shall exceed nine (9) months;
(C) No later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the village including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and if not, the
date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the village.
(3) Any other information as deemed by the village engineer or the director to be necessary to evaluate the discharge permit application. After
evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the director may issue a discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions provided herein.
(4) All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain
the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best
of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
b. Wastewater Discharge Permit Conditions: Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other
applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the village. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain the following terms and
conditions:
(1) A statement of duration. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. The permittee
shall file an application for renewal of its permit at least ninety (90) days prior to expiration of the existing permit. The user shall apply on a form
provided by the village for the reissuance of the permit. Upon reissuance, any applicable provisions of the wastewater discharge permit issued
during the term of the expiring permit shall be incorporated as conditions of the reissued wastewater discharge permit.
(2) A statement of nontransferability. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for the process activity specified in the
wastewater discharge permit. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner or new user in different
premises or to a new or changed operation in the same or different premises without the prior approval of the village of Bartlett. If the premises
are sold or otherwise transferred by the permittee to a new owner who will maintain the operation in the same premises, then the wastewater
discharge permit held by the seller may be reissued by the village of Bartlett to the new owner as a temporary permit, provided that the new
owner shall immediately apply for a new wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this article and further provided that the temporary
permit shall only be effective for ninety (90) days after the date of sale or transfer. The village shall have the same remedies for violation of
temporary permits as it has for violation of other permits.
(3) Effluent limitation on average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics based upon the more stringent of federal, state, or
local discharge limits as established by the village ordinances, which may include requirements for time, flow regulation or equalization prior to
discharge for each separate discharge of the user.
(4) Specifications and requirements for the establishment of compliance monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of
sampling, number and type of standard testing, submission of technical or discharge reports, or the installation and operation of monitoring
facilities for each separate discharge of the user.
(5) Requirements to retain for a minimum of three (3) years any records of monitoring activities and results relating to wastewater discharge and
for affording the village access to said records in accordance with this article.
(6) A statement that any user found to have violated any provision of this article is subject to the enforcement remedies found in this article. Such
enforcement shall include, but shall not be limited to, the civil and criminal penalties found in this article.
(7) A compliance schedule(s), if necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 260/702
(8) Requirements for notification of accidental or deliberate discharge of pollutants which may cause problems in the Bartlett treatment facility,
including, but not limited to, slug loadings, bypasses, upsets, or any violations in accordance with this article.
(9) Requirements for industrial users to give a thirty (30) day notice in writing to the village in the event the type, quality, or volume of wastewater,
including hazardous waste notification, from the property is expected to materially and substantially change in accordance with this article.
(10) Requirements for the industrial users to allow the village, or its representatives, ready access, upon presentation of credentials, at reasonable
times to all parts of its premises in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or in which records required by this article are kept
for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examination, and photocopying of said records and for the performance of any other duties in
accordance with this article.
(11) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article, state, and federal pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(12) The terms and conditions of the wastewater discharge permit may be subject to modification by the village of Bartlett during the term of the
permit as limitations or requirements of this article are modified or other just cause exists. Where the national categorical pretreatment standards
are modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 407.7) or the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)) or net/gross calculations (40
CFR 403.15) or fundamentally different factor variance for nontoxics (40 CFR 403.15) of the general pretreatment regulations, the limits as
modified shall be made a part of the permit and shall be adjusted consistent with USEPA guidelines and regulations.
c. Changes In Conditions: In the event the type, quality, or volume of wastewater from the property or which a wastewater discharge permit was
previously granted is expected to materially and substantially change as reasonably determined by the permittee or the director, the permittee shall
give a written thirty (30) day notice to the director and shall submit a new application to the village prior to said change. Information previously
submitted that has not changed does not need to be resubmitted by the permittee. No permittee shall materially and substantially change the type,
quality, or volume of the wastewater beyond that allowed by its wastewater discharge permit without the prior approval of the director.
d. Plans And Specifications: Detailed plans and specifications, prepared by an Illinois registered professional engineer, of the pretreatment facilities
proposed to be constructed shall be submitted to the village for review and must be acceptable by the village before construction of the facility is
commenced. The review of such plans shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the pretreatment facility as necessary to
comply with this article. The user shall submit, within a reasonable time after the completion of the pretreatment facility, a copy of the facility's
operations and maintenance procedures to the village.
C. Denial Of Wastewater Discharge Permit Application:
1. No wastewater discharge permit shall be issued by the village to any person whose discharge of material to the sanitary sewers, whether shown
upon his application or determined after an inspection and testing conducted by the village, is not in conformity with the village's ordinances and/or
regulations, or whose application for a wastewater discharge permit is incomplete, or does not comply with the requirements of this article. The
village of Bartlett shall state the reason(s) for denial in writing, which shall be mailed or personally delivered to the applicant within five (5) days after
denial.
2. If the application is denied, the user may submit, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the denial, a written request for a hearing to show cause why
the wastewater discharge permit should be granted.
D. Reporting Requirements For Permittee:
1. Compliance Date Report: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or in the case of a
new source, within forty five (45) days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the Bartlett treatment facility, any user subject
to pretreatment standards shall submit to the village a report, on forms provided indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units
in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional user operation and maintenance, pretreatment techniques or installations are necessary to
bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user.
2. Self-Monitoring Report: Any user subject to an applicable pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such applicable pretreatment
standard; or, in the case of a new source, after discharge of wastewater into the Bartlett treatment facility begins, shall submit to, on or before
January 15 and July 15 of each year a certified report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
applicable pretreatment standards.
In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and daily wastewater flows for the reporting period.
a. At the discretion of the director, this report shall also include concentrations of CBOD5, TSS and/or other pollutants specified by the director. The
permittee shall sample and analyze its wastewater for CBOD5, TSS and/or other pollutants at the discretion of the director as set forth in the
wastewater discharge permit issued to the permittee.
b. At the discretion of the director, and in consideration of such factors as a local high or low flow rate, holidays, and budget cycles, the director may
agree to alter the months during which self-monitoring reports are submitted.
c. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater to which reference is made in this subsection shall be determined in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(g), as amended from time to time.
3. Baseline Monitoring Reports:
a. Industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the village a complete baseline monitoring report meeting
the requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403.12(b).
b. Existing industrial users, currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge into the Bartlett treatment facility, shall submit a baseline monitoring
report within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a national categorical pretreatment standard or one hundred eighty (180)
days after the final administrative decision made upon a categorical determination submission, whichever is later.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 261/702
c. New sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard, shall submit a baseline monitoring report at least ninety (90) days prior to the commencement of discharge.
E. Bypass:
1. Allowing Bypass To Occur: An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not violate any pretreatment standards or requirements, but
only if such bypass is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. Such bypasses are not subject to subsection B of this section.
2. Notice:
a. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice to the village, if possible at least ten (10) days
before the date of the bypass.
b. An industrial user shall verbally notify village of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. Such
notice shall be given within twenty four (24) hours of the industrial user becoming aware of such a bypass. The industrial user shall, within five (5)
days of becoming aware of such a bypass, submit a written report to the village containing: a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration
of the bypass, including exact times and dates; and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and the
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent a recurrence of the bypass.
3. Prohibition Of Bypass:
a. Bypass is prohibited and the village may take enforcement against a user for a bypass unless:
(1) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; and
(2) There are no feasible alternatives to bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of wastewater, or maintenance during
normal periods of equipment down time. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed to prevent
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment down time or preventative maintenance; and
(3) The user submitted notices as required by subsection E2 of this section.
(4) The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that the bypass will meet the
three (3) conditions required by this subsection E3a.
F. Upsets:
1. An upset shall constitute an affirmative action defense to an action brought for noncompliance with the national categorical pretreatment standards if
the following requirements contained within this section are met.
2. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative action defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
a. An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the specific cause(s) of the upset;
b. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
c. The industrial user has submitted the following information to the director verbally, within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset,
and in writing, within five (5) days of becoming aware of the upset:
(1) A description of the upset and the cause(s) of noncompliance; and
(2) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times; and, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
(3) The steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent the recurrence of the noncompliance.
G. Burden Of Proof: In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of upset shall have the burden of proof.
H. User Responsibility In Case Of Upset: The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
all applicable regulations upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the Bartlett treatment facility is reduced,
lost, or fails.
I. Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation:
1. Any significant industrial user who is found to have violated any provision of this article, its wastewater discharge permit, enforcement remedy
pursuant to this article, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), is subject to having its wastewater discharge permit revoked.
a. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits of a user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that same user.
b. Following an order of revocation, the significant industrial user shall immediately cease discharging into the Bartlett treatment facility. Failure of the
significant industrial user to comply voluntarily with the order shall be evidence of continuing harm to the Bartlett treatment facility and provide
grounds for escalated enforcement actions to be taken by the village in accordance with this article, or any such steps as deemed necessary by
the village, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the Bartlett treatment facility or danger to
any individuals or to the environment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 262/702
c. The village shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or allow the significant industrial user to resume its discharge following a show
cause hearing held in accordance with this article. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-13: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
The director and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-14: ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
A. Public Notification Of Industrial Users In Significant Noncompliance: The village shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper in the municipality
in which the Bartlett treatment facility is located, a list of industrial users who were in significant noncompliance of any applicable pretreatment
requirement or standard during the previous twelve (12) months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the
industrial user(s) during the same twelve (12) months.
B. Notices Of Violation:
1. Whenever the village finds that any user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, wastewater discharge permit, or any other
pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), the village of Bartlett may serve upon said user a written notice of violation.
a. The notice of violation shall contain the particulars of such violation(s) and order the offending user to, but not limited to: explain the cause(s) of
the violation(s), submit a plan or schedule for the satisfactory correction of the violation(s) and the prevention of similar violation(s) in the future,
pay an administrative fine, or any additional remedies deemed necessary by the director to bring the user into compliance within the shortest time
frame feasible.
b. Submission of any information, plan, or schedule for corrective action, or fine payments in no way shall relieve the user of liability for any
violation(s) occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the village of Bartlett to take
any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement remedies, without first issuing a notice of violation.
C. Consent Orders:
1. The village administrator is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the user responsible for noncompliance.
a. Such orders shall include a schedule containing specific increments of progress or remedial actions to be completed for compliance by the user
within the time period(s) also specified by the order, any stipulated fines, and signatures of authorized representatives of the village of Bartlett and
industrial user representatives.
b. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as compliance directives issued in accordance to this article and shall be judicially
enforceable.
D. Show Cause Orders:
1. The village of Bartlett may order any user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, its wastewater discharge permit,
enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirements, to appear before the village administrator and show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
a. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of the hearing, the proposed enforcement action(s), the reason(s) for such
action(s), and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action(s) should not be taken. The notice of hearing shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
upon any authorized representative of the user.
b. At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded by a stenographer. The transcript, so recorded, will
be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearings upon payment of the usual copying charges.
c. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause order shall
not be a prerequisite for taking any other action(s) or enforcement remedies against the user.
E. Compliance Directives: Whenever the village administrator finds that any user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, its
wastewater discharge permit, enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), the village administrator
may issue a directive to the user responsible for the discharge, ordering the user to come into compliance within a time period stated in the compliance
directive. If the user does not come into compliance within the stated time period, sanitary sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
1. The compliance directive may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including, but not limited to: additional self-monitoring,
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged, payment of any stipulated fines, or any other additional remedies
deemed necessary by the village to bring the user into compliance within the shortest time frame feasible.
2. A compliance directive shall not exceed the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement.
3. A compliance directive shall not release the user of liability for any violation(s), including continuing violation(s), nor shall the issuance of a
compliance directive be a prerequisite for taking any other enforcement action or enforcement remedies against the user.
F. Cease And Desist Orders: Whenever the village finds that any user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, the wastewater
discharge permit, enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), or that the user's past violations are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 263/702
likely to recur, the village may issue an order directing the user responsible for the discharge to cease and desist all illegal or authorized discharges
immediately.
1. In emergency situations, a cease and desist order may be given by telephone.
2. In nonemergency situations, a cease and desist order may be used to suspend or permanently revoke an industrial user's wastewater discharge
permit(s).
3. The cease and desist order may require the user to take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
4. The issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite for taking other action or enforcement remedies against the user.
G. Emergency Suspensions: The village administrator may immediately suspend a user's wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater discharge
permit whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the Bartlett treatment facility, or the environment.
1. Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater discharge treatment service and/or wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply with the cease and desist order, the village shall take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer service connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the Bartlett treatment facility,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals, or the environment.
2. The village shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed following a hearing held in accordance with this
article, unless the revocation proceedings set forth in this article are initiated against the user.
3. Any user notified pursuant to this section shall submit to the village, prior to the date of the hearing described above, a detailed written statement
describing the cause(s) of the harmful conditions and the measures taken to prevent their future recurrence. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
7-5D-15: PENALTY:
A. Administrative Fines:
1. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user that is found to have violated any provision of this article, its wastewater discharge permit,
enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), shall be fined in an amount of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation per day.
a. Fines shall be issued that, at a minimum, remove the economic benefit to a user by its noncompliance, include an additional monetary amount
reflecting the seriousness or gravity of the violation(s), and ensures the user has a strong economic incentive to fully comply in a timely manner.
The village shall consider any corrective actions taken by the user and the compliance history of the user prior to the issuance of the fine.
b. For the purposes of this section, each day in which any such violation shall occur shall be deemed a separate violation.
2. Administrative fines and penalties may be added to the user's next scheduled wastewater billing and the village shall have such collection remedies
as may be available for other service charges and fees.
3. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall be assessed an additional penalty of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter in
accordance with the Bartlett treatment facility user charge within this article. A lien against the individual user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
4. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file, within ten (10) calendar days of being notified of the fine, a written request for the village president to
reconsider the fine. Where such request has merit, the village shall convene, within fifteen (15) calendar days of receiving the request from the user,
a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment shall be returned less any costs incurred by the village in the
preparation of the enforcement action.
5. The village may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter fees, and any other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the costs of any actual damages incurred by the village.
B. Injunctive Relief:
1. Whenever the village administrator finds that any user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, its wastewater discharge
permit, enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), or that the user's past violations are likely to
recur, the village may petition the circuit court for the issuance of a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of
the user, and if necessary in the opinion of the village attorney, a complaint for permanent injunctive relief.
2. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the village. A petition asking for injunctive relief need not be
filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user.
C. Civil Penalties:
1. Any user that is found to have violated any provision of this article, its wastewater discharge permit, enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s), shall be liable to the village of Bartlett for a civil penalty of an amount of not less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation per day, plus any actual damages incurred by the village, including,
but not limited to, damages to the Bartlett treatment facility for as long as the noncompliance continues. For purposes of this section, each day in
which any such violation shall occur shall be deemed a separate violation.
2. The village may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter fees, and any other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 264/702
3. The village shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining the extent of the liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation(s), the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gain through the user's violation(s), corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factors as
justice requires.
D. Criminal Prosecution:
1. Any user that is found to have intentionally or wilfully and wantonly violated any provision of this article, its wastewater discharge permit, an
enforcement remedy issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard(s) or requirement(s) shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation per day. For the purpose of this section, each day in which any
such violation shall occur, shall be deemed a separate violation.
2. Any user that is found to have intentionally or wilfully and wantonly introduced any substance into the Bartlett treatment facility which causes
personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) per violation per day. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available
under state law.
3. Any user that is found to have knowingly made any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, its wastewater discharge permit, or order, or who falsifies, tampers
with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation per day.
E. Additional Remedies:
1. In addition to the remedies available to the village set forth elsewhere in this article, if the Bartlett treatment facility is fined by the state of Illinois, the
IEPA, or USEPA for violation of the Bartlett treatment facility's NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as a result of a discharge of
pollutants, then the fine, including all of the legal fees, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other related costs shall be charged to the
responsible user(s). Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the village may have under this article, statutes,
regulations, at law or in equity.
2. If the discharge from any users causes a deposit, obstruction, or damage to any portion of the Bartlett treatment facility, the village sanitary sewer
system, lift station, or wastewater treatment plant, village personnel may immediately remove the deposit or obstruction and promptly repair the
damage. The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and supervision, shall be borne by the person(s) causing such deposit, obstruction, or
damage.
3. The remedies provided in this article shall not be exclusive and the village may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute, at law or in
equity against any person violating the provisions of this article. The village of Bartlett is hereby empowered to take more than one enforcement
action (remedy) against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
F. Informant Rewards:
1. The village is authorized to pay up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by an industrial user.
In the event that the information provided results in a civil penalty levied against the industrial user, the village of Bartlett is authorized to dispense up
to ten percent (10%) of the collected penalty to the informant. However, a single payment may not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
2. Employees of the village, representatives of the IEPA or USEPA, or any other public employee or official, and members of their immediate family
shall be expressly prohibited from receiving any additional monetary compensation for information leading to the discovery of noncompliance by an
industrial user. (Ord. 2016-44, 6-7-2016)
ARTICLE E. SEWER SERVICE CHARGES AND FEES
7-5E-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No connection with a Village sewerline shall be made without a permit being issued and twenty four (24) hours' notice having been given to the Director of
Public Works. All such connections shall be made and all such work done at the expense of the applicant who shall also furnish materials necessary for
such work; all such connections shall be made under the supervision of the Director and no connections shall be covered until the work has been
inspected by him or some person authorized by him. Applications for such connections must be made to the Director and the following fees shall be paid
for each connection. (Ord. 73-14, 5-29-73)
7-5E-2: SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
A fee for connecting to the Village sanitary sewer system shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule, as it appears in Title 9, Bartlett Building Code,
Section 9-07.1.2(b), Ordinance 91-72 dated September 17, 1991. (Ord. 85-74, 8-6-85; amd. Ord. 91-77, 10-1-91)
7-5E-3: CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
Fees for connecting properties outside the corporate limits of the Village (unless such connections are otherwise prohibited by any revenue bond
ordinance or bond purchase agreement) shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the rates hereinbefore set forth. (Ord. 73-14, 5-29-73)
Chapter 6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 265/702
7-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's jurisdiction,
which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights of way and the
village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of the public
ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the
jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated
by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or
similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of way. Utilities that
are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village
may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
F. Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
G. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the
utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
H. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 266/702
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Bartlett.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village director of public works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary
or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the
parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The village engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or
operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the village director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 267/702
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 7-6-4 and 7-6-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 7-6-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular
mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more
other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this section.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-
201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Bartlett, an Illinois municipal corporation of Cook, DuPage and Kane Counties, Illinois.
VISION TRIANGLE: The triangular area determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points measured thirty five feet (35') equidistant from the lot
corner of two (2) intersecting lot lines adjacent to the public rights of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 268/702
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2008-6,
1-15-2008)
7-6-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the utility's
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section 7-6-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village right
of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first filing an
application with the village director of public works and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of
way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number
of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes
contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
a. A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 7-6-8 of this chapter;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 7-6-10 of this chapter;
9. Proposed landscape screening plan for any freestanding facility greater than forty inches (40") in height measured from existing ground level and
having any side greater than forty inches (40") in width and/or depth;
10. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 7-6-21 of this chapter); and
11. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 269/702
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division
of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation district and/or other local, county or state entities with jurisdiction, have been
satisfied; or
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
F. Reimbursement Of Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter
shall not be charged an application fee. However, in the event the director of public works determines that engineering or other outside review of the
application is necessary due to the size, scope, complexity of the proposed project from his review of the application and submittal documents, or if it
involves or impacts storm water management facilities or conflicts with other existing utilities, he may forward the permit application and the drawings,
plans and specifications to the village engineer's office, and/or other outside consultants for review and if the public works director deems it necessary,
for field observation and inspection of the work. The applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the village for all of its out of pocket expenses in
reviewing applications and submittal documents, including, but not limited to, design documents and for field observation fees charged to the village by
the village engineer's office, and/or other outside consultants, if any, charged to the village and billed at their usual and customary rates charged
municipalities for similar services in assisting the village in reviewing permit applications under this chapter. No application fee is required to be paid by
any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act.
(Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of public
works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the director of public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of public works is satisfied
that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of
public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction
of the director of public works, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of public works shall specify the portion of the right of way
upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the director of public works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a) ten (10)
days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction, or b)
twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 7-6-4 of this chapter, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section.
C. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a
utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances,
and regulations. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights
of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
B. Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
C. Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall
be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will
occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 270/702
D. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within ninety (90) days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the
locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with section 7-6-21 of this chapter. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility
from the right of way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and
naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections
A1 and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X",
"C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary
policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following receipt of a
written request therefor from the village.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
F. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are
the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the
recovery of any amounts thereunder.
G. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally
able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a
class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 271/702
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord. 2008-6,
1-15-2008)
7-6-10: SECURITY:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee
is required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to
perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to
the village attorney, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village attorney. The permittee shall be required to deliver documents
and other evidence to the village attorney evidencing that the issuing surety, bank or financial institution meets the minimum requirements set forth in
subsection I of this section. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least as
good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit and the estimated cost to screen facilities greater than forty inches (40") in
height with vegetative landscaping and to maintain and replace any failed landscaping for a period of two (2) years (the "2 year maintenance period"),
as determined by the village director of public works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in
multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village director
of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase
of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have
been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village, upon
written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
security fund, less the reasonably estimated cost to maintain all landscape screening for the two (2) year maintenance period and/or such other portion
thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the village for failure by the
permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any
and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage
incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the
permittee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 272/702
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved
by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other
right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights
which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
I. Suitability Of Security: In the event the permittee elects to post a surety bond as its security fund, the bond shall be issued by a surety company or
insurance company authorized by the Illinois department of insurance to issue sureties in the state of Illinois. In the event the permittee elects to post
an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or savings and loan association as its security fund, the issuing bank or savings and loan association shall be
federally insured and shall have assets of not less than fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00) and a capital asset ratio of not less than six percent (6%)
unless the corporate authorities otherwise determine and deem it good and sufficient security. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this chapter;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way presents a
direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the
village, the permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to the
satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of
way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2008-6,
1-15-2008)
7-6-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 273/702
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the village engineer and/or director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and
such decision shall be final. If requested, the village engineer or director of public works or his or her designee, shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any
work on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 7-6-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention
by the village. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the village engineer and/or director of public works
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with
the operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said
right of way.
3. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in the vision triangle or any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of
way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 274/702
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right
of way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may require
the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting
from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. adm.
code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The village may require any freestanding facility greater than forty inches (40") in height and having any side greater than forty inches (40") in width
and/or depth located within a right of way to be screened from view with evergreen vegetative landscaping such as arbor vitae, techny, Austrian
spruce, Norway spruce, and as determined by the director of public works after taking into account and depending upon the suitability of the
available space surrounding the freestanding facility, the terrain, slope, location, access, surrounding uses, safety, aesthetic and ongoing
maintenance requirements and costs.
F. Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 275/702
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-
2008)
7-6-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village
engineer and/or director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48)
hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While
pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so
that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or
around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only one-half (1/2) of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the village engineer and/or director of public
works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the village engineer and/or director of public works, the utility, at
its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material,
and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the village engineer and/or director of public
works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic.
If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 7-6-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the village engineer and/or director of public works.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 276/702
b. Restoration of pavement, in-kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair, and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation, or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snow
drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities
shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 277/702
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for
pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage
lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the village engineer and/or director of
public works. With the approval of the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free
area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the director of public works.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and
during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are those set forth in title 9 of this code.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the
right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the village as
permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not performed
pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall
require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration
date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the
village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 278/702
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director
of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of
the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting
or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way are
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the village engineer and/or director of
public works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the
right of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project and the installation of vegetative
landscape screening if required under the provisions of this chapter. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the director of public
works for good cause shown. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory
to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs.
If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the director of public
works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 279/702
why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The director of public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated
that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the director of public works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
E. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the director of public
works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village administrator. The application for appeal shall be submitted in
writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The village administrator shall
commence his or her consideration of the appeal within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the appeal. The village administrator shall timely decide the
appeal. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost
apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 2008-6, 1-15-2008)
7-6-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
2008-6, 1-15-2008)
Chapter 7
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
7-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited and referred to as the BARTLETT ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2010-67, 9-7-
2010)
7-7-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing regulations and standards for the detection and elimination of illicit discharges into the storm
drainage system throughout the village, the "DuPage County illicit discharge detection and elimination ordinance" (the "county ordinance") in effect on May
26, 2009, as the illicit discharge detection elimination ordinance of the village, as if fully set forth in this chapter, and each and all of the regulations therein,
including any and all amendments that may, from time to time, be adopted by the county of DuPage. Copies thereof shall be made available in the public
works department, the building department and the community development department. (Ord. 2010-67, 9-7-2010)
7-7-3: NOTICE OF FULL PARTICIPATION:
This chapter shall serve as notice that the village has chosen to be a "full participant" with the county of DuPage, as provided for in section 18-31(1) of the
county ordinance, for purposes of the enforcement of the county ordinance within the village's territorial jurisdiction, and shall be applicable to properties
lying in DuPage and/or Cook County, Illinois, that are within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2010-67, 9-7-2010)
7-7-4: DELETIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS:
The following deletions, modifications and amendments to the county ordinance shall be effective and applicable to the village:
Section 18-12 (Definitions) is amended by:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 280/702
(1) Deleting the definition for "committee" in its entirety, and replacing it with the words the "oversight committee of the village which shall be comprised
of the public works director, the director of community development and the assistant to the village administrator, who are hereby appointed and
designated as the oversight committee of the village for purposes of this chapter."
(2) Deleting the definition of "department" in its entirety, and replacing it with the words "the village engineer".
(3) Deleting the definition of "director" in its entirety, and replacing it with the words "the village engineer".
(4) Adding the following to the list of definitions: "Village: The village of Bartlett, an Illinois home rule municipal corporation of DuPage, Cook and Kane
Counties, Illinois."
Section 18-21 (Applicability) is amended by deleting the word "department" and replacing it with the word "village".
Section 18-22 (Interpretation) is amended by deleting the word "county" and replacing it with the word "village".
Section 18-31 (Participating Communities) is amended by deleting the word "department" in paragraphs 1b, 1c and 1e, and replacing it with the words
"DuPage County stormwater management division".
Section 18-33 (Duties Of Director) is amended by deleting the word "communities" in paragraph 3, and replacing it with the words "DuPage County
stormwater management committee".
Section 18-34 (Representative Capacity) is amended by deleting the word "county", and replacing it with the word "village".
Section 18-42 (Prohibitions Of Illicit Connections) is amended by deleting the word "department" in the last sentence of paragraph 5, and replacing it with
the words "DuPage County stormwater management committee".
Section 18-50 (Submission Of Notice Of Intent (NOI) To The Department) is amended by deleting the word "department" in the subtitle and in paragraphs
1, 2 and 3, and replacing it with the words "DuPage County stormwater management committee".
Section 18-56 (Notification Of Spills) is amended by deleting the word "department" in paragraph 1b, and replacing it with the words "DuPage County
stormwater management committee".
Section 18-62 (Notice To Correct Violations; Director May Take Action) is amended by deleting the words "county of DuPage" from paragraph 2 and
replacing them with the words "village of Bartlett".
Section 18-66 (Fines) is hereby deleted in its entirety, and the following is substituted therefor:
In addition to all other remedies provided for in article 8 of the county ordinance, any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $75.00 and not more than $1,000.00, and each and every day or portion of a day during which the violation
is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by such a fine.
Section 18-86 (Right Of Appeal) is amended by:
(1) Deleting the words "stormwater committee of the DuPage County board" from paragraph 1, and replacing them with the words "oversight committee
of the village".
(2) Deleting the words "stormwater committee" from paragraph 3, and replacing them with the words "oversight committee of the village".
(3) Deleting the word "committee" from paragraphs 3 and 4, and replacing it with the words "oversight committee of the village".
(4) Deleting the words "county board" from paragraphs 3 and 4, and replacing them with the words "village president and board of trustees".
(Ord. 2010-67, 9-7-2010)
Chapter 8
REGULATION OF AND APPLICATION FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
7-8-1: RECITALS AND LEGISLATIVE STATEMENT:
Whereas, Village of Bartlett (the "Village") is a duly organized and validly existing home rule municipality created in accordance with the Constitution of the
State of Illinois of 1970 and the laws of the State; and
Whereas, The Village uses the public rights-of-way within its corporate limits to provide essential public services to its residents and businesses and is
authorized to regulate the public rights-of-way under section 11-80-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code1; and
Whereas, the public rights-of-way within the Village are a limited public resource held by the Village for the benefit of its citizens and the Village has a
custodial duty to ensure that the public rights-of-way are used, repaired and maintained in a manner that best serves the public interest; and
Whereas, the Village President and Board of Trustees (the "Corporate Authorities") previously adopted chapter 6, "Construction Of Utility Facilities In The
Rights-Of-Way", of this title that established policies and procedures for construction of facilities on rights-of-way within the Village to provide public benefit
consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the Village's rights-of-way and the Village as a whole; and
Whereas, growing demand for personal wireless telecommunications services has resulted in increasing requests nationwide and locally from the wireless
industry to place small cell distributed antenna systems and other personal wireless telecommunication facilities on utility and street light poles and other
structures in the public rights-of-way; and
Whereas, the Illinois General Assembly has recently enacted Public Act 100-0585 known as the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (the "Small
Wireless Facilities Act") which became effective June 1, 2018; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 281/702
Whereas, the Small Wireless Facilities Act set forth the requirements for the collocation of small wireless facilities by local authorities; and
Whereas, the Small Wireless Facilities Act and Federal law limit the authority of local governments to enact regulations that prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of telecommunications services by wireless service providers, the Village is authorized under existing Federal law and State laws,
including the Small Wireless Facilities Act, to enact appropriate regulations and restrictions relative to small wireless facilities, distributed antenna systems,
and other personal wireless telecommunication facility installations in the public rights-of-way as long as said regulations do not conflict with State and
Federal law; and
Whereas, the foregoing recitals are incorporated into and are made an express part of this chapter as findings and as a legislative statement of the
Corporate Authorities. (Ord. 2018-73, 6-19-2018, eff. retroactive to 6-1-2018)
7-8-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use,
in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless Facilities Act.
B. Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
C. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter,
the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or
regulations. (Ord. 2018-73, 6-19-2018, eff. retroactive to 6-1-2018)
7-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Uniform Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated
the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through
section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in width,
and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located
in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 282/702
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power
transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 2018-
73, 6-19-2018, eff. retroactive to 6-1-2018)
7-8-4: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in subsection C9
of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received
and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
1. Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell Facilities
Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in
section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
2. Application Process: The Village shall process applications as follows:
a. The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or
wireless support structure.
b. An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny
the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 283/702
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
c. An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a
completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
d. The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions
contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty
(30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days
of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated
with the small wireless facility.
e. Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall
enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement in form on file in the Village, except for such modifications thereto approved by the Village
Attorney, for the initial collocation on a Municipal utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless
facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
3. Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
4. Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
b. A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay.
5. Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the
applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities
if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or
that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
6. Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable
Village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Small Wireless Facilities Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code
provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
7. Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal delivery at the
Village's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
C. Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
1. Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably determines
that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 284/702
2. Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good
repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable
industry and governmental standards and regulations.
3. No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere
with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR
90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code
of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
4. Pole Zones: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and
on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
5. Public Safety: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
6. Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Village ordinance or Code, written policy adopted by the Village, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic
district.
7. Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collate
small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility
pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose
that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the
proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the
alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
8. Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
a. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date
the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting
right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
b. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
9. Height Exceptions Or Variations: If an applicant proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which
the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variation in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in section 10-13-5, "Variations", of this Code except that any application for one or more variations for a small wireless facility or small
wireless facilities and other matters directly related thereto under this chapter shall be processed on an expedited basis and shall be promptly
scheduled for a public hearing thereon as soon as practicable, and notice thereof shall be published by the Zoning Administrator without the
Corporate Authorities having first reviewed the application at a Committee of the Whole meeting of the Village Board and without requiring a referral
of said matter to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
10. Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the rightof-
way.
11. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that
addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.
12. Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 285/702
13. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60)
days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed
three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the
applicant.
D. Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
1. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
2. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes
the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
3. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
4. The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
a. Routine maintenance;
b. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies
the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with subsection B1d, "Application Requirements", of this section; or
c. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
5. Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
E. Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
1. Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within rightsof-
way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
2. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation
purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are
under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
3. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities
are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service
or video service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
F. Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the
right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable
termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the effective date of the Small Wireless Facilities Act may accept the rates, fees
and terms that the Village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Small Wireless
Facilities Act by notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable
termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
G. Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole
located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after the
first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
H. Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of
the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of
the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 286/702
or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village. Such
notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 2018-73, 6-19-2018, eff. retroactive to 6-1-2018)
7-8-5: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village
shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal utility pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 2018-73, 6-19-2018, eff. retroactive to 6-1-2018)
7-8-6: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from
or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Small Wireless Facilities Act. A
wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of
the Village or the sole negligence of the Village's employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the
Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 2018-73, 6-19-2018, eff.
retroactive to 6-1-2018)
7-8-7: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
A. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
B. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits
consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that selfinsures
is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 2018-73, 6-19-2018, eff. retroactive to 6-1-2018)
Title 8
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Chapter 1
OPEN BURNING
8-1-1: OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED:
A. It shall be unlawful to burn any scrap, clothing, trash, refuse, garbage or other organic refuse or waste material outside of any building or dwelling at any
time in the Village.
B. Should any person desire to start or cause a fire for the purpose of burning leaves, grass, weeds or other combustible material outside of any building
or dwelling, such person desiring to set such fire shall make written application for a permit addressed to the Village President and Board of Trustees
which application for permit shall state the location where such fire is to be set, a description of the combustible matter to be burned, and the identity
and number of persons who will be in charge of said proposed fire to guard against its getting out of control. Such person will be responsible for and
assume all costs and damages that may result from the setting of such fire.
Upon the filing with the Village President and Board of Trustees of such application, complying with the requirements hereinbefore described and its
approval by the Village President or Board of Trustees, the Village Clerk shall, without cost to the applicant, issue a permit pursuant to such application
which permit, however, shall be good only for the date or period on or for which it is issued.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, all previously issued permits shall be suspended on any day when the wind velocity exceeds five (5) miles per
hour or when the ESSA Weather Bureau issues high air pollution potential advisories.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 287/702
D. Notwithstanding anything set forth in this Section, the officers, employees, agents and servants of any duly constituted fire protection district, while at
the performance of their official duties, shall be exempt from the permit requirements, rules and regulations herein set forth. (Ord. 76-15, 11-17-70;
amd. Ord. 75-44, 9-16-75)
8-1-2: BURNING REFUSE, GARBAGE, LEAVES AND OTHER YARD WASTE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to burn any garbage, refuse, leaves and other yard waste, or any other material outside of any building at any time in the Village. The
foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the following:
A. The setting of fires for public safety or ecological purposes by governmental officials performing the duties of their office.
B. The burning of fuels for legitimate campfire or cooking purposes. (Ord. 75-46, 10-7-75; amd. Ord. 91-68, 9-17-91)
8-1-3: OFFENSES RELATING TO BURNING AND FIRE HAZARDS:
A. Fires: It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close to any building or other structure as to endanger such building or structure or on any
street or sidewalk pavement. (1968 Code, §23.016)
B. Combustible Refuse:
1. It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard or to store or throw away any refuse of any kind
in any alley, street or other public way in the Village.
2. It shall be unlawful to dump, leave or deposit any refuse anywhere in the Village, with or without the consent of the owner of the premises, which is
or may be thrown about by the wind, which consists of garbage or any vegetable matter subject to decay other than landscape refuse placed in a
properly maintained compost pile, or which consists of flammable material so as to form a fire hazard; and it shall be unlawful to leave or deposit or
abandon any cases, cartons, car bodies or similar articles anywhere in the Village. (Ord. 75-44, 9-16-75)
Chapter 2
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
8-2-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to store, handle or offer for sale any flammable or volatile liquids in violation of any provision of this Chapter, and it shall be the duty of
the Building Director, with the cooperation of the Police Department, to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. (1968 Code, §§21.101,
21.102)
8-2-2: CLASSIFICATION OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, flammable liquids are divided into three (3) classes, according to flash point, as follows:
Class I Liquids with a flash point at or below twenty five degrees (25°F.) (-4°C.) closed cup tester.
Class II Liquids with a flash point above that for Class I and at or below seventy degrees (70°F.) (21°C.) closed cup tester.
Class III Liquids with a flash point above that for Class II and at or below two hundred degrees (200°F.) (931/3°C.) closed cup tester.
The flash point shall be as determined with the Elliot, Abel, Abel Pensky or the Tag closed cup testers, but the Tag closed cup testers (standardized by the
United States Bureau of Standards) shall be authoritative in case of dispute. All tests shall be made in accordance with the methods adopted by the
American Society for Testing Materials.
Representative examples of the classes of flammable liquids are:
Class I Class II Class III
Ether Alcohol Kerosene
Carbon bi-sulphur Amyl Acetate Amyl Alcohol
Gasoline Toluol Turpentine
Naphtha Ethyl Acetate Fuel Oil
Benzol Methyl Acetate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 288/702
Acetone Methyl Alcohol
Collodion
(1968 Code, §21.103)
8-2-3: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, install or enlarge any tank, pump or piping equipment for the storage or handling of flammable or volatile liquids, such as
defined in this Chapter, without having first obtained a permit therefor. Application for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall be
accompanied by drawing to scale showing the following:
A. Drawings shall show the plot of ground to be utilized and its immediate surroundings on all sides; the complete layout of tanks, loading and unloading
docks, equipment and buildings; the capacity of each tank; kind of liquid to be stored; type of tank supports; type of construction of each building, and
all clearances as provided for herein. In addition, the dimensions of any tank with a capacity of more than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons shall be given.
B. Drawings shall show the name of the person proposing the installation, the location within the Village, and adjacent railroads and streets.
C. Drawings shall designate passenger, freight, passing and side tracks and shall show the clearance between tanks and closest passenger tracks,
between the tracks at point where tank car will be placed for unloading and nearest passenger tracks, and between unloading dock and closest
passenger tracks. (1968 Code, §21.149)
No such permit shall be issued until the Building Director has certified that the contemplated work fully complies with the ordinances of the Village. (1968
Code, §21.150)
8-2-4: PERMIT FEES:
The fee for such permits shall be:
For installation of fuel oil tanks having a capacity of more than 2,000 gallons and less than 20,000 gallons: $ 5.00
For installation of tanks for storage of gasoline having a capacity of less than 1 gallon: $5.00
For installation of tanks for storage of fuel oil having a capacity of 20,000 gallons or more: $15.00
For installation of gasoline storage tanks having a capacity of 1,000 gallons or over: $10.00
For installation of tanks for other flammable liquids: $15.00
(1968 Code, §21.151)
8-2-5: SMALL STORAGE LIMITED:
Storage of flammable liquids of Classes I, II and III shall be in accordance with the rules governing general storage and service stations, except:
A. Not to exceed five (5) gallons of crude petroleum, benzine, benzol, gasoline, naphtha and their compounds may be kept on hand if stored in a proper
safety container, remote from flame or open fire. Such storage must not be in any cellar, basement or pit and should be in a room with direct ventilation
to the outside and preferably in an out building or garage.
B. Ten (10) gallons of kerosene may be stored above ground in a proper safety can and sixty (60) gallons may be stored for the retail trade within a
building, provided storage is in an approved tank. Tank shall be set in a metal pan extending at least eight inches (8") beyond outside of tank at sides
and rear and eighteen inches (18") in front. Tank should be located on the first floor where the influx of natural light is sufficient to light the room, and
reasonable ventilation must be provided. (1968 Code, §21.104)
8-2-6: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Gasoline Containers Must be Red: All receptacles used for the keeping or storing of gasoline, naphtha, benzine or benzol shall be placed in red
containers.1 (1968 Code, §21.105)
B. Empty Drums: Drums or barrels in which liquids of Classes I, II or III have been stored shall have taps, plugs or bungs replaced immediately after
package has been emptied and shall be removed promptly from the premises. (1968 Code, §21.106)
8-2-7: USE RESTRICTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 289/702
A. Use Within Building Restricted: The mixing, storing or handling of Class I and II liquids in open containers is prohibited in any building except in the
compounding of medicines and prescriptions in drug stores. (1968 Code, §21.107)
B. Pouring Into Sewers Prohibited: No liquids of Class I, II or III, or solutions containing such liquids, shall be poured into any sewer or any drain which
connects with a sewer system. (1968 Code, §21.108)
C. Storage in Public Buildings Restricted: No liquids of Class I and II shall be kept or stored in any school house, public hall or place of assembly or in any
public building, except for demonstrative purposes or for industrial or mechanical uses, and then only under competent supervision. (1968 Code,
§21.109)
D. Use in Starting Fires: Flammable liquids shall not be used to start or kindle fires in stoves, furnaces or otherwise, and same shall always be kept away
from fire or open flame; fire or open flame shall always be kept away from flammable liquids. (1968 Code, §§21.110, 21.111)
8-2-8: LOCATION OF TANKS:
A. Restricted Classes of Property: No storage tank shall be less than three hundred feet (300') from any school house, church, hospital or public hall. The
distance shall be measured from near the edges of the tanks in all directions to near point of buildings.
A public hall is any place which is used at any time for public meetings or the assembling of people for amusement, instruction or religious worship.
(1968 Code, §21.112)
B. Property Lines and Buildings: The minimum distance from individual tanks to the property line of adjoining property which is or may be built upon shall
not be less than the following:
1. For tanks of 50,000 gallons or less:
Tank Capacity
(gallons)
Minimum
Distance
(feet)
3,000 or less 20
21,000 or less 25
31,000 or less 30
45,000 or less 40
50,000 or less 50
In case of tanks for the storage of crude petroleum, the foregoing minimum clearances shall be doubled.
2. For tanks of more than 50,000 gallons to be used only for the storage of refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boilover:
Group A Tanks: If the tank is equipped with a) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system, or b) an approved floating roof, the distance
shall be not less than the greatest dimension (diameter, length or height) of tank, but such distance need not exceed one hundred twenty feet (120').
Group B Tanks: If the tank is not equipped either with a) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system, or b) an approved floating roof, the
distance shall be not less than one and one-half (11/2) times the greatest dimension (diameter, length or height) of the tank, but such distance need
not exceed one hundred seventy five feet (175').
3. For tanks of more than 50,000 gallons to be used for the storage of crude petroleum or other flammable liquid subject to boil-over:
Group C Tanks: If a tank is equipped with either a) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system, or b) an approved floating roof, the
distance shall not be less than twice the greatest dimension (diameter, length or height) of the tank, but such distance need not exceed one hundred
seventy five feet (175').
Group D Tanks: If a tank is not equipped with either a) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system, or b) an approved floating roof, the
distance shall be not less than three (3) times the greatest dimension (diameter, length or height) of the tank, but need not exceed three hundred fifty
feet (350').
4. These distances shall apply also to other buildings on the property except those necessarily connected with the installation (such as oil warehouse,
pumphouse or garage).
5. In particular installations, these distances may be decreased by the Building Director after consideration of such special features as topographical
conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity of buildings on adjoining property, height and construction of such buildings, capacity and construction
of proposed tanks and character of liquids to be stored, degree of private fire protection provided and facilities of fire departments to cope with oil
fires.
6. Location of tanks with reference to railroad tracks over which passenger trains are moved shall conform to the regulations of the Bureau of
Explosives of the Association of American Railroads (formerly American Railway Association), 30 Versey Street, New York City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 290/702
7. When general oil storage is maintained in connection with a filling station, the distance from general storage tanks to filling station building, tanks and
equipment shall be the same as that required to property lines.
8. Tanks shall be located so as to avoid possible danger from high water.
9. When tanks are located on a stream without tide, they shall, where possible, be downstream from burnable property. (1968 Code, §21.113)
C. Distance Between Tanks: The minimum distance from tanks to adjacent tanks shall be as follows:
Tank Capacity
(gallons)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
300 or less 3
500 or less 3
1,000 or less 3
8,000 or less 3
12,000 or less 3
18,000 or less 3
24,000 or less 5
30,000 or less 10
48,000 or less 10
75,000 or less 13
100,000 or less 15
Over 100,000 One tank diameter
If tanks are of different capacities, the capacity of the larger tank shall govern its distance to adjacent tanks. (1968 Code, §21.114)
8-2-9: MATERIAL AND CONSTRUCTION OF TANKS:
A. Specifications: Factory assembled tanks shall bear the label of Underwriter's Laboratories or meet equivalent specifications. Field erected tanks shall
meet the specifications of the National Fire Protection Association as published in N.F.P.A. Pamphlet No. 30, or those of the American Petroleum
Institute. No open tanks shall be used.
1. Tanks shall be covered with asphaltum or other nonrusting coating or paint.
2. All pipe connections shall be made through flanges or reinforcements securely riveted, welded or bolted to the tank and shall be made tight.
3. All openings shall be made liquid and vapor tight, except breather vents. Gaskets used shall be such as are not affected by heat or the contents of
tanks.
4. Covers for manholes, handholes and gauge holes shall be made tight fitting and normally kept in place. (1968 Code, §21.115)
B. Normal Vents in Tanks: Each tank over one hundred (100) gallons in capacity shall have vent openings, except safety valves, provided with approved
noncorrosible flame arresters so attached as to completely cover the openings.
Vent openings shall be in no case less than one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter and where a power pump is used in filling tanks and tight connection is
made to fill pipe, vent shall not be smaller than fill pipe. (1968 Code, §21.116)
C. Special Safety or Emergency Relief Vents in Tanks: Additional vent openings or safety valves adequate to relieve any excessive pressure due to
external heat shall be provided, of a type which shall be self-closing when pressure is relieved.
The total area of vents shall not be less than twenty four (24) square inches for tanks of twenty one thousand (21,000) gallons' capacity or less and not
less than eighteen (18) square inches for tanks of more than twenty one thousand (21,000) gallons' capacity. (1968 Code, §21.117)
D. Setting of Tanks: Tanks more than one foot (1') above the ground shall have a firm foundation and supports of noncorrosible materials, bases of which
shall rest below frost line.
Unprotected steel as a support for tanks shall not be permitted.
No combustible materials shall be permitted under or within ten feet (10') of any storage tanks except stairways to and walks on top, which shall be of
iron or steel. (1968 Code, §21.118)
E. Grounding Tanks: All tanks shall be electrically grounded in an effective manner. (1968 Code, §21.119)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 291/702
8-2-10: PIPING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Materials and Design: Piping, valves and fittings for flammable liquids shall be designed for the working pressure and structural stresses to which they
may be subjected. They may be of steel or other materials suitable for use with the liquid being handled. Pipe wall thickness determined in accordance
with section 3 of the American Standard Code for Pressure Piping (A.S.A. B31.1) shall be deemed to comply with this Section; except that carbon steel
pipe shall not be thinner than standard wall thickness listed in the American Standard for wrought-iron and wrought-steel pipe (A.S.A. B36.10). (1968
Code, §21.120)
B. Piping Runs: Piping shall be run as directly as possible and proper allowance made for expansion and contraction. (1968 Code, §21.121)
C. Piping Above Ground:
1. Pipes shall not be surrounded or covered by cinders or other material of corrosive effect, but preferably should be laid in sand, and where carried in
conduit, the openings of such conduit must be fully protected to prevent escape or liquid under dangerous conditions.
2. Pipe lines buried on railroad property shall be laid at a depth of not less than three feet (3'); where they pass under tracks, they shall be laid at least
four feet (4 ') below the bottom of ties.
3. Piping buried in Village streets or other area where other pipe lines are carried shall be placed in conduit. Joints of conduit shall be sealed to prevent
leakage and pitch shall be toward tank yard.
4. Underground piping shall be coated with asphaltum or corrosion resisting material. (1968 Code, §21.122)
D. Joints in Pipes: Joints may be welded or of the ordinary screw type; if the screw type, they shall be made with litharge and blycerine, lamp black or
shellac. (1968 Code, §21.123)
E. Tests of Piping: Piping after installation shall be tested at a pressure of fifty percent (50%) in excess of the working pressure and shall be proven tight.
Test shall continue thirty (30) minutes. (1968 Code, §21.124)
F. Normal Valve in Pipes: Each pipe attached to a tank shall be provided with a valve at the tank, with no branches or outlets, between the tank and the
valve.
In case two (2) or more tanks are cross-connected, there shall be a valve at each tank in each cross-section. Tanks with different classes of liquids
shall not be cross-connected. (1968 Code, §21.125)
G. Emergency Internal Check Valves: In addition to any normal valves, there must be an extra valve at each pipe line connection to any tank below normal
liquid level (regardless of when installed). Such valve must contain an effective heat actuated device which, in case of fire, will automatically close the
valve to prevent the flow of liquid from the tank, even though the pipe lines are broken from the tank. These extra valves are not required in crude oil
tanks in oil fields, or tanks at refineries, or on tanks at terminals which are equipped with a swing line or where facilities are provided to transfer the
contents of the tank to another tank in case of fire. (1968 Code, §21.126)
8-2-11: DIKES REQUIRED:
A. Embankments: Embankments or dikes are required:
1. For each tank containing crude oil or other liquid which has a tendency to boil-over.
2. For each individual tank exceeding fifty thousand (50,000) gallons (1,200 barrels) in capacity.
3. For individual tanks of less than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons, or groups of tanks with individual tank capacity of less than fifty thousand (50,000)
gallons, when installed.
4. On the bank of a stream or other body of water, or on land permitting of rapid drainage thereto.
5. When, due to any other special conditions, the Village President and Board of Trustees deems diking to be necessary for the protection of other
property. (1968 Code, §21.127)
B. Capacity of Dikes:
1. Dikes for refined petroleum products not subject to boil-over shall have a capacity of not less than the capacity of the tank or groups of tanks
surrounded.
2. Dikes surrounding tanks containing crude oil or other flammable liquid subject to boil-over shall have a capacity of not less than the capacity of the
tank surrounded and in addition shall have a suitable coping or deflector pointing inward, so designed and constructed as to minimize the effect of
the boil-over wave. Dike shall be not less than fifty feet (50') from the shell of the tank surrounded. (1968 Code, §21.128)
C. Material and Construction of Dikes: Dikes shall be constructed of earth, clay masonry or reinforced concrete not higher than one-half (1/2) the height of
the tank or tanks enclosed, so constructed as to afford adequate protection.
Earthwork embankments shall be firmly and compactly built of good earth or clay, free from stones, vegetable matter and other foreign material. They
shall have a flat section at the top of not less than two and one-half feet (21/2') wide and a slope of at least one to one (45°) on both sides.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 292/702
Masonry or concrete dikes shall have footing below the frost line.
If concrete floor covering is provided for the area enclosed by a concrete dike, a sump shall be provided at some convenient place, attached to which
shall be a pump of approved design, so that any accumulation of water or oil may be removed immediately. (1968 Code, §21.129)
D. No Openings in Dikes Permitted: Embankments or dikes shall be continuous, with no openings or piping or roadway. (1968 Code, §21.130)
8-2-12: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful to store, or to sell or offer for sale, any flammable or volatile liquids as defined in this Chapter in an amount in excess of one gallon in
any building of frame construction, or any building other than a building of fireproof construction as defined in the ordinances of the Village; provided that
this Section shall not be construed to prohibit the storage of such liquids in the fuel tanks of automobiles, or in tanks for heating systems installed in
compliance with the provisions of the Village ordinances. (1968 Code, §21.131)
8-2-13: PUMPHOUSES:
Motors and pump or pumps shall be located in a separate, noncombustible building, not less than ten feet (10') from tanks, warehouse, garage or property
lines.
Motor shall be of the polyphase, nonsparking or explosion-proof type, and shall be grounded to permanently moist earth.
If pumphouse is electrically lighted, lights shall be of vapor-proof type, wiring shall be in a sealed conduit, and placed outside the building.
Motor starting switches shall be of the explosion-proof type or oil bath type.
Screened openings of not less than sixty four inches (64") shall be constructed in opposite corners at floor line to provide proper ventilation.
All doors of pumphouse shall open outward.
Doors shall be left open at all times when pumps are in operation. (1968 Code, §21.132)
8-2-14: UNENCLOSED PUMPS AND MOTORS:
If pumps and motors are located entirely in the open, with no enclosure whatever, they may be located at or under the loading dock. (1968 Code, §21.133)
8-2-15: LOADING AND UNLOADING FACILITIES:
A. Location of Loading Dock: Truck loading docks and platforms shall be located not less than ten feet (10') from storage tanks, plant buildings and
property lines. (1968 Code, §21.134)
B. Location of Unloading Dock: Location of unloading site with reference to railroad tracks over which passenger trains are moved shall be subject at all
times to the regulations of the Bureau of Explosives of the Association of American Railroads (formerly American Railway Association), 30 Versey
Street, New York, N.Y. (1968 Code, §21.135)
C. Electrical Equipment: All electric lights at loading or unloading docks shall be of vapor-proof construction. Electric wiring shall be in sealed conduit at
docks and switches shall be of the explosion-proof type or placed at some point remote from the docks. (1968 Code, §21.136)
D. Grounding:
1. Before loading operations begin, tank trucks shall be electrically bonded to pipe line by means of a bonding device at loading dock. (1968 Code,
§21.143)
2. Before unloading operations are started and before any connection or contact is made with piping or other loading equipment, the tank car shall be
electrically grounded in an effective manner. Permanent electrical connection of not less than Number 0 copper cable shall be made between the
rails on which tank cars stand and the piping system of the storage plant.
NOTE: This connection may be accomplished in two (2) ways. The rails may be bonded by means of standard rail bonds and connected to the
permanent system with Number 0 electric cable connections at each end of the loading or unloading section; or a similar connection may be made
between each rail on which car stand and the permanent piping system. (1968 Code, §21.138)
E. No Unloading by Gravity: The withdrawal of liquids from tank cars through bottom outlets shall not be permitted. Tank cars shall be unloaded through
dome (manhole) only. Pumps required to accomplish this shall be of adequate type and securely installed.
1. Exception: Fuel oils may be unloaded by gravity.
2. The use of compressed air to discharge contents of tank cars is prohibited, but this shall not be construed to prevent the use of a standard system
employing an inert gas, such as carbon dioxide or nitrogen, as pressure generating medium for this purpose. (1968 Code, §21.139)
F. Unloading to Portable Containers: Unloading from tank cars to tank trucks or to any portable containers shall not be permitted. (1968 Code, §21.140)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 293/702
G. Dome Covers: After unloading, pipe is inserted into dome of car and before any pumping is done, dome shall be tightly covered with wet burlap or some
other type of cover equally effective. (1968 Code, §21.141)
8-2-16: PUMP AND PIPE LINES:
A. Gasoline and naphtha shall never be handled through the same pump and pipe lines as kerosene and fuel oils.
B. Pipe lines shall have a definite color scheme for painting to indicate the product which is being carried by the respective lines. The color red shall be for
gasoline and naphtha. Valves on lines in pump houses shall be tagged to denote the product handled and controlled by each valve.
C. Pumps delivering to or taking supply from tanks or tank cars shall be provided with valves on both suction and discharge pump. (1968 Code, §21.137)
8-2-17: OTHER RESTRICTIONS:
A. All connections between tank cars and pipe lines shall be in a good condition and not permit leakage.
B. Tank cars shall not be left connected to pipe lines except when loading or unloading is going on, and during all such time a competent person shall be
present and in charge.
C. The pressure of flame lanterns, flame switch lights or other exposed flame lights or fires during the process of loading or unloading is prohibited.
D. Siding used in connection with tank car unloading operations shall not be common to other users, or they shall be provided with necessary derails or
with warning signs in accordance with section 4, paragraph 697(b) of the Interstate Commerce Commission Regulations on the Transportation of
Explosives.
E. The unloading of tank cars and all operations in connection therewith shall be in full accord with the Rules and Regulations of the Interstate Commerce
Commission. (1968 Code, §21.142)
8-2-18: FENCING:
The area which embraces the tank gear, including dike and all aboveground piping and pipe lines, shall be properly fenced with a metal fence. (1968
Code, §21.144)
8-2-19: CARE AND ATTENDANCE:
A. Property shall be kept free from weeds, high grass, rubbish and litter and shall be kept neat, clean and orderly throughout.
B. Open light or flame shall not be permitted on the property. (1968 Code, §21.145)
8-2-20: FIRE PROTECTION:
Approved chemical fire extinguishers, foam generators or other smothering agents for extinguishing oil fires shall be provided. (1968 Code, §21.146)
8-2-21: STORAGE WITHIN BUILDING PROHIBITED:
Barrels and drums used for Class I liquids, whether full or empty, shall be stored in the open or on open platforms in plant yard. Platforms may have roofs,
but all sides shall be open.
A. No open lights shall be permitted in such storage yard.
B. Caps, bungs and plugs shall be closed tightly immediately after container is emptied.
C. Gasoline and naphtha shall be handled only in barrels or drums painted red and properly labeled, and no other liquids shall be handled in such barrels
or drums. (1968 Code, §21.147)
8-2-22: TANK TRUCKS AND WAGONS:
Tanks, tank trucks and wagons shall be constructed with double bulkheads.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 294/702
Compartment tanks shall be constructed with double bulkheads unless they always carry the same class of liquids in the respective compartments (Class
I, II or III).
Compartment of tank trucks carrying different classes of liquids shall not be manifolded together. Separate pipe line and meter shall be provided for each
class of liquid to eliminate hazard of mixing.
Each compartment or tank shall be numbered, and the same number shall appear on pipe line at rear of truck or wagon connected with that compartment.
A serviceable metal tag shall be fastened securely to each faucet, designating the contents of the compartment it controls by lettering not less than onefourth
inch (1/4") high. Tags shall be painted according to the same color scheme as the pipe line, red always indicating gasoline or naphtha.
Faucets shall be of the self-closing type.
Heavy bumpers shall be provided across rear, adequate to protect all faucets in case of a rear-end collision.
Tanks, chassis, axles and springs shall be attached long enough to reach the ground at all times.
If buckets are used to deliver gasoline or naphtha, they shall be painted red and properly labeled. They shall be used for delivering gasoline and naphtha
only and gasoline and naphtha shall not be delivered in any other buckets.
Cargo tanks and vehicle chassis shall be electrically bonded. Provision shall be made in the tank structure and vehicle for the bonding of the vehicle to the
fill pipe during the truck loading operations.
During loading and unloading of tank trucks and tank wagons, a competent person shall be present and in charge at all times.
No retail deliveries from tank trucks or tank wagons shall be permitted in any street or alley of the Village, except in extreme emergencies for relief
purposes, and then only in quantities not to exceed two (2) gallons.
Each tank truck or tank wagon shall carry an approved fire extinguisher suitable for extinguishing gasoline and oil fires, such as carbon tetrachloride,
carbon dioxide, foam or powder. (1968 Code, §21.148)
8-2-23: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code, §21.152)
Chapter 3
EXPLOSIVES
8-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to engage in blasting operations or in any other activity in which explosives are used, or to store or keep in the Village any black
powder in excess of five (5) pounds, gun cotton, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerine, fulminate of mercury, or any other explosive or substance,
compound, mixture or article having properties of such a character that alone or in combination or contiguity with other substances or compounds may
decompose suddenly and generate sufficient heat, gas or pressure to produce rapid flaming combustion or administer a destructive blow to persons or
property without first securing a license therefor and complying fully with the provisions of this Chapter. (1968 Code, §21.201)
8-3-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such license shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk and shall conform to the provisions of the ordinances of the Village relative to
license applications.1 Each application shall set forth the location at which such explosives are to be kept and shall state whether such explosives are to
be in bulk, barrels, canister, cartridges or other manner, and the maximum amount to be kept on hand at any one time.
The annual fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided, that where such license is applied for by any person licensed to operate
a quarry in the Village in accordance with the ordinances applicable thereto, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (1968 Code, §21.202)
8-3-3: COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING ORDINANCES:
No such explosives shall be stored in any building other than a fireproof building in full compliance with the building ordinances of the Village. (1968 Code,
§21.203)
8-3-4: REQUIREMENTS FOR HANDLERS:
No such license shall be issued unless the licensee shall file with the Village Clerk the name of the person or persons designated by him or it to handle
such explosives or to have charge of magazines. No person shall be so designated unless he is:
A. At least twenty one (21) years of age.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 295/702
B. Able to understand, read and write the English language.
C. Of temperate habits.
D. Familiar with the laws and provisions of the ordinances of the Village governing the storage and use of explosives.
E. Capable of performing the duties incident to his work without unnecessary hazard to himself or others.
A certificate of fitness shall be issued to any qualified person so designated by any licensee or applicant for a license; and it shall be unlawful to engage in
any of the activities described in Section 8-3-1 of this Chapter unless each person so designated in accordance with this Section shall have first received a
certificate of fitness from the Village Clerk. (1968 Code, §21.204)
8-3-5: LABELS, PACKAGING:
No explosive shall be stored anywhere in the Village unless such explosive is properly labeled and packaged. All boxes or containers in which explosives
containing nitroglycerine are packaged must be lined with suitable material that is impervious to liquid nitroglycerine. No explosive shall be kept or stored
in the Village unless it is packed in the manner prescribed by the regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission for packing of such explosives for
shipment on common carriers.
No unpackaged or loose dynamite, not in cartridges, shall be stored or kept in the Village unless the nitroglycerine contents of such dynamite is less than
ten percent (10%) by weight. (1968 Code, §21.205)
8-3-6: RESTRICTIONS ON BLASTING:
A. It shall be unlawful to set off or discharge more than seven hundred fifty (750) pounds of sixty percent (60%) dynamite, or any charge containing or
releasing a disruptive force greater than seven hundred fifty (750) pounds of sixty percent (60%) dynamite, in any one blasting operation. (1968 Code,
§21.206)
B. It shall be unlawful to set off or detonate any primary blast, or to load, pack or place the explosive for any such blast, unless notice thereof shall have
been given twenty four (24) hours before such packing to the Chief of Police or the Village Clerk. Such notice shall describe the location of the
proposed blast, the time and the amount and kind of explosives to be used.
The Chief of Police or any other person designated for the purpose by the Village President shall inspect the location, hole and explosives used for any
such primary blast to determine that the ordinance pertaining thereto is complied with. (1968 Code, §21.207)
C. Secondary shots may be fired in accordance with good practice, provided adequate protection is taken to prevent flying debris. No adobe or mudcapped
shots shall be used. (1968 Code, §21.208)
8-3-7: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and any other person designated by the Board of Trustees to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter. (1968 Code, §21.209)
8-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code, §21.210)
Chapter 4
TRANSPORTATION OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND EXPLOSIVES
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
EXPLOSIVE: Includes any chemical compound and any mechanical mixture (including gases) containing any oxidizing and combustible units or other
ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or detonation of any part of the compound or
mixture may cause sudden generation of highly heated gases so that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects; and
the term "explosive" shall include fixed ammunition, fireworks and other manufactured articles which contain explosives as defined above, but no fuses so
constructed and packed as to render explosion impossible.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Is construed to include gasoline, naphtha, benzine, kerosene, motor fuel oil, or any other liquid having a flash point of seventy
degrees (70°) F. or below, by the closed cup test method.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 296/702
TANK TRAILER: Any vehicle without motive power but drawn by a motor vehicle, used for the transportation of explosives, flammable liquids, or liquefied
petroleum gases, and which for such purpose is provided with a tank or tanks mounted thereon.
TANK SEMI-TRAILER: A vehicle of the trailer type having one or more axles and two (2) or more wheels, so designed and used in conjunction with a
motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle; used for the transportation of explosives
and flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases and for which purpose is provided with a tank or tanks mounted thereon.
TANK TRUCK: Any motor vehicle used for the transportation of explosives, flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases, which for such purpose is
provided with a tank or tanks mounted on the frame or chassis of such vehicle.
VEHICLE: Includes any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer propelled by mechanical, motor or muscular power, other than a railroad car on rails. (1968 Code,
§21.301)
8-4-2: RESTRICTED STREETS:
No person shall drive, cause to be driven or otherwise bring any tank truck, tank trailer, tank semi-trailer, or other vehicle which transports as bulk cargo
explosives, flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases, excepting fuel oil, upon any of the streets or portions of the streets in the Village designated by
the Village Board. (1968 Code, §21.302)
8-4-3: EXPLOSIVES:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle containing explosives on any street in the Village except in compliance with the following rules:
A. No such vehicle shall be so operated unless it is marked, loaded and equipped in full compliance with all laws of the State of Illinois relating thereto.
B. No vehicle carrying the explosives shall be parked or permitted to stand anywhere in the Village longer than is necessary to make a lawful delivery;
provided, that the standing of such vehicle made necessary by mechanical trouble, traffic conditions, accident or in obedience to the direction of a
police officer or traffic signal shall not be considered a violation of this Section. (1968 Code, §21.303)
8-4-4: NITROGLYCERINE:
It shall be unlawful to transport liquid nitroglycerine by vehicle (as defined in this Chapter) anywhere in the Village. (1968 Code, §21.306)
8-4-5: SLIPPERY PAVEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle carrying explosives on any street in the Village that is too slippery because of ice, snow or from any other cause
as to be unsafe for driving. (1968 Code, §21.304)
8-4-6: WARNING LIGHTS; SIGNS:
Whenever a vehicle carrying explosives or flammable liquids is disabled in the Village, warning flags or lights shall be placed as required by statute;1 and it
shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle carrying explosives to remain unattended at any such time.
No work involving danger of sparks, fire, friction or concussion which might cause an explosion shall be performed on any vehicle carrying explosives; and
no such vehicle shall be brought into or kept in any garage in the Village; nor shall such vehicle carrying explosives be permitted to remain anywhere in the
Village under any circumstances for a period of more than five (5) hours. (1968 Code, §21.305)
8-4-7: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter relating to explosives shall not apply to the transportation of nitroglycerine in capsule form, or in solution, in quantities not
exceeding a total of one ounce avoirdupois in weight; nor to the lawful transportation of properly packed ammunition in quantities not exceeding twenty five
(25) pounds in weight, nor to the transportation of ammunition by the armed forces of the United States of America or the State of Illinois, or by police
officers or other conservators of the peace in the performance of their duties. (1968 Code, §21.307)
8-4-8: REGULATIONS CONCERNING TANK TRUCKS, TANK TRAILERS AND TANK SEMI-TRAILERS:
Every tank truck, tank trailer and tank semi-trailer operated within the corporate limits of the Village shall be in good repair, clean and free from leaks.
Every tank truck, tank trailer and tank semi-trailer operated within the corporate limits of the Village shall be equipped only with electric lights, and lighting
circuits shall have suitable over current protection with fuses and automatic circuit breakers, and the wiring shall have sufficient carrying capacity and
mechanical strength and shall be suitably secured, insulated and protected against physical damage. (1968 Code, §21.308)
8-4-9: REGULATIONS CONCERNING DRIVERS:
The driver, operator, attendant or helper of any tank truck, tank trailer or tank semi-trailer shall not leave the vehicle while it is being filled or while it is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 297/702
discharging through a delivery hose, and when so doing, such delivery hose shall be attached to the tank truck, tank trailer or semi-trailer and shall be
considered a part of the vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for the driver, operator, attendant or helper of any tank truck, tank trailer or tank semi-trailer to smoke or hold any lighted cigar, cigarette
or pipe while such vehicle is being operated on the streets or alleys of the Village, or while such vehicle is being filled or is discharging or having any
repairs made thereto.
The ignition on the motor of any tank truck, tank trailer or tank semi-trailer shall be turned off during the making and breaking of hose connections, and
likewise be turned off if the filling or discharging is done without the use of a power pump on such vehicle. (1968 Code, §21.309)
8-4-10: PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any tank truck, tank trailer or tank semi-trailer on the streets or alleys of the Village. (1968 Code, §21.310)
8-4-11: FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS:
Every tank truck, tank trailer or tank semi-trailer and all equipment thereon shall meet the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association and the
laws of the State of Illinois, and the regulations of the Department of Public Safety of the State, and shall be equipped with an approved fire extinguisher
for extinguishing flammable liquid fires.
The driver of any tank truck, tank trailer or tank semi-trailer shall be responsible for such vehicle to be electrically connected to the fill pipe by a bond wire
when filling or discharging, and for the drag chain on such vehicle which shall be long enough to reach the ground at all times. (1968 Code, §21.311)
8-4-12: RAILROAD CROSSINGS:
No vehicle containing explosives of flammable liquids shall be driven or propelled across any railroad track unless it is first brought to a full stop within not
less than ten feet (10') nor more than fifty feet (50') therefrom. (1968 Code, §21.312)
8-4-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code, §21.313)
Chapter 5
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS: Is construed to include any material composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of them:
propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or isotane) and butylene.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS EQUIPMENT: All containers, apparatus, piping (not including utility distribution piping systems), and equipment pertinent
to the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gas. Gas consuming appliances shall not be considered as being liquefied gas equipment. (1968 Code,
§21.401)
8-5-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to produce, store or use any liquefied petroleum gas, or to install or maintain any equipment for such production or use, unless such
production, storage and utilization equipment is constructed and maintained in compliance with provisions of this Chapter. (1968 Code, §21.402)
8-5-3: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. License for Production: It shall be unlawful to operate a plant for the production of liquefied petroleum gases, or for filling containers with such gases in
the Village without first having secured a license therefor.
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk, and shall conform to the general provisions of the ordinance relating to
business licenses.1 The annual fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
No such license shall be issued unless the premises and equipment thereon to be used in such activity are in full compliance with the standards
prescribed in N.B.F.U. Pamphlet No. 58; and it shall be unlawful to conduct or operate such activity unless all buildings and equipment used in
connection therewith comply with the standards prescribed in that bulletin. (1968 Code, §21.407)
B. License for Storage: It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of storing liquefied petroleum gases in the Village without first having secured a
license therefor.
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk, and shall conform to the general provisions of the ordinances relating to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 298/702
business licenses. The annual fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
No such license shall be issued unless the premises and equipment thereon to be used in such activity are in full compliance with the standards
prescribed in N.B.F.U. Pamphlet No. 58; and it shall be unlawful to conduct or operate such activity unless all buildings and equipment used in
connection therewith comply with the standards prescribed in that bulletin. (1968 Code, §21.408)
8-5-4: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Building Director or such other officer or employee as may be designated by the Board of Trustees to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter and to make such inspections or tests as may be necessary in connection therewith. Whenever a test is necessary to determine whether any
equipment or method complies with the standards prescribed, or referred to, in this Chapter, the enforcing official may accept the results of a test
conducted by or under the supervision of the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. (1968 Code, §21.403)
8-5-5: ODORIZING:
All liquefied petroleum gas used or stored in the Village shall be effectively odorized by an agent of such character as to indicate by a distinctive odor the
presence of gas in the air down to a concentration of one-fifth (1/5) of the lower limit of the combustibility. (1968 Code, §21.404)
8-5-6: CONTAINERS:
All containers used for liquefied petroleum gases shall be constructed according to the standards prescribed therefor in the Standards of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters for the Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases, of 1958, with the 1959 amendments, as published in pamphlet form by the
National Board of Fire Underwriters, hereinafter referred to as N.B.F.U. Pamphlet No. 58.
The maximum filling density (the percent ratio of the weight of gas in a container to the weight of water in the container will hold at 60° F.) shall be that
prescribed in paragraph B.11 (page 16) of N.B.F.U. Pamphlet No. 58.
No such container for use in connection with any building shall be located between the building and the street upon which the building abuts, nor within
such building. The installation of such containers and location with reference to buildings shall be in accordance with the standards prescribed in N.B.F.U.
Pamphlet No. 58. (1968 Code, §21.405)
8-5-7: EQUIPMENT:
No equipment for the utilization of liquefied petroleum gas shall be installed in the Village unless a permit therefor shall have first been secured. When
such installation is in a building being newly constructed or remodelled in accordance with a permit for such construction or remodelling, no extra fee for
such permit shall be required. In other cases, applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall contain a description of the
location, equipment and intended use of such equipment. The fee for such permit shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00).
No such equipment shall be installed or used unless it complies with the standards therefor established in the N.B.F.U. Pamphlet No. 58. (1968 Code,
§21.406)
8-5-8: REGULATIONS ON STORAGE:
No liquefied petroleum gas shall be stored in the Village except in compliance with the standards prescribed in N.B.F.U. Pamphlet No. 58. (1968 Code,
§21.409)
8-5-9: CONTENTS OF N.B.F.U. PAMPHLETS:
The Village Clerk shall keep on hand copies of the N.B.F.U. pamphlet herein referred to for inspection and distribution without charge to any interested
persons:
Underwriters's Laboratories, Inc.
207 East Ohio Street, Chicago, Illinois
2550 Dundee Road, Box 247, Northbrook, Illinois
National Board of Fire Underwriters
222 West Adams Street, Chicago, Illinois
(1968 Code, §21.411)
8-5-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code, §21.410)
Chapter 6
FIREWORKS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 299/702
8-6-1: DISCHARGE, EXHIBITION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to store, discharge or set off any fireworks or give any pyrotechnic displays in the Village except as herein provided.
No public exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be given unless a permit is first obtained from the Village President and Board of Trustees. All such
public displays shall be under the supervision of a competent person, and shall be supervised by the Fire Marshal or some member of the Fire Department
assigned to this duty by him.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of selling, any fireworks in the Village at any time. (1968 Code, §22.401)
8-6-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1968 Code, §22.402)
Title 9
BARTLETT BUILDING CODE
Chapter 1
TITLE, ADOPTION OF CODES, AMENDMENTS AND STANDARDS
9-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the BARTLETT BUILDING CODE, hereinafter referred to as "this code" or "this title". (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-1-2: ADOPTION OF CODES:
Subject to modifications hereinafter set forth, the following codes, regulations and records are hereby expressly incorporated into the Bartlett building code
by this reference, and are adopted as the Bartlett building code, pursuant to section 1-3-2 of the Illinois municipal code1, which authorizes municipalities to
incorporate by reference the provisions of nationally recognized technical codes and records:
A. The international building code, 2012 edition (the "IBC") (with amendments);
B. The Illinois energy conservation code, latest edition (the state energy conservation code "IECC")/ANSI/ASHRAE/IES standard 90.1-2010 (with
amendments);
C. The international residential code, 2012 edition (the "IRC") including appendices F, G and J (with amendments);
D. The international mechanical code, 2012 edition (the "IMC") (with amendments). See chapter 11 of this title;
E. The Illinois plumbing code 2014, and as hereafter amended from time to time (the "state plumbing code") (with amendments). See chapter 10 of this
title;
F. The national electrical code, 2011 edition (the "NEC") (with amendments). See chapter 9 of this title;
G. The Illinois accessibility code, latest edition, and as hereafter amended from time to time;
H. The international property maintenance code, 2012 edition (the "IPMC") (with amendments). See chapter 13 of this title;
I. The international fire code, 2012 edition (the "IFC") (with amendments, including appendices B, C, D);
J. The international fuel gas code, 2012 edition (the "IFGC").
Except for the deletions, modifications, additions, clarifications, elections and amendments that follow in this title, all provisions (except appendices
unless indicated) of the foregoing codes incorporated herein by reference are expressly made part of this code just as if they were fully set forth herein.
The following deletions, changes, additions, clarifications, elections and amendments in section 9-1-3 of this chapter, and the deletions, modifications,
changes, additions, clarifications, elections and amendments and provisions set forth in chapters 2 through and including 25 of this title (collectively the
"local amendments"), shall supersede the requirements in the codes adopted in this section. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-1-3: DELETIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS FOR BARTLETT, ILLINOIS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 300/702
IBC
Section 101.1 Insert the village of Bartlett.
Section 113 Delete the section: Board Of Appeal, and replace with section 9-23-3 of the Bartlett municipal code.
Amend chapter 9- For changes to the requirements for fire protection systems see chapter 9 of the international fire code.
Section 1612.3 Insert the village of Bartlett and map #170059-0007-0005-0003.
Amend section 1807.1.4 Permanent Wood Foundation Systems; Delete the section and insert: "Wood foundations are prohibited".
Delete section 1809.8 Concrete Footings.
Amend section 1904.4 Insert Chlorides are not allowed.
Amend section 2308 Light Weight Wood Framing, see section 9-8-11 of the Bartlett municipal code.
Delete the following from chapter 35 Referenced Standards:
Delete the ICC electric code-2012.
Delete the international existing building code-2012.
Delete the IPMC section 303.
All references throughout this code to the international plumbing code shall be deleted and changed to the Illinois state plumbing code. All references
throughout this code to the international energy conservation code shall be deleted and changed to the Illinois state energy conservation code.
IRC
IRC Table R301.2(1)
Ground snow load 25
Wind speed 3 second 90
Seismic design category B
Weathering Severe
Frost line depth 42 inches
Termite Moderate to heavy
Winter design temperature -4 degrees
Ice shield underlayment Yes
Flood hazard C or X zone; see local flood zone map (170059)
Air freezing index 2000
Mean annual temperature 50 degrees
Section R101.1: Insert the village of Bartlett.
Delete section R101.2 Exceptions 1 and 2 and replace with:
Exceptions:
1. Live/work units complying with the requirements of section 419.5 of the international building code shall be permitted to be constructed in
accordance with this code.
2. Owner-occupied lodging house with five or fewer guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with this code.
Section R112 Delete the section: Board Of Appeal, and replace with section 9-23-3 of the Bartlett municipal code.
Section R302.3 Amend 1 hour fire resistance rating to 4 hour.
Amend table R302.6 A minimum or not less than 5/8-inch type X gypsum board.
Delete section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
Delete sections R402.1, R404.2, R405.2 and R406.3 and all subsections and insert: "Wood foundations are prohibited".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 301/702
Amend section R402.2 - Chlorides Not Allowed.
Delete section R602.3.2 Exception, section R602.3.3 Not less than 16" inch on center.
Delete chapters 11-43 and all referenced standards within.
Insert under part IV - Energy Conservation: Illinois state energy conservation code.
Insert under part V - Mechanical: International mechanical code 2012 w/ Bartlett amendments.
Insert under part VI - Fuel Gas: International fuel gas code 2012.
Insert under part VII- Plumbing: Illinois state plumbing code w/ Bartlett amendments.
Insert under part VIII - Electrical: National electric code 2011 w/ Bartlett amendments.
IPMC
Delete section 111 Means Of Appeal and add section 9-23-3 of the Bartlett municipal code.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-1-4: STANDARDS:
All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance
with nationally accepted and standard practices in the trade. The provisions of the nationally recognized codes and records, except as modified by the
express provisions of this title, shall be considered to be minimum standards and acceptable practice for all matters concerning building and structure
construction not otherwise provided for by ordinance. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 2
BUILDING PERMITS
9-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A building permit is required prior to a building or structure being erected, constructed, built, enlarged, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, and/or when a
change in ownership or occupancy has taken place. No construction trailer shall be placed on any site, nor shall any repair of equipment or maintenance
work be conducted which affects the structure of a building, energy compliance, or its ability to withstand fire or other hazards without a building permit. No
excavation shall be made (except for tree and shrub plantings outside of any drainage easement or public utility and drainage easement or in connection
with landscape plantings located within 10 feet of a building foundation), nor shall any septic tank or any well for drinking water, nor electrical work, nor
signs be installed, erected, altered or repaired without a building permit. A building permit is required for any swing set, jungle gym or other children's play
apparatus if such structure has a roof and/or attached playhouse, if said structure is permanently installed into the ground or affixed to any concrete
footing, foundation, slab or pier. The term "construction trailer" as used in this code shall include, without limitation, construction storage trailers, sales
trailers or prefabricated temporary construction buildings. A building permit is required for any temporary structure (tent) greater than two hundred (200)
square feet and for all trash dumpsters and trash enclosures. Nothing contained in this code shall be construed as relieving any person from the duty to
obtain a permit from the appropriate county health department, or other applicable governmental agency, for the installation of any septic tank or the use of
any well for drinking water. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-2: APPLICATION:
An application for a building permit shall be completed by the owner, lessee or duly appointed representative. It shall include a description of the proposed
work, the use or uses for which the building or structure will be used, estimated cost of construction, signed copy of the homeowner's contract,
enlargement or repair, and a complete legal description of the property, and shall give such additional information as may be required by the building
director or the assistant building director for an intelligent understanding of the proposed work. No permit will be approved or processed until all general
contractors and each and every subcontractor(s) are licensed and bonded in the village of Bartlett, and have furnished evidence that each and every said
general contractor(s) and subcontractor(s) carry insurance in amounts and coverage at least as broad as required in subsection 9-4-2B of this title. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-3: PLANS:
The application for a residential permit shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of stamped plans and specifications, clearly illustrating and specifying the
work to be done, signed and sealed in accordance with section 9-2-4 of this chapter. Nonresidential plans require architect's or engineer's certified cost
estimates or signed contract for proposed work. All plans and drawings required under this code shall be drawn to a scale not less than one-eighth inch to
one foot (1/8" = 1'), on paper or in ink or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. The application for nonresidential new construction permit shall be
accompanied by five (5) copies of the signed and sealed plans with specifications. Separate schedules for electrical, plumbing and the heating, ventilating
and air conditioning ("HVAC") systems shall be submitted with the plans as may be appropriate. Both copies of the plans and specifications shall, if they
are approved and a building permit issued for the start of work, be signed or stamped by the building director or the assistant building director. One signed
or stamped copy of plans and specifications shall be kept on file in the building department, and one signed or stamped copy shall be returned to the
applicant and shall be kept in a neat, readable condition at the place where the work is being done until its completion. Additional copies may be requested
and shall be furnished by the applicant at said applicant's sole expense. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 302/702
9-2-4: ARCHITECT'S AND ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
A. No building permit application will be accepted by the building department without plans that are signed and sealed by a registered designer of record
(architect or a structural engineer) licensed by the state of Illinois and certified in compliance with this code. The building director or assistant building
director may require additional certification by a registered licensed mechanical, electrical, and structural engineer. (Detached garages, storage sheds
and construction trailers shall be exempt from designer of record certification.)
B. All plans submitted to the building department shall have the following certification affixed to them:
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE UNDERSIGNED IS FAMILIAR WITH THE BARTLETT BUILDING CODE, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE - 2012, INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE - 2012, INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE - 2012,
ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE - LATEST EDITION, NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE - 2011, ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE - LATEST EDITION,
ILLINOIS ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE - LATEST EDITION, INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - 2012, INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE - 2012,
EACH OF WHICH HAVE BEEN INCORPORATED THEREIN BY REFERENCE, AND THE UNDERSIGNED IS FAMILIAR WITH THE VILLAGE
DELETIONS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO SAID REFERENCED CODES AND REGULATIONS AND HEREBY
CERTIFIES THAT THE PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE PROPERTY BELOW HAVE BEEN DESIGNED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
BARTLETT BUILDING CODE. IT IS UNDERSTOOD THAT APPROVAL OF PLANS SUBMITTED TO THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT FOR REVIEW IS
A CONDITIONAL APPROVAL ONLY AND CONSTRUCTION SHALL REMAIN SUBJECT TO ALL PROVISIONS OF THE AFOREMENTIONED
BARTLETT BUILDING CODE. IT IS FURTHER UNDERSTOOD THAT, IN THE EVENT OF A CONFLICT BETWEEN THE APPROVED PLANS AND
THE PROVISIONS OF THE BARTLETT BUILDING CODE, THE BARTLETT BUILDING CODE SHALL CONTROL AND BE THE FINAL AUTHORITY.
Specifications may be submitted to the building department, but they shall not become a part of the approved plans, and data contained therein shall
not be included in the conditional approval. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-5: PLAT OF SURVEY/PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT LAYOUT PLAN:
Legal lot of record verification shall be filed with the permit application as part of the working drawings. A plat of survey of the lot on which the proposed
structure is to be erected, certified by a licensed Illinois land surveyor, on which the applicant shall show the size and location of all proposed new
construction, its relation to other existing and proposed structures on the same lot and its relation to other structures on adjoining property within ten feet
(10') of each property line, drawn to scale with all dimensions shown. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-6: PLAT OF SURVEY/PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT LAYOUT PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
For all new construction a plan shall show the proposed location of the village water supply and sanitary sewer lines, or any wells and septic systems
permitted under the Bartlett building code or other village or county ordinance or regulations, storm sewer lines or drainage ditches for disposal of surface
water and proposed storm sump line destination.
A. Required Information: The plat of survey/proposed improvement layout plan shall show the proposed elevation of the foundation (including the elevation
of each portion of a stepped foundation), the actual elevation of the top of the curb (or the edge of the road pavement where no curb exists) opposite
each front lot corner and the invert of any drainage ditch at each lot line, and culvert inverts at each culvert end. Also indicate the rim and invert of any
storm sewer structures located on the lot.
B. Elevation Variances: In the event that the top of foundation elevation on the plat of survey varies by more than minus three inches (-3") or plus twelve
inches (+12") from the top of the foundation elevation shown on the grading plan for the subdivision approved by the village engineer, the building
director, or the assistant building director shall submit the plat of survey/proposed improvement layout plan to the village engineer for review and
approval.
C. Stormwater Management Plan: In addition to all other required plans and specifications, the application shall include detailed plans and specifications
for stormwater management, soil erosion control, and grading on the subject property. Such plans and specifications shall be on a drawing or drawings
separate from all other plans and specifications, labeled as "stormwater management plans". Such plans and specifications shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer, shall be made in conformance with the requirements of the village's stormwater management ordinance, and shall
include a certification by the applicant, in a form provided by the village, that all requirements of the village's codes, ordinances, and regulations related
to stormwater management, soil erosion control, and grading shall be satisfied by the applicant at all times. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-7: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
No building permit application can be applied for an industrial, storage, commercial, office, multi-family residential, public, semipublic and institutional
building or structure without site plan review and approval in accordance with section 10-13-9 of the Bartlett zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-8: CUSTOMER SERVICE POLICY:
A written customer service policy (or evidence that a previously submitted policy is still in effect) shall accompany all new applications for a building permit.
A copy of such policy shall be kept as part of the village's permanent files. The applicant shall furnish each purchaser or tenant with a copy of such policy.
The customer service policy shall not be required for any applicant who has built less than five (5) homes in Bartlett in a twelve (12) month period
immediately preceding such application or will be applying for building permits for five (5) or fewer homes in the next succeeding twelve (12) month period.
This statement shall include the policy and procedure for receiving, recording, and resolving customer inquiries and complaints on building code, warranty
and contract related matters. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-9: BARTLETT ZONING ORDINANCE AND SUBDIVISION PUD REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 303/702
No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building or structure which does not comply with the provisions of the Bartlett zoning ordinance,
the Bartlett subdivision and PUD ordinance (the "Bartlett subdivision ordinance"), and this code as may be applicable and from time to time in effect. The
issuance of a building permit does not assure the applicant that the proposed building, structure or its use conforms to all applicable regulations and
ordinances noted above. If such assurance is required, the applicant should obtain a written opinion from the Bartlett community development director. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to determine and comply with all codes, ordinances of the village and all federal, state, county and other local laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations that may be applicable to any demolition, building construction, or development project within the corporate
limits of the village of Bartlett, and to obtain all necessary permits and/or approvals prior to commencing any work. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-10: BUILDING PERMIT CONDITIONS:
No building permit shall be approved/issued for any building/structure until all of the following conditions have been satisfied:
A. Improvements: The village water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems have been extended across the entire lot frontage on each street on which
the residence and/or structure proposed to be built is located and the street has been improved with a paved street which extends from such lot to a
fully improved village street connected with the village street system. For purposes of this code the term "paved street" shall mean a dedicated street
area in which there has been installed base material, a binder course (or PCC concrete pavement) and, unless specifically exempted in the ordinance
approving the subdivision, planned development ("PD") and/or planned unit development ("PUD") in which the subject lot is located, curbs and gutters.
All underground utilities shall be installed within public rights of way or utility easements approved by the village for that purpose. All underground
public improvements shall be installed and tested in accordance with all village requirements; the stormwater management facilities shall be fully
functional with ground cover established and detention volume as built drawings approved by the village engineer for capacity. Temporary street name
signs, with addresses on individual lots shall be erected.
B. Improvement Completion Agreement: A public improvement completion agreement ("PICA") or other contract between the village and the developer,
subdivider and/or owner of the underlying subdivision or PUD on the lots for which the applicant is seeking a building permit is located for the
construction that involves any public improvements. A performance bond and labor and material payment bond (collectively a "performance and
payment bond"), an irrevocable letter of credit and/or other security approved by the village attorney shall be deposited with the village to guarantee
completion of and payment for any and all public improvements in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of project engineer's cost
estimate to complete said work is approved by the village engineer in accordance with the Bartlett subdivision ordinance. Nothing contained in this
subsection shall mean that the building department will make inspections until a safe street has been installed in accordance with subsection 9-8-1D of
this title, nor that an occupancy permit will be issued until all of the public improvements required under the Bartlett subdivision ordinance and/or this
code have been installed or, under the circumstances described in section 9-5-4 of this title, cash, an additional bond or a letter of credit has been
deposited with the village treasurer to assure the installation of concrete stoops and service sidewalks, a paved driveway, paved parking lots,
landscaping and sod as required by section 9-5-1 of this title. Any such performance and payment bond shall be issued by a surety or insurance
company authorized by the Illinois department of insurance to sell and issue sureties in the state of Illinois. Any such irrevocable letter of credit shall be
issued by a bank, savings and loan association or federally insured financial institution, and for letters of credit in excess of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) said entity shall have assets of at least fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00) and a capital asset ratio of at least six percent (6%).
The form of performance and payment bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be provided in appendix F to the Bartlett subdivision ordinance, except
for such modifications therefrom approved by the village attorney.
C. Wells And Septic: For lots one acre or more in area, the building director or the assistant building director may issue a building permit for a residence to
be served by a well and septic system; provided, however, that no occupancy permit shall be issued until the appropriate county health official has
approved/certified to the village in writing that the water supply from such well is potable and that a safe, healthful septic system has been installed to
serve the premises.
D. Fees And Donations: All construction fees under chapter 3 of this title, including all municipal donations under title 11, chapter 10 of the Bartlett
subdivision ordinance (as amended) and all other charges and expenses due the village have been paid in full. Donations/impact fees may be due
under subsection 9-3-1B5 of this title, notwithstanding the fact that building permit application may be for an improvement on any existing lot that does
not involve a subdivision, resubdivision or lot consolidation. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-11: MISCELLANEOUS PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a miscellaneous permit will need to be completed by the owner/agent for all non-new construction work. Plans and specifications will be
required for interior alterations, repairs or electrical work, and for additions or other new construction, which will encroach on ground in addition to that
occupied by the existing structure, a plat of survey/proposed improvement layout plan will be required. Provide a signed copy of homeowner's contract.
Nonresidential require architect's or engineer's certified cost estimates or signed contract for the work. Owner/homeowner will be responsible for all
exterior improvements. Improvements cannot negatively affect the lot's approved grading plan, or negatively affect drainage on adjoining lots. (Ord. 2014-
46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-12: PERMIT APPLICATION REVIEW:
Building permit applications shall be processed within a reasonable time period, considering the building department's workload. If laboratory testing is
required to determine whether any proposed structural unit, system or construction method meets the requirements of this code, the time for the issuance
of the permit shall be extended accordingly. If the application, plans and specifications are found to be in compliance with this code, the zoning ordinance
and all other applicable ordinances, a building permit shall be issued. If the application, plans and specifications are not in compliance, the applicant shall
be notified in writing, specifying the reasons for denial of the permit, within a reasonable time period, considering the department's workload. The new
construction time frame for review of plans is generally two (2) to four (4) weeks from the time of submittal.
A. The building director or assistant building director shall sign or cause to be signed all building permits, certificates and notices required to be issued by
this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 304/702
B. A copy of the building permit shall be kept on site during construction. A copy will be available for public inspection during the time of construction. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-13: EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMIT:
A building permit shall expire if no work is commenced within six (6) months from the date the permit was issued. Building permits under which work is not
completed within the following time limits shall expire:
Single-family homes and townhouses in buildings containing 6 units or less 1 year
Residential buildings containing 24 units or less but more than 6 units and nonresidential buildings containing 50,000 square feet or
less
18 months
Residential buildings greater than 50 units and nonresidential buildings greater than 50,000 square feet 2 years
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-14: EXTENSION OF BUILDING PERMIT:
An extension of a building permit may be granted to the owner, lessee or designated agent upon payment of a fee of twenty five percent (25%) of the cost
of the original building permit; provided, however, in no case shall the fee for the extension be less than thirty five dollars ($35.00). An extension of a
building permit shall be valid for six (6) months from the date the original permit expired. A total of two (2) extensions may be granted by the building
director; however, it may be further extended by the corporate authorities in their sole discretion for good cause shown, and only after submittal of such
new and revised plans, tests and reports as recommended by the building department. Where, under the authority of a building permit or extension, work
has begun and has been abandoned for a continuous or cumulative period of four (4) months or more, all rights under such building permit shall thereupon
terminate. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-15: ANTIMONOTONY REQUIREMENTS:
No detached single-family residence building (the "subject residence") shall be built in the village which contains the same or similar design characteristics
so as to be monotonous in appearance to the single-family residence located on the same side of the street and on two (2) or three (3) lots in either
direction from the subject residence (regardless of intervening streets) or directly across the street from the subject residence (the "compared
residences").
A. The front fascia of all detached single-family residences shall consist of brick, stone, stucco or cedar siding. Aluminum or vinyl siding may be used on
the front fascia, however, vinyl or aluminum cannot consist of more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total area excluding soffit and fascia.
B. The subject residence shall be deemed not to be of a similar design so as to be monotonous in appearance to compared residences if it has: 1) major
exterior building materials (excluding wood, masonite, stucco, plaster or other siding materials which are customarily painted) of a different permanent
color, or 2) different predominant building materials used on its exterior (i.e., masonry, stone, stucco, wood shingles, asphalt roofing, terra cotta roofing)
than the compared residences, and 3) at least three (3) of the following features different from the compared residences:
1. Roofline (hip, gable, mansard, etc.);
2. Garage orientation (right hand model vs. left hand model, etc.);
3. Facade (different elevation facing the street);
4. Front porch (porch vs. stoop or steps with landing); and
5. Architectural style (contemporary, colonial, prairie school, traditional).
C. A building permit shall be issued if in the building director's or assistant director's opinion such residences or dwelling units as depicted in plans
submitted for building permit approval are of sufficiently dissimilar design. Plans for the residence or dwelling unit in question may be resubmitted after
they have been modified to meet the regulations outlined in this section.
D. When roof replacement/repairs are to be made on single-family or multi-family uses: If one three foot by three foot (3' x 3') or greater area of roof is to
be replaced this would require the entire side of the roof to be replaced.
E. When siding replacement/repairs are to be made on single-family or multi-family uses: If a three foot by three foot (3' x 3') or greater area per wall
section of siding is to be replaced this would require the entire wall of the siding to be replaced, unless the replacement siding can be matched and not
discolored or of a different color/make/model. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-16: EROSION CONTROL PERMIT REQUIRED:
At the time of application for a building permit, all projects involving the excavation, grading, regrading, landfilling, berming or the cover of land, and/or
which involve any change in the topography of land shall apply for an erosion control permit to be issued by the stormwater administrator as defined in the
Bartlett subdivision ordinance, as amended, based on his physical inspection of the property, to determine what, if any, sedimentation facility, including
debris basins, sedimentation traps, berms, interceptor ditches, land terraces, siltation fences and vegetation ground cover shall be constructed or installed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 305/702
by the applicant to control on site erosion and off site sedimentation for the purpose of preventing the deposit of sediment from the lot or tract under
application upon any off site public or private property or watercourse during all phases of project construction. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-17: DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
If a building or structure is to be demolished, the applicant/owner shall apply for a demolition permit, a state of Illinois or county demolition permit. A plat of
survey shall be submitted identifying the structure(s) to be demolished and any existing buildings and structures, which are to remain. A tree survey
depicting the location, and delineating the species and size of all existing trees four inches (4") in diameter and larger measured one foot (1') above natural
grade, existing on the lot, and within thirty feet (30') of the lot on adjoining lots and in the adjacent parkway(s) shall also be submitted. The applicant shall
comply with the international building code section 3303. Subsection 9-2-18H, "Fencing", of this chapter will apply if determined by staff after review. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-2-18: DEMOLITION/RECONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Definitions:
COMMENCEMENT OF DEMOLITION: Any work done pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to section 9-2-17 of this chapter other than the installation
of the protective fencing required pursuant to subsection H of this section and any approved erosion control.
COMMENCEMENT OF RECONSTRUCTION: The beginning of the new reconstruction work under a building permit for the structure being
constructed.
COMPLETION OF DEMOLITION: Removal of the walls of the first floor above the foundation of the structure being demolished or removal of all
foundation material from the excavation in the case of a foundation removal.
DEMOLITION: The razing and removal of all or substantially all of a structure or removal of such portions of a principal structure as to make the
structure uninhabitable or unsafe for human occupancy.
RECONSTRUCTION: All the on site work done in building or altering structures from land clearance to completion, including excavation, erection and
the assembly and installation of components and equipment upon any lot or lots upon which a structure has been demolished pursuant to a demolition
permit.
B. Demolition Permit Time Limit: No demolition permit or approval made pursuant to this title shall be valid for a period of more than one year after the date
of issuance. Demolition shall be completed within thirty (30) days of commencement of demolition.
C. Permit Renewal Fee: The fee for any renewal or reissuance of any demolition permit or reconstruction permit or approval shall be the same as the
original cost of such permit approval.
D. Required Plans, Specifications And Submittals: Every application for a demolition permit shall be accompanied by the following plans and
specifications:
1. Building Plans And Specifications: If the application includes demolition of a principal structure, and reconstruction of any structure upon any portion
of the land for which a demolition permit is issued, then the application shall include building plans and specifications prepared in compliance with the
provisions of this title for any structure to be built on the subject property.
If commencement of reconstruction of such structure is not planned to occur within sixty (60) days after completion of demolition, then the application
shall also include a detailed site restoration plan as provided in subsection D2 of this section.
2. Site Restoration Plans And Specifications: If the application includes demolition of a principal structure, and if commencement of reconstruction of a
new structure is not planned to occur within sixty (60) days after completion of demolition, then the application shall include a detailed site restoration
plan depicting all work required to restore the subject property, within sixty (60) days after completion of demolition, to a safe, clean condition until
construction of a new structure has commenced, including, without limitation, backfilling of any excavation, grading, seeding, fencing, stormwater
management, and the like.
3. Stormwater Management Plans: In addition to all other required plans and specifications, the application shall include detailed plans and
specifications for stormwater management, soil erosion control, and grading on the subject property. Such plans and specifications shall be on a
drawing or drawings separate from all other plans and specifications, labeled as "stormwater management plans". Such plans and specifications
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer, shall be made in conformance with the requirements of the village's stormwater management
ordinance, and shall include a certification by the applicant, in a form provided by the village, that all requirements of the village's codes, ordinances,
and regulations related to stormwater management, soil erosion control, and grading shall be satisfied by the applicant at all times. Among other
details, the required stormwater management plans shall include:
a. Drainage plans, and soil erosion control during demolition; and
b. Stormwater management and soil erosion control during any period of time between completion of demolition and commencement of
reconstruction; and
c. Stormwater management commencing with preparation for foundation pouring and continuing during the entire new construction process until final
grading of the subject property.
4. Accessibility, Parking And Loading Plans: The application shall include separate plans and specifications showing the location of all work affecting,
and all parking and loading activities planned to take place on, public streets, sidewalks, and other rights of way. Such plans and specifications shall
include, among other things, the location of pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalk, trees on the lot proposed to be removed and preserved (including
height, caliper and species), parkway trees (including height, caliper and species), and parkways, that may be affected by the proposed work; the
impacts on such pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalk and parkways; the proposed location for all parking of contractor and worker vehicles; the
proposed location of any loading or unloading activities (including concrete) to occur within any right of way; the proposed location of the gravel mat
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 306/702
required by subsection L3 of this section; proposed fencing or other protective measures; temporary pavement or other temporary accessibility
measures; tree preservation measures for parkway trees, trees on adjoining property, and trees on the lot proposed to be saved shall be submitted.
5. Materials And Spoils Storage Plans: The application shall include plans depicting the proposed location for storage of materials and spoils on the
subject property.
6. Dust And Airborne Particulate Control Provisions: The application shall include provisions for controlling dust and other airborne particles from the
subject property, including, without limitation, a source of water and spraying equipment and any other measures to be taken to control airborne
particles.
7. Certificate Of Insurance: The application shall include a certificate of insurance establishing that the applicant, or the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant, has commercial general liability insurance coverage in an amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence for all damage to property adjoining the subject property resulting from the proposed work on the subject property by the applicant, the
owner, or any employee, agent, contractor, or subcontractor of the applicant or the owner.
8. Easements: Prior to reconstruction of a dwelling unit upon a lot or lots where the principal residential dwelling unit is intended to be, or has been
demolished, the owner shall execute and deliver a grant of easement and an easement plat granting the village and all utility companies furnishing
utilities in the area of the subject property, a five foot (5') wide utility and drainage easement in, over, upon, through, under and along the rear and
side lot lines of the subject property as it may be configured in the event said lot or lots do not already have said easements of record. In the event
two (2) or more lots, or parts of lots, have been acquired and are under common ownership, any utility easements underlying any proposed structural
improvement on the property shall be vacated or abrogated by all parties to whom or to which said easements run. The applicant shall reimburse the
village for the cost of recording any such grant of easement, plat of easement and/or plat of vacation or abrogation as required hereunder.
E. Predemolition Inspection And Utility Report: Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any reconstruction activity on the subject property, the building
director and the public works director shall have prepared a predemolition inspection and utility report regarding existing conditions affecting the subject
property, which shall describe the approximate location and depth, if known, of existing village water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer, if any, in the
vicinity of the subject property, and the approximate cost to install new service connections to the village water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer as
applicable.
F. Notices: For the sole purpose of advising adjacent residents that a demolition authorized pursuant to this title will be occurring, notices shall be required
of all applicants for a permit authorizing demolition of a dwelling at the time of application and, if a permit is issued, prior to commencement of
demolition as follows:
1. Written Notice Of Application; Certification: Notice of the filing of an application for a permit to demolish shall be given to all residents of property
within one hundred feet (100') of any part of the subject property, including all residents living directly across the street(s) that borders the subject
property. Such notice shall be in a form provided by the village and shall be given by first class mail not later than ten (10) days after the filing of the
application. The applicant shall file with the village, within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the application, written certification that such notice has
been given properly. Such certification shall be in a form provided by the village. The village shall not process, and shall return to the applicant, any
application for which such notice was not given or for which such certification was not filed as provided herein.
2. Notice Of Commencement: The applicant shall cause notice, which may be in writing or oral, to be given to the building department of any work
pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this section. Such notice shall be given not less than two (2) business days nor more than four (4) business
days in advance of such work. For purposes of this subsection, the term "work" shall mean any work on the subject property other than the
installation of the protective fencing required pursuant to subsection H of this section and any approved erosion control.
3. Posted Notice Of Commencement: The applicant shall cause notice of the commencement of demolition to be given by posting the subject property
in a prominent place with a sign announcing such commencement. The size, shape, color, and message of such sign shall be as required by the
building department. Such sign shall be posted not less than four (4) days nor more than seven (7) days in advance of such commencement, and
shall be maintained on the subject property until commencement of demolition.
G. Village Processing Period: No permit authorizing demolition of a dwelling shall be issued by the village sooner than thirty (30) days after filing by the
applicant of the certification of notice provided in subsection F1 of this section.
H. Fencing: If the permit authorizes demolition and/or authorizes reconstruction of a new principal structure, then the applicant shall cause a six foot (6')
chainlink safety fence to be installed around the perimeter of either the excavation, the structure under construction, or the entire construction area, in a
location and manner approved by the building department and shall remain locked when no one is on site. The fencing shall be installed not more than
seven (7) days nor less than four (4) days before commencement of any work on the subject property pursuant to any permit issued under this section
or any permit issued by the village under this title. In addition to such perimeter fencing, the applicant shall cause safety fencing to be installed around
every tree in the parkway abutting the subject property, unless the village arborist has preapproved of the removal of any such parkway tree, in which
event the tree(s) shall be removed at the applicant's expense. Safety fencing shall also be placed at the drip line of any tree with its trunk on an
adjoining property, but with its canopy overhanging at the lot on which reconstruction is sought, and protective fencing around all trees on the lot sought
to be preserved (to the extent practicable as determined by the village arborist). Such tree fencing shall be located, so far as feasible, at the drip line of
the tree, whether on public or private property; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed or applied to authorize placement of tree
fencing on private property not owned by the applicant unless proper permission therefor has been secured from the property owner by the applicant. If
placement of tree fencing is not feasible at the drip line of the tree, then such fencing shall be installed in a location approved by the building director or
village arborist.
I. Commencement Of Reconstruction Or Site Restoration: Either construction of an approved new structure shall have commenced, or the subject property
shall have been fully restored in conformance with the approved site restoration plan, if any, or with such other plan as may be approved by the village,
within sixty (60) days after completion of demolition.
The sixty (60) day period provided in this subsection for completion of site restoration shall be extended by one day for every business day that
weather conditions prohibit restoration work on the subject property, as determined by the building director.
J. Foundation Plan: After construction of the foundation of any new building, and before any other work is commenced on such building, any person
undertaking such work shall submit an "as built" spotted survey foundation plan, showing top of foundation elevations to the village. Such survey shall
be approved by the building director before the commencement of any such other work.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 307/702
K. Site Management Bond:
1. Bond Requirement; Timing Of Payment; Amount: If the permit to be issued pursuant to this title authorizes demolition of a dwelling and
reconstruction of a new dwelling, then the applicant shall post with the village, at the time of issuance of the building permit for such new dwelling, a
site management bond in the amount of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in cash or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved
by the village attorney. Such bond shall be in addition to all other application and processing fees, costs, escrows, bonds, and performance securities
required by this title.
2. Increase Of Cash Bond Or Letter Of Credit: New sanitary sewer and water services and water meter and storm sewer shall be required for all
reconstructed dwellings when the existing dwelling unit is intended to be or has been demolished. If a public street or streets, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, parkway trees and parkways will be impacted by the planned reconstructed dwelling unit, including connection to the village's sanitary
sewer system and/or water system, the public works director will determine the estimated cost to perform said work based on the location and depth
of the village's existing water main, sanitary sewer and storm sewer in proximity to the proposed dwelling to be constructed, and the size and length
of the new water and sanitary services and storm sewer and the amount of street, curb and sidewalk that will need to be replaced. In the event the
public works director determines that the cost to open, cut or auger under any public roads to make water and/or sewer service connections and the
amount of said replacement and restoration work, and to restore the road, curbs and parkways in the right of way, will exceed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), he shall so notify the applicant and the cash bond or letter of credit posted pursuant to subsection K1 of this section shall be increased
to an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the public works director's estimate of said costs. An applicant shall only be required to
install and bond for up to one hundred twenty (120) linear feet of storm sewer, measured from the property line that is closest to the village's closest
existing storm sewer to the subject property that is at a sufficient depth to afford positive drainage from the subject property. The public works director
may request copies of any contracts the applicant has to perform said work or may procure one or more estimates from independent contractors to
perform said work to determine the amount of said bond.
3. Application Of Bond: The site management bond shall be held by the village and shall be applied as provided in this subsection K and in this title.
4. Village Right To Draw On Bond: The village shall have the right at all times, at its option, to draw on the site management bond for the costs,
including, without limitation, legal fees and administrative expenses, incurred or to be incurred by the village in exercising any of its rights under this
title in the event: a) the applicant undertakes any work in violation of any provision of this title or of any permit issued or plan approved pursuant to
this title, or b) the applicant fails or refuses to complete any work authorized by any permit issued under this title in accordance with all plans
approved in connection with said permit. The village's determination of such costs shall be based either on costs actually incurred by the village or on
the village's reasonable estimates of costs to be incurred.
5. Additional Fee For Late Work: If the applicant shall fail to commence reconstruction within sixty (60) days after completion of demolition, or shall fail
to file a site restoration plan as required in subsection D2 of this section and complete site restoration according to said plan within sixty (60) days of
completion of demolition, as provided in subsection I of this section, then the applicant shall pay a special late work permit fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) per day for each day until such work is completed. The village shall deduct such fee from the site management bond provided
pursuant to this subsection K.
6. Replenishment Of Bond: If the village draws on the site management bond, then the applicant shall replenish the bond to the full amount required by
this subsection K immediately after demand therefor is made to the applicant in writing by the village. Any failure of the applicant to replenish the
bond shall result in cancellation of the related permit, which permit shall not be reissued thereafter except after the filing of a new application therefor,
payment of the permit fee, and establishment of a new site management bond.
7. Return Of Unused Bond: The village shall return any unused portion of the site management bond to the applicant, without interest, as follows:
a. If the permit authorizes only demolition work, and no construction work is scheduled to take place within sixty (60) days after completion of
demolition, the village shall return the bond within thirty (30) days after final inspection of the restoration of the subject property and approval of the
work by the building director.
b. If the permit authorizes any work in addition to demolition work, then the village shall return the money within thirty (30) days after issuance of a
final certificate of occupancy.
L. Site Management Standards: The following site management standards shall apply to all permitted work:
1. Accessibility, Parking And Loading Standards: No pavement or sidewalk within any public right of way shall be unavailable for public use at any time
except when such pavement or sidewalk is removed and replaced. No such pavement that is removed shall be out of service for more than twenty
four (24) hours without the approval of the public works director. No such sidewalk that is removed and replaced shall be out of service for more than
thirty (30) days unless approved by the public works director. No parking, loading, or storage of demolition debris, spoil, or construction materials
shall be permitted within any right of way, on any public property, or within ten feet (10') of any right of way or adjacent public or private property
unless specifically approved by the village and shown on approved accessibility plans as required by subsection D4 of this section. The village may
forbid parking in any particular location on a public right of way if the village determines that such parking has an adverse impact on neighboring
property or on traffic control.
2. Particulate Control: Airborne particles shall be controlled at the subject property at all times during work by thoroughly saturating all portions of the
structure and surrounding property affected by the work with water. Such spraying shall be undertaken at all times necessary to thoroughly control
the creation and migration of airborne particles, including, without limitation, dust, from the subject property. The water source for control of airborne
particles shall be a water tanker truck with pump capacity of one hundred (100) gallons per minute at the nozzle. Water shall be delivered from the
water source to the subject property by a hose with a minimum diameter of two and one-half inches (21/2"), which diameter may be reduced to one
and one-half inches (11/2") when on the subject property.
3. Gravel Mat: When determined by the village engineer to be appropriate and practicable, the applicant shall cause a gravel mat to be installed on the
subject property of a size and in a location sufficient to wash down all vehicles used on the subject property and to cause dirt and mud to be removed
from the tires of such vehicles. The gravel mat shall be located so as not to cause any nuisance or inconvenience to adjacent public or private
property.
4. Sanitation Facilities: Any portable toilet on the subject property shall be located and oriented as required by the building department. One such
portable toilet shall be provided at every site of construction of a new principal structure, prior to commencement of excavation of the foundation or
slab for the new structure. The proposed location of any portable toilet shall be depicted on plans submitted at the time of application for the review
and approval of the building department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 308/702
5. Litter Control And Cleanup: Litter and debris at the subject property shall be controlled at all times. The applicant shall designate a person regularly
present at the subject property as having responsibility to assure that no litter or debris leaves the subject property and that all litter and debris is
removed from the subject property before the end of every day, including weekends and regardless of whether work was conducted that day on the
subject property.
6. Street And Sidewalk Cleaning: The applicant shall cause all dirt, mud, gravel and other debris from the subject property or related to any work
conducted on the subject property to be cleaned regularly every day from all sidewalks and streets adjoining and in the area of the subject property.
7. Utilities: All existing water and sewer service lines shall be disconnected and terminated at the property line. The removal of and installation of all
other utilities, including gas, electric and telephone, shall be performed by the applicable utility company. Prior to occupancy of any reconstructed
dwelling permitted under this section, all previously existing water and sewer services shall be removed at the mains and new water and sewer
services of a size approved by the building director shall be installed by a licensed, bonded and qualified underground contractor hired by and paid
by the applicant. The anticipated removal date of any such old services and the approximate connection date when applicant anticipates said new
services will be tapped and connected to any village water and sewer mains lying in village rights of way or easements shall have been preapproved
by the public works director to ensure that disruption to the public caused by open cuts in and/or excavated parkways is reasonably minimized.
8. Safeguards: All persons undertaking work pursuant to a permit issued under this title shall exercise proper care for the safety of all persons and
property. Warnings, barricades, and lights shall be maintained when required by the building director and regardless of such requirement, whenever
necessary for the protection of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. Temporary roofs over sidewalks and all other public rights of way shall be constructed
whenever there is danger to pedestrians from falling articles or materials. All such safety devices, including barricades, barriers, railings, coverings,
fences and signage, shall at a minimum comply with the requirements of chapter 33 of the 2012 international building code or shall be subject to the
approval of the building director.
9. No Trespass: No permit issued pursuant to this title shall authorize or shall be construed to authorize any entry onto property adjoining the subject
property or any work for which entry onto property adjoining the subject property is or may be necessary, unless a proper right of entry has been
secured from the owner of such property.
10. Stormwater Management: Stormwater shall be managed during all phases of demolition and reconstruction in accordance with requirements of the
Bartlett stormwater management ordinance.
M. Limitations On Noise: All work undertaken pursuant to a permit issued under section 9-2-17 of this chapter and this section shall be subject to the
provisions of section 9-6-4 of this title related to hours of work. Further, no person shall operate or cause to be operated any radio, phonograph,
telecommunications device, or other such object at such volume or in any other manner that would cause a nuisance or a disturbance to any person.
Every contractor and every permittee shall be responsible for all actions of their employees, agents, and subcontractors hereunder, and shall be liable
for all violations of the provisions of this subsection committed by such employees, agents, or subcontractors.
N. Weeds And Long Grass: All persons undertaking work pursuant to a permit issued under this title shall maintain the subject property in compliance with
the standards of section 4-3-2 of this code related to the control of weeds and long grass.
O. Signs: No person shall erect or maintain any sign except in conformance with the provisions of the Bartlett sign ordinance.
P. Village Right To Enforce: Every permit authorizing demolition of a dwelling issued pursuant to this title and Illinois or county notification of demolition
asbestos removal permit shall be conditioned on the agreement of the applicant and the owner of the subject property that if any work pursuant to a
permit authorizing demolition of a dwelling is undertaken in violation of any provision of this title, then the village shall have the right at all times, but not
the obligation, to enter onto the subject property and to cause any and all work to be done and actions to be taken to cure such violation. The applicant
and the owner of the subject property shall be jointly and severally responsible for all costs and expenses incurred by the village, including, without
limitation, attorney fees and administrative expenses, in causing such cure. The village shall have the right, at its option, to draw on the site
management bond provided pursuant to subsection K of this section, or to demand payment directly from the applicant or the owner, for the cost of
such village work, including, without limitation, legal fees and administrative expenses, based either on costs actually incurred by the village or on the
village's reasonable estimates of costs to be incurred. Except as provided in subsection Q of this section, the village shall give a written or oral twenty
four (24) hour notice and an opportunity to cure to the applicant before taking such action; provided, however, that no such notice and opportunity to
cure shall be required in the event of repeated violations or in the event that a condition on or near the subject property poses, in the determination of
the village, a threat of any kind to the public health or safety.
Q. Village Right To Complete Work: Every permit authorizing demolition of a dwelling issued pursuant to this title shall be conditioned on receipt of a
written agreement from the applicant and the owner of the subject property, in form approved by the village attorney agreeing that if the applicant fails
or refuses to complete the work authorized by said permit in accordance with all plans approved in connection with said permit, or if said permit has
expired or been canceled and the applicant has failed to secure a new permit to complete the work, or if the applicant has violated any provision of this
title or of any permit issued or plan approved pursuant to this title and fails and refuses to cure such violation, then the village shall have the right, in
addition to all other rights afforded to the village by law, at the village's option, to go upon the owner's property and complete such work or to correct
any defect or deficiency, using the village's own forces or contractors hired for that purpose. The village shall have the right to draw on the site
management bond provided pursuant to subsection K of this section, or to demand payment directly from the applicant or the owner, for the cost of
such village work, including, without limitation, legal fees and administrative expenses, based either on costs actually incurred by the village or on the
village's reasonable estimates of costs to be incurred. Prior to proceeding with said work, the village shall endeavor to give a written or oral twenty four
(24) hour notice and an opportunity to cure to the applicant before taking such action; provided, however, that no such notice and opportunity to cure
shall be required in the event of repeated violations or in the event that a condition on or near the subject property poses, in the determination of the
village, a threat of any kind to the public health or safety.
R. Penalties: The violation of any provision of section 9-2-17 of this chapter or of this section shall, at the election of the village, be grounds for the right to
complete work as provided in subsection Q of this section, revocation of any permit or approval pursuant to which the work in question is being
undertaken, and the right to enforce provided in subsection P of this section; the right to issue a stop order pursuant to section 9-23-2 of this title; for
the imposition of a penalty pursuant to section 9-23-4 of this title; and/or to avail itself of the other remedies provided in section 9-23-5 of this title. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 309/702
Chapter 3
CONSTRUCTION FEES
9-3-1: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
Each application for a building permit for new construction shall be accompanied by a building permit fee outlined as follows:
A. Base Fee For Gross Floor Area: The base fee shall be calculated on the square feet of gross floor area using outside dimensions of all floors in
accordance with the following schedule. Residential gross floor area shall be calculated for all floors on which there are habitable rooms, except rooms
on a floor, which are more than five feet (5') below grade.
1. Detached Single-Family: A minimum base fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per dwelling unit up to one thousand two hundred
fifty (1,250) square feet gross floor area and forty five cents ($0.45) for each square foot of gross floor area over one thousand two hundred fifty
(1,250) square feet. An additional fee for an attached or detached garage shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per car space or a minimum fee of forty
dollars ($40.00).
2. Detached Single-Family Teardown: For reconstruction of a detached single-family residence(s) or other dwelling unit upon a lot or lots upon which
one or more residential units has been or is intended to be demolished pursuant to section 9-2-17 of this title, the base fee shall be four dollars
($4.00) per square foot for the first one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of gross floor area of the reconstructed dwelling, and twenty
five cents ($0.25) for each additional square foot of gross floor area, for a minimum base fee for a reconstructed dwelling where the former residence
was a teardown of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
3. Attached Single-Family (Townhomes, Duplexes): ("Attached single-family residence" shall be defined as a single-family dwelling unit having a direct
private outside access at grade and 1 or more party walls.) A minimum base fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per dwelling unit
up to one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet gross floor area and forty five cents ($0.45) for each square foot of gross area over one
thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. An additional fee for an attached or detached garage shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per car space
or a minimum fee of forty dollars ($40.00) per unit.
4. Multiple-Family (Apartments, Condos): A minimum base fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per dwelling unit up to one thousand two hundred
fifty (1,250) square feet of gross floor area and thirty five cents ($0.35) for each additional square foot of gross floor area over one thousand two
hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of gross floor area.
5. Storage, Mercantile, Industrial And Business Buildings (Use Groups B, F, M And S As Defined In The IBC): Seventy five cents ($0.75) per square
foot of gross floor area for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area and fifteen cents ($0.15) per square foot for all additional
floor area, with a minimum base fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
6. Other Use Groups: Fees for buildings in all other use groups (as defined in the IBC): Seventy five cents ($0.75) per square foot for the first ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area of all floors, and fifteen cents ($0.15) per square foot for each additional square foot of gross floor
area with a minimum base fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
B. Additional Fees: In addition to the base building permit fee, building permit fees shall include the aggregate of the following:
1. Water Meter: Every unit of every residential building and every individual commercial unit within a commercial building shall have a separate Easy
Read-O-Matic meter of adequate size, which can be read outside the building. Meters shall not be installed in unheated or inadequately heated
areas. The water meter fee shall be an amount equal to the actual cost of such meter to the village, plus fifty dollars ($50.00).
2. Sanitary Sewer Connection: A fee for connecting to the village sanitary sewer system shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule:
Residential Uses Per Dwelling Unit
Cook County $ 940.00
DuPage County 2,125.00
Kane County 940.00
All Other Uses
Per Square Foot
Of Building Area
Cook County $0.09
DuPage County 0.27
Kane County 0.09
"Dwelling unit" shall include detached single-family, attached single-family, and multiple-family dwelling units.
Fees for connecting sewer to properties outside the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett (unless such connections are otherwise prohibited by any
revenue bond ordinance or bond purchase agreement) shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the rates hereinbefore set forth.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring the village to permit such connection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 310/702
3. Water Connection: A fee for connecting to the village water system shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule:
Residential Uses Per Dwelling Unit
Cook County $1,680.00
DuPage County 1,680.00
Kane County 1,680.00
All Other Groups
Per Square Foot
Of Building Area
Cook County $0.23
DuPage County 0.23
Kane County 0.23
Fees for connecting water to properties outside the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett (unless such connections are otherwise prohibited by any
revenue bond ordinance or bond purchase agreement) shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the rates hereinbefore set forth.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring the village to permit such connection.
4. Water Tap Fee: A water tap fee of one thousand six hundred eighty dollars ($1,680.00) shall be charged only if village personnel actually make the
tap (connection) to the village water service line.
Fees for connecting water to properties outside the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett (unless such connections are otherwise prohibited by any
revenue bond ordinance or bond purchase agreement) shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the rates hereinbefore set forth.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring the village to permit such connection.
5. Municipal Developer Donations: For all new lots, existing lots, or teardown lots, the owner or developer shall pay full municipal donations in
accordance with the village's ordinance to provide land and cash donations by developers set forth in title 11, chapter 10 of the Bartlett subdivision
ordinance in effect on the date the building permit application is filed with the village for new construction, reconstruction, or addition that will add one
or more bedrooms, unless previously paid for said lot.
6. Reinspection Fee: A reinspection fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) per inspection shall be charged in every instance where the party requesting
the inspection fails to meet the requirements of this code or the plans and specifications or fails to keep an appointment with a village inspector.
7. Erosion Control Permit Fee: If an erosion control permit application is required to be applied for under the terms of section 9-2-16 of this title, as
amended, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable erosion control review fee of one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00).
8. Elevator Inspection Fee: An inspection fee of thirty eight dollars ($38.00) (or the current rate) per elevator per inspection, and an administrative fee of
ten dollars ($10.00) per elevator, shall be charged to the owner of each building in which an elevator is located within the jurisdiction of the village of
Bartlett, with the exception of those located in schools or single-family residences.
9. Plan Review Fee: A plan review fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for all new construction applications. The applicant shall pay
the nonrefundable fee at the time of application. A plan review fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) shall be charged for the second and subsequent
plan reviews.
10. Plan Review Fee For Demolition: A demolition plan review fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for all demolition applications.
11. Consultant Fees: The applicant shall reimburse the village for all fees and expenses charged to the village by consultants retained by the village to
review plans, building systems and to perform testing where deemed necessary by the building director or assistant building director. (Ord. 2014-46,
6-3-2014)
9-3-2: DEPOSITS:
The village treasurer shall hold all such deposits until the completion of all work required to be done by the contractor and all of its subcontractors in any
subdivision, PD or PUD for which any such cash bond has been deposited. The maximum cash bond to be deposited by any contractor, however, shall be
the amount required for work still in process plus two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). If the applicant, its contractors, subcontractors or the owner does no
damage to municipal property, the total amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the depositor upon completion of the subdivision, PD, PUD, or dwelling
unit.
A. In the event of damage to municipal property, that portion of the deposit required to effect repairs shall be retained by the village and the balance
refunded to the depositor; provided, however, that a general contractor or subcontractor shall be required to make an additional deposit in an amount
which will maintain a continuing deposit at the amount required in this section. It shall be the duty of each and every builder, developer, contractor and
subcontractor to report to the building department any act or omission by any person or persons, or any entity, which causes damage to village
property.
Any builder, developer, contractor or subcontractor whose agents, servants and employees are working within the immediate vicinity where damage to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 311/702
village property occurs and knew or ought to have known the cause of such damage shall be charged a pro rata share of the cost of repairing such
damage.
B. If the cost of the repairs exceeds the amount of the deposit, such additional cost shall be charged to the party or parties legally responsible therefor.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-3: SIDEWALK/PARKWAY BOND FOR SUBDIVISIONS ACCEPTED BY VILLAGE:
Except where the developer of a residential subdivision has posted and there remains in place a letter of credit or performance bond and a labor and
material payment bond with the village to guaranty the completion or maintenance of the public improvements for the subdivision and the payment
therefor, and the same developer has applied for a building permit for one or more single-family homes within that same subdivision, the applicant for a
building permit shall deposit with the village treasurer at the time of filing a building permit application, a cash bond in the amount of twenty five dollars
($25.00) per linear foot of frontage on each street on which the lot for which the application is made is located to assure the construction, repair and/or
replacement of a five foot (5') wide concrete sidewalk which meets the specifications set forth in section 9-8-9 of this title. If such lot is located in a
subdivision where sidewalks more than five feet (5') in width are required, the amount deposited shall be increased in proportion to such increased widths.
If the applicant fails to cause such sidewalk to be constructed, or any damaged sidewalk or other municipal property to be replaced within sixty (60) days
after completion of a building for which the permit issued, the village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to cause the sidewalk to be constructed, or
the damaged sidewalk or other damaged municipal property to be repaired or replaced, and apply such cash bond to the cost of construction, repair or
replacement. Upon the written request of the deposition of the refund of any excess deposit within one year after the issuance of an unconditional
occupancy permit for the residence on any such lot, the Village Treasurer shall issue a refund. Any refund not requested within one year from the date of
issuance of such unconditional occupancy permit shall be forfeited to the Village. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-4: BUILDING PERMIT FEES FOR REMODELING, ADDITIONS AND PHASED NEW CONSTRUCTION WORK:
A. The fee for the issuance of a building permit for remodeling work, additions, and new construction work when full construction drawings for the entire
building project are not submitted at the time of application, but partial construction drawings are submitted for review and a partial or phased building
permit is sought and applied for footings and foundations, early earthwork/site grading, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, racking, fixtures, furnishings,
alterations or other improvements different from those shown on previously submitted and approved building plans, or other interior or exterior work, or
combination of such proposed phases of work for which complete construction drawings have been submitted and have been approved by the Building
Director for combination subject to his final review and approval of said plans shall be as follows:
Estimated Value Of Proposed Work Fee
Less than $500.00 $35.00
$500.00 but less than $1,000.00 40.00
$1,000.00 but less than $2,500.00 45.00
$2,500.00 but less than $5,000.00 50.00
$5,000.00 but less than $10,000.00 75.00
$10,000.00 or more 12.00 per thousand
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014; amd. Ord. 2019-10, 2-19-2019)
B. Said building permit fees shall be reduced to thirty five dollars ($35.00) for owners of single family and multi-family residences, when one or more of the
owners of the property on which any of the following improvements to maintain the property, is sixty five (65) years of age or older:
Driveway replacement.
Furnace/AC replacement.
Private service walkway installation.
Roof replacement.
Shed installation.
Siding replacement.
Water heater replacement.
To qualify for the above discounted building permit fee for owners sixty five (65) years of age or older, the owner must provide: 1) proof of ownership; 2)
proof that at least one of the owners in title is sixty five (65) years of age or older; 3) a copy of the contractor's proposal, estimate, work order or
contract for the eligible work; and 4) identification documentation that matches the address of the residence proposed to be permitted.
Work performed by or for a residential homeowner's association, townhome association, or condominium association shall not be eligible for said
discount, even if some of the work included in an association project being permitted is work on property owned by a person sixty five (65) years of age
or older. (Ord. 2019-10, 2-19-2019)
9-3-5: ELECTRICAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 312/702
A forty dollar ($40.00) fee shall be charged for a building permit for electrical installations not done in connection with other work. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-6: PLUMBING:
A forty dollar ($40.00) fee shall be charged for a building permit for any actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing
system by any person, including all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including, without limitation, lawn
sprinkler systems. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems, including all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-7: DEMOLITION (ACCESSORY STRUCTURE):
A minimum of a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee shall be charged for a building permit to demolish an accessory structure and a completed State of
Illinois demolition/renovation/asbestos project notification form. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-8: DEMOLITION (PRIMARY STRUCTURE):
A fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be charged for a building permit to demolish a residential, office, commercial or industrial building and a
completed State of Illinois demolition/renovation/asbestos project notification form. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-9: SWIMMING POOLS:
A. Inground Pools: The building permit to construct shall be based on the cost of construction using subsection 9-3-4A of this chapter.
B. Aboveground Pools: A seventy five dollar ($75.00) fee shall be charged for a building permit to construct an aboveground swimming pool. In addition, a
forty dollar ($40.00) electrical fee shall be charged and a forty dollar ($40.00) plumbing fee if a heater is installed. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-10: FENCES:
A building permit fee for any fence over two feet (2') high shall be charged at the rate set forth in subsection 9-3-4A of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-
2014)
9-3-11: SIGNS:
A. Nonilluminated Signs: A fifty five dollar ($55.00) fee shall be charged for a permit to erect a nonilluminated sign.
B. Illuminated Signs (Internal Or External): A seventy five dollar ($75.00) fee shall be charged for a permit to erect an illuminated sign.
C. Plan Review Fee For Signs: A plan review fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for all new sign permit applications. An additional electrical plan
review fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be charged for all illuminated signs. The applicant shall pay the nonrefundable fee(s) at the time of application.
A plan review fee of forty dollars ($40.00) will be charged for the second and subsequent plan reviews.
D. Additional Fees: The following are being added to the cost of a sign permit where applicable:
1. Consultant Fee For Signs: The applicant shall reimburse the Village for all fees and expenses charged to the Village by consultants retained by the
Village to review plans and perform on site sign locations where deemed necessary by the Community Development Director or their appointed
authority.
2. Double Permit Fee: Double permit fees will be charged for installing signage without a permit.
3. Signage Reinspection Fee: A reinspection fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) per inspection shall be charged in every instance where the party
requesting the inspection fails to meet the requirements of this Code or the plans and specifications or fails to keep an appointment with the
inspector. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-12: CONSTRUCTION TRAILER:
A one hundred dollar ($100.00) permit fee shall be charged for the placement of each construction trailer on a construction site for six (6) months or less.
Information shall be provided if utilities will be connected. In addition, the applicant shall deposit with the Village Treasurer a five hundred dollar ($500.00)
cash bond to guarantee performance of the applicant's duty to remove such construction trailer and restore the site upon expiration of the permit. Such
deposit shall be refunded in full after applicant removes such construction trailer promptly upon expiration of such permit. If such construction trailer is not
removed within thirty (30) days after permit expiration, the Village may, upon written notice to the permittee at the address specified in the application,
cause such construction trailer to be removed, deduct the expense of removal and storage from such bond, and refund the balance, if any, to the
permittee. In the event the cost of removal exceeds such bond, the applicant shall be responsible for any such excess costs. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 313/702
9-3-13: CONDITIONAL OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE:
A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged in every instance where a conditional occupancy certificate is requested. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-
2014)
9-3-14: FINAL OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE:
A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged in every instance where a final occupancy certificate is requested. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-15: CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP/OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE:
A fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be charged in every instance where changing ownership/final occupancy is required for nonresidential
use. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-3-16: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A fifty dollar ($50.00) fee shall be charged for a use permit to allow a home occupation. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 4
BUILDING CONTRACTOR LICENSES
9-4-1: CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of construction, demolition, rehabilitation, alteration or repair of buildings or other structures, sidewalk or
street pavements, landscaping which makes changes to the topography of the property, and the installation of electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning or other mechanical systems, or any such business, in the village of Bartlett, as a general contractor, subcontractor or otherwise, without first
obtaining a building contractor's license. Any person or entity engaged in such business shall be deemed a building contractor.
It shall be the duty of building contractors and their employees to comply with this code and all other village ordinances relating to the construction of
buildings or other structures, the construction of streets or sidewalk pavements, and all laws or ordinances pertaining to or regulating the activities in which
they are engaged. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-4-2: LICENSE REGULATIONS:
A. License Application: A license application is required.
B. Certificates Of Insurance: Every person and entity engaged in the business described in section 9-4-1 of this chapter shall submit to the village clerk
with his, her, their or its license application a current certificate or certificates of insurance issued by a company having at least a "B+/VII" rating in "The
A.M. Best Insurance Guide", evidencing the following types of insurance coverage in not less than the following amounts of coverage:
1. Commercial General Liability Insurance ("CGL"): One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence covering liability arising from premises,
operations, independent contractors, products completed operations, and personal injury.
2. Workers' Compensation Insurance: In the amounts and coverages required by law.
The insurance requirement of this section shall not be applicable to the plumbers who present a current state of Illinois plumbing contractor's license
issued by the Illinois department of public health pursuant to the Illinois plumbing license law (PA 92-0338).
C. Electrical Contractor: Every electrical contractor shall submit to the village clerk a copy of its electrical license certified by an established commission.
D. Plumbing Contractor: Every plumbing contractor shall submit to the village clerk a certified copy of its state of Illinois plumbing certification. Plumbing
contractors need to submit only their state license. No insurance, bond or fee is required in accordance with the state of Illinois.
E. Roofing Contractor: Every roofing contractor shall submit to the village clerk a certified copy of its state of Illinois roofing certificate.
F. Homeowner/Occupant Exemption: The provisions of this chapter shall not require an owner/occupant of a single-family residence, or the owner of a
single-family residence being remodeled or repaired for his or her occupancy to procure a building contractor's license for himself or herself, but any
person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or limited liability company that is an owner but not an occupant, or is not a homeowner, shall not
perform or assist a homeowner with any construction, demolition, rehabilitation, alteration, remodeling or repair work without a building contractor's
license. For purposes of this subsection a person shall be considered an "owner" if he or she owns a fee simple interest or is the legal owner, beneficial
owner or holds a beneficial interest in a trust that holds legal title to single-family residential property. For purposes of this subsection, a person shall be
considered an "occupant" if and only if he or she has taken possession of and is living in the premises as his or her bona fide sole and exclusive
residence, or, in the case of an owner of a single-family residence proposed to undergo remodeling/repair work for his or her occupancy, for which an
application for a building permit for remodeling or repair work has been submitted, along with an affidavit stating that he or she expects to take
possession of and live in the premises as his or her bona fide sole and exclusive residence, and he or she has a current intention to live in such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 314/702
premises as his or her sole and exclusive residence for a period of not less than six (6) months after completion of the remodeling or repair work.
Failure to possess and live in the premises as a sole and exclusive residence for a period of six (6) months or more shall create a rebuttable
presumption of a lack of such intention. Notwithstanding the application of said exemption, nothing contained herein shall be construed to supersede,
amend, alter or exempt any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity from the state licensing
requirements or compliance with state laws including, without limitation, the Illinois plumbing license law1.
G. Fees: Annual license fees for building contractors shall be as follows:
General contractors $100.00 (allows for only 1 additional trade)
Subcontractors 50.00
Anyone who has a contract with the owner or developer (or the owner's or developer's agent) of the property proposed to be improved shall be deemed a
general contractor for purposes of this code.
H. Tree Contractor: Every tree removal, tree trimming and other contractor engaged in the business of tree removal, tree trimming, and/or the application
of any chemical treatment for any tree within the village shall have first filed with the village clerk proof of insurance as required in subsection B of this
section, its license bond as required in section 9-4-3 of this chapter, and if it will be applying chemical tree treatment, its state of Illinois licenses to allow
it to keep, apply and dispose of chemicals for tree treatment. All landscapers, tree removal contractors and tree trimmers shall remove from the
property all trunks, limbs, branches, and landscape debris from any tree or shrub that said contractor has removed, cut, trimmed or pruned, and
dispose of same off site. It shall be unlawful for any landscaper, tree removal contractor, and/or tree trimming contractor to leave any such material for
the owner of the property to dispose of, or for any in town contractor to add any such material to any residential landscape pick up provided by the
village. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-4-3: LICENSE BOND:
Every person and entity engaged in the business described in section 9-4-1 of this chapter shall submit to the village clerk with his, her or its contractor's
license application a license bond or permit bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to guaranty the contractor's compliance with the
provisions of this building code and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the village of Bartlett, cosigned by a surety authorized by the Illinois
department of insurance to sell and issue sureties in the state of Illinois; provided, however, that no such license bond shall be required in the event said
applicant has obtained a unified license and permit bond from DuPage, Cook and Kane Counties, in accordance with the requirements of the contractor
unified license and permit bond act2, and has filed a certified copy of said unified bond with the village clerk. Notwithstanding the foregoing, plumbing
contractors presenting a current Illinois plumbing contractor's license issued by the Illinois department of public health pursuant to the Illinois plumbing
license law (PA 92-0338), shall not be required to post a license bond with the village. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-4-4: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
Every building contractor's license shall expire on the date of the expiration of its bond; provided, however, that no such license shall remain in effect for
more than one year. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-4-5: SUSPENSION AND/OR REVOCATION:
The village of Bartlett building director (the "building director") is authorized to suspend and/or revoke any building contractor's license pursuant to the
following notice and hearing requirements:
A. Suspension:
1. The village building director is hereby authorized to summarily order the cessation of business operations within the village and the suspension of
any license issued to a building contractor for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days when the continued conduct or operation of the building
contractor's business constitutes a danger to public health, safety or morals.
2. Within three (3) business days after such suspension or order, the building director shall schedule a hearing to be held within a reasonable time for
the purpose of determining whether or not such license should be revoked and/or whether such business should be permanently prohibited from
continuing within the village. Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with subsection C of this section.
3. Any person or entity whose license is suspended may, at any time, either petition in writing to the village administrator for a hearing or make a written
application to the village administrator requesting a hearing for reinstatement of his, her or its license. Upon receipt of the written application, the
village administrator shall schedule a hearing to be held within five (5) days of receipt of the application. At the hearing to be held in front of the
village administrator, the person or entity whose license is suspended may present reasons why the suspension should be terminated and the village
administrator shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official suspension notice of order, considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision shall be furnished by the village administrator to the person or entity whose license was suspended within five (5) days
after the conclusion of said reinstatement hearing.
B. Revocation: Any contractor's license issued under this chapter during the term of such license may be revoked by the building director for any of the
following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for such license; or
2. The entry of a final, unappealable order by any court, administrative agency or hearing officer finding that the licensee, or employee or agent of the
licensee:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 315/702
a. Has been engaged in acts constituting a danger to the public health, safety or morals; or
b. Has violated the consumer fraud laws of the state, or any other state, or of the United States; or
c. Has been engaged in a business or profession in defiance of the state statute or local ordinance regulating or prohibiting the same, which
includes, but is not limited to, dealing in stolen property.
3. Failure of the licensee to pay any fine, penalty or license fee owed the village.
4. Refusal on at least two (2) occasions by the licensee or any of its employees or agents to permit any inspection by any such person with a duly
authorized code officer, enforcement officer or village employee while in the performance of their duties in making any inspection required under this
or any village ordinance.
5. Any violation by the licensee of any of the application provisions of this chapter.
6. The commission by the licensee of any acts and/or omissions that would constitute a violation of any consumer fraud laws of the state of Illinois, any
other state, or of the United States, including, but not limited to, section 505/2Q(c) of the consumer fraud and deceptive business practices act3
and/or the home repair fraud act4 (collectively, "consumer fraud laws"); provided, however, such charges are proven by a preponderance of the
evidence and that such findings are made by the building director following a hearing as provided for herein, and subject to the licensee's right to
appeal such findings and decisions to the village administrator as provided herein.
No revocation shall be effective until after the licensee has had an opportunity to have a hearing pursuant to subsection C of this section.
C. Revocation Hearings:
1. The village clerk shall cause to be served upon the licensee or the licensee's agent, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
written notice:
a. That his, her or its license will be revoked effective not less than twenty (20) days after such notice is served upon said licensee or licensee's
agent;
b. Specifying the cause for such revocation, including the nature of the violation, the section number of the building code or any ordinance or law he,
she or it has violated, if applicable, and the date, time and place such violation occurred and/or continued; and
c. Informing the licensee that he, she or it has the right to a hearing before the building director, provided the licensee requests such hearing by
written notice to the village clerk within fifteen (15) days after notice of revocation is served upon the licensee.
2. If the licensee does not request a hearing within fifteen (15) days after service upon the licensee or its agent of the notice provided for in subsection
C1 of this section, the building director shall review the evidence against the licensee and the report of the enforcement official, and shall make
written findings of fact and conclusions of law as to whether or not there is cause for license revocation, and shall submit such findings and
conclusions within fifteen (15) days of said hearing to the licensee.
3. If the licensee requests a hearing, the license may not be revoked until the conclusion of such hearing and only upon a preponderance of the
evidence and the making of findings and conclusions by the building director that there is cause for the license revocation. If a suspension is in place
pursuant to subsection A of this section, said suspension need not be lifted but may in fact be extended by the building director for a period not to
exceed an additional thirty (30) days upon findings by him or her that the continued conduct or operation of the business constitutes a danger to the
public health, safety and morals. At the hearing on the revocation, the enforcement officer shall present evidence of the violation or cause on the
basis of which the license should be revoked and the licensee or his, her or its attorney shall have the right to examine witnesses and present
evidence on behalf of the licensee. After the conclusion of the hearing, the building director shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law as to
whether or not there is cause for license revocation and shall submit such findings and conclusions to the licensee within fifteen (15) days after the
conclusion of the hearing.
4. Any person or entity whose license is revoked by the building director may, within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of said revocation, either
petition in writing to the village administrator for a hearing or make a written application to the village administrator requesting a hearing for
reinstatement of his, her or its license. Upon receipt of the written application, the village administrator shall schedule a hearing to be held within ten
(10) days of receipt of the application. The hearing to be held in front of the village administrator shall be held in accordance with the provisions of
subsection C3 of this section; provided, however, that the village administrator shall submit her findings of fact and conclusions of law within ten (10)
days after the conclusion of the hearing.
5. Upon receipt of written determination by the village administrator following the conclusion of the hearing above, or by the building director and
following failure of licensee to file a timely request for appeal pursuant to subsection C4 of this section, that there is cause for the revocation of the
contractor's license, the village clerk shall revoke such license. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-4-6: CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS:
All general contractors, construction managers, prime contractors and all subcontractors on any construction, demolition, rehabilitation, alteration and
repair of a building(s), or other structure(s), sidewalk, street pavement or landscape project involving any change in topography shall be licensed and
insured in accordance with the requirements of this code before a building permit can be processed and approved. In the event that a building permit is
issued in error or the license of any general contractor, construction manager, prime contractor, and/or subcontractor is suspended, revoked, expired or
he/she fails to maintain at least the minimum insurance requirements under this code, the building director may issue a stop work order and suspend a
building permit until such time as there is compliance. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 5
OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES
9-5-1: FINAL OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 316/702
The building official shall not issue a final occupancy certificate for any building or structure until the building or structure complies with all applicable
provisions of this code and the Bartlett zoning ordinance, and all necessary repairs of public or private property damaged during construction have been
completed. All nonresidential uses are required to have an occupancy certificate prior to opening to ensure that all health and life safety issues have been
addressed. In the event of a change in ownership, and/or a change in the use of any nonresidential structure, a new occupancy permit shall be required
and an inspection of the premises by the building department and/or the zoning department shall be requested by the present and/or proposed new owner,
and shall take place prior to said change in ownership and/or use and issuance of an occupancy permit, to determine whether the structure complies with
this code and what, if any, modifications and/or improvements are proposed and/or required to eliminate any life safety violations and to bring said
structure up to current building code requirements as nearly as practicable, taking into account the age of the structure, type of construction, floor layout,
physical constraints, proposed new use and cost to retrofit, to determine whether the proposed new and/or additional use complies with the Bartlett zoning
ordinance. Final inspections are required by the building department for all uses, and additional inspections are required by the community development
department, fire department, health department and village engineer for all attached two (2) dwelling, townhome, multi-family and nonresidential uses. No
building or part thereof, whether for nonresidential uses or residential uses, shall be occupied in whole or in part for human habitation or use until a final
occupancy certificate, or a conditional occupancy certificate pursuant to section 9-5-4 of this chapter, has been issued by the building director or assistant
building director. Final occupancy certificate requirements are as follows:
A. The building has been substantially completed in accordance with this code and the village approved plans.
B. The use for which an occupancy certificate is requested is a permitted use or authorized special use in the zoning district in which the building is located
and the building is not in violation of the setback requirements of the Bartlett zoning ordinance. No occupancy certificate issued in error shall constitute
zoning approval, or may be relied upon as a zoning approval or waiver, or act as an estoppel of the village's right to enforce its zoning ordinance or
other ordinances of the village.
C. The dwelling meets the minimum requirements of the property maintenance code (chapter 13 of this title), and the health code (title 4 of this code).
D. The public sidewalk has been installed in front of the building for which the occupancy certificate is issued.
E. All concrete stoops, sidewalks, driveways and sod (and/or seeding if allowed under section 9-5-7 of this chapter) have been properly installed and
inspected, final grading and final landscaping have been completed and the final topographic survey has been filed with the building department. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-2: REFUSAL TO ISSUE CERTIFICATE:
The building director or assistant building director may refuse to issue a final or conditional occupancy certificate if:
A. The public improvements for the subject property and/or the subdivision or development in which the subject property is located have not been
completed.
B. No security for the public improvements for the subject property has been provided, and/or if the owner and/or developer of the subdivision or
development in which the subject property is located has not deposited with the village treasurer, or which has expired, a performance and labor and
material bond or letter of credit, a maintenance bond or maintenance letter of credit to guaranty the completion, payment for, and maintenance of all the
public improvements required for the subdivision or development in which the subject property is located.
C. The applicant for the occupancy permit, owner, developer, subdivider or other person or entity responsible for the completion of such public
improvements, and/or the applicant for such occupancy certificate have not executed a public improvement completion agreement. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-
2014)
9-5-3: SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION:
"Substantial completion" shall mean that the building is safe and healthy for occupancy for its intended purposes, that the prime and final coats of paint
have been applied to all exterior wood surfaces, and that concrete stoops and service sidewalks, public sidewalks, a paved driveway, and sodding and
final landscaping have been completed. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-4: CONDITIONAL OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES:
A. Between November 1 and June 1 conditional occupancy certificates may be issued by the building director provided a cash bond or letter of credit has
been posted with the village treasurer in the amount corresponding to the following chart for those items not completed. All items outlined for
completion in the bond and/or letter of credit must be completed and inspected no later than June 1 of the following year.
Item
Cash Bond Or
LOC Amount Completion Of Filing Deadline
Additional topographic survey for lots
on which seeding permit was issued
$1,000.00 June 1 of following year
Concrete service sidewalks $200.00 June 1 of following year
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 317/702
Concrete stoop $100.00 per stoop June 1 of following year
Final grading with 4 inches to 6
inches of pulverized black dirt
spread uniformly over lot
$2,500.00 June 1 of following year
Irrigation/sprinkler system for seeded
lots with seeding permit
110 percent of contractor's written
estimate, but in no event less than
$1,000.00
30 days after filing of first topo, weather permitting; otherwise July 1 of
the following year
Landscaping Based on signed contract amount
supplied by landscape contractor,
plus 15 percent
October 31 of same year
Paved driveway $1,200.00 June 1 of following year
Seeding pursuant to seeding permit $1,000.00 30 days after filing of first topo, weather permitting; otherwise July 1 of
the following year
Sod $3,000.00 June 1 of following year
Topographic survey $1,000.00 July 1 of the following year for sodded lot, or 60 days after filing of first
topo on lots with seeding permit, weather permitting; otherwise August
1 of the following year
In conjunction with the request for and issuance of a seeding permit, the building director may issue a seeding permit between June 1 and October 31, if
bonds covering all incomplete requirements have been furnished to the village treasurer.
B. Between June 1 and September 1 conditional occupancy certificates may be issued to commercial, industrial and multi-family residential projects
without the installation of the landscaping, seeding or sodding of the project site provided that a cash bond, letter of credit or performance bond is
submitted to the village and approved by the village attorney in an amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the contracted amount to perform or
cost estimate for said landscaping, seeding and/or sodding of the project site. The contracts and cost estimate for said incomplete work for the project
shall be reviewed and approved by the village arborist. The ability to landscape, seed and/or sod the project site during this time is dependent on the
review of factors related to the impact of the weather on said plant material and the impact of watering said plant material has on the village's water
system as determined by the village arborist in conjunction with the director of the public works department.
In the event that the village accepts a cash bond, letter of credit or performance bond in lieu of the installation of the landscaping, seeding or sodding of
a commercial, industrial or multi-family residential project site during June and July, said project site shall be landscaped, seeded or sodded by
September 30 of that same year.
In the event that the village accepts a cash bond, letter of credit or performance bond in lieu of the installation of the landscaping, seeding or sodding of
a commercial, industrial or multi-family residential project site during August, said project site shall be landscaped, seeded or sodded by October 31 of
that same year.
C. Upon request of the holder of a building permit, the building director or assistant director may issue a conditional occupancy certificate for part or parts
of a commercial or industrial building, residential home, or for one floor of a multi-family residential building, provided such conditional occupancy or
use will not jeopardize life, safety or welfare of the property. Every conditional occupancy certificate shall state the purposes for which the building may
be used in its several parts and any special conditions and stipulations limiting occupancy or the purposes for which the building may be used, and the
date by which said incomplete work shall be completed.
D. Between June 1 and October 31, upon review of factors related to the impact of the weather, a conditional occupancy certificate for a single-family
home may be issued by the building director or assistant building director, provided a cash bond or letter of credit in the amount(s) set forth in
subsection A of this section, or if for other improvements in an amount determined by the village arborist or village engineer, as the case may be, has
been posted with the village treasurer. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-5: SOD OR SEED REQUIRED:
All residential lots less than three-fourths (3/4) acre in area shall be sodded, unless a seeding permit has been issued by the building director prior to the
issuance of a final occupancy certificate for the residence located on lots three-fourths (3/4) acre in size or less, and the developer, builder or the owner of
such lot has filed a written certification with the building department that the entire lot has received four inches to six inches (4" - 6") of pulverized black dirt
which has been graded in accordance with the grading plan for the subdivision, PUD or development in which said lot is located before the sod is installed.
The building director may issue a seeding permit for: a) shaded wooded areas pursuant to the provisions of section 9-5-6 of this chapter, and/or b) in the
event the developer, builder and/or owner has satisfied each of the following conditions, or depending on the time of year, has posted adequate security
with the village to guaranty that the following conditions will be satisfied: 1) installed an inground irrigation/sprinkler system; 2) filed a written certification
with the village building department that the entire lot in question has four to six inches (4 - 6") of pulverized black dirt spread uniformly over the entire lot
and that the final grades on the lot conform to the approved grading plan for the subdivision, PUD or development in which the lot is located; 3) submitted
a topographic survey of the lot meeting the requirements of section 9-5-8 of this chapter after final grading and the spreading of said black dirt and prior to
seeding evidencing that the final grade on the lot conforms to the approved grading plan for the subdivision, PUD and/or development in which the lot is
proposed to be seeded is located; 4) excelsior blankets shall be used over all drainage swales and slopes on the lot that exceed three to one (3:1); 5) only
mulch seeding or hydroseeding shall be used for the balance of the yard where excelsior blankets are not required; and 6) post a cash bond or letter of
credit in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to guaranty that the homeowner will furnish the building department with a second topographic
survey of the lot meeting the requirements of section 9-5-9 of this chapter after turf has been established on the lot. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-6: TERM DEFINED; SHADED WOODED LOT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 318/702
"Shaded wooded lot" is defined as "an area sheltered, screened and/or hidden from the glare of radiant sunlight by foliage of a large tree or trees for not
less than three-fourths (3/4) of daylight hours in a given day". Prior to the issuance of any occupancy certificate for a residence on a residential lot less than
three-fourths (3/4) acre in area, said lot shall be completely sodded, except if twenty five percent (25%) or more of said residential lot in the aggregate
contains shaded wooded areas, then said shaded wooded areas may be seeded and the rest of the lot sodded, if the building director has issued a
seeding permit therefor. The building director may issue such seeding permit if the developer, builder, owner or tenant thereof has: a) submitted a
topographical survey pursuant to section 9-5-8 of this chapter outlining said shaded wooded areas, b) has filed a written request with the building director
to seed the shaded wooded areas, and the building director, after a site inspection, determines that sod is not likely to survive in the shaded wooded
areas. No unconditional occupancy certificate shall be issued on any such lot which seeding permit and all of the shaded wooded areas are fine graded
and occupancy certificate may be issued pursuant to section 9-5-1 of this chapter, provided the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) in the form of a
cash bond or letter of credit if such work has not been completed has been posted with the village treasurer to guaranty completion of said sodding, fine
grading and seeding work. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-7: MAINTENANCE OF SOD AND SEEDED LOTS:
All sodded lots shall be maintained to assure survival and all seeded areas authorized to be seeded pursuant to a seeding permit issued by the building
director or assistant director pursuant to section 9-5-5 or 9-5-6 of this chapter shall be watered and maintained to assure the turf becomes established.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-8: TOPOGRAPHIC SURVEY REQUIREMENTS:
A topographic survey certified by a professional land surveyor licensed to practice in Illinois showing the elevations of: a) the foundation, b) all lot corners,
c) all drainage "break points", d) storm sump line, e) all drainage structure frames, f) garage floor elevation and width of driveway and width of slope
percentage and g) the top of curb elevations opposite the front lot corners of the subject lot should be submitted prior to an occupancy certificate being
issued. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-9: ENGINEER'S/SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATION:
For all topographic surveys submitted, the engineer or surveyor of record must sign a topographic survey certification for occupancy, which may be picked
up in the building department and reads as follows:
I, (name) , A (surveyor/engineer) DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE TOPOGRAPHIC SURVEY FOR LOT (number) OF THE (subdivision) SHOWN ON
THIS SURVEY WAS DONE BY ME OR UNDER MY DIRECT SUPERVISION. I FURTHER CERTIFY THAT THE ELEVATIONS FOR ALL LOT
CORNERS, ALL DRAINAGE "BREAK POINTS", ALL DRAINAGE STRUCTURE FRAMES AND THE TOP OF ALL CURBS (OPPOSITE THE FRONT LOT
CORNERS OF THE HEREIN IDENTIFIED LOT) ARE DUPLICATED ON THE SURVEY AND ARE WITHIN TWO (2) TENTHS OF A FOOT OF THOSE
SHOWN ON THE APPROVED GRADING PLAN OR A REVISED GRADING PLAN. I ALSO CERTIFY THAT ALL REAR LOT LINE SLOPES, OR SLOPES
IN DRAINAGE SWALES DESIGNED TO CARRY OVERLAND FLOW FROM ADJOINING PROPERTIES, ARE WITHIN 20% OF THE GRADE
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE ELEVATION POINTS SHOWN ON THE APPROVED GRADING PLANS (SHEET OF ) DATED .
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-10: ARCHITECT'S FINAL CERTIFICATION:
For all nonresidential buildings, the architect of record shall submit to the building director a letter certifying that the building has been built according to the
approved plans and specifications prior to the issuance of an occupancy certificate. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-11: CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP/OCCUPANCY USE:
No change in the ownership/occupancy or use of any building shall be made that is not consistent with the last issued occupancy certificate for such
building, nor shall a change that would bring it under some special provisions of this code take place, unless a new occupancy certificate therefor has been
applied for, the inspections and determinations provided in section 9-5-1 of this chapter have been made, and the building director finds, upon inspection
and consultation with the community development director, that such building conforms to the provisions of the Bartlett zoning ordinance and other
applicable laws and ordinances, including, without limitation, the Bartlett building code with respect to the proposed new occupancy and use, and issues
an occupancy certificate therefor. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-5-12: HOUSE NUMBERS:
A house number shall be displayed on a building in a place visible from the street, in figures a minimum of four inches (4") high, designating the street
number of such building. Said numbering shall be in accordance with the village plan kept in the office of the village clerk. All multi-unit buildings shall use
the following system for numbering individual units: odd numbers on the east and south side, even numbers on the north and west side of hallways. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 6
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
9-6-1: STREET MAINTENANCE AND ACCESS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 319/702
It shall be unlawful to allow dirt, debris, gravel, stone, concrete or any other material to be deposited, dropped or thrown on a street which has been
prepared for construction, repair or reconstruction or which has a bituminous paving course in place. The building department and its authorized
representatives are authorized to stop all construction activity if, upon prior notice by the department to the owner's agent or general contractor, such
materials are not removed within two (2) hours.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 9-23-4 of this title any person, firm, corporation, or entity who or which violates the provisions of this section shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any citation issued for any such violation may be settled by paying a
fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such violation to the village clerk if paid within five (5) business days of the issuance of a citation therefor,
otherwise said citation will be processed through the court system. The building official will provide a two (2) hour notice by telephone or site visit.
A. Fees For Village Services: If any village employee, village equipment or village contracted services are used to remove any such material from any
street, said expenses shall be as follows:
Laborers $30.00 per hour
Trucks 50.00 per hour plus driver
Loaders 75.00 per hour plus operator
which shall be reimbursed to the village, and shall be in addition to any fines imposed for any violation of this section.
B. Damage To Village Property: It shall be the duty of each and every builder, developer, contractor and subcontractor to report to the building department
any act or omission by any person or persons or any entity, which causes damage to village property. Any builder, developer, contractor or
subcontractor whose agents, servants and employees are working within any area where damage to village property occurs and knew or ought to have
known the cause of such damage, shall be charged a pro rata share of the cost of repairing such damage. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-6-2: ACCESS:
Failure of the builder and/or the developer to maintain emergency vehicle access routes in safe, usable condition as determined by the fire chief of the
Bartlett fire protection district, or to abide by the operational plans shall constitute sufficient grounds for the building director to suspend any building
permits in the affected area. Access to the construction site shall be on an approved paved street or a street containing a first binder lift. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-
3-2014)
9-6-3: CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS:
All construction and building sites must be kept free and clear of debris generated by site preparation, construction, reconstruction or demolition of
buildings ("construction debris"). All construction debris must be gathered at the end of each workday and placed in a container or containers capable of
preventing the scattering of such debris within the site or onto surrounding property. Burying of construction waste or debris is prohibited.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 9-23-4 of this title, any person, firm, corporation or entity who or which violates the provisions of this section shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any citation issued for any such violation may be settled by paying the
sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such violation to the village clerk if paid within five (5) business days of the issuance of said citation
therefor, otherwise said citation will be processed through the court system. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-6-4: CONSTRUCTION HOURS:
Activity associated with the preparation of land for development, or associated with the construction or reconstruction of a building, shall only occur within
the village of Bartlett on any weekday between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Activity shall only occur within the village of Bartlett
on either Saturday or Sunday between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Activities subject to these limitations shall include, but are not
limited to, noise generating activities such as the operation of engines, equipment, hammers, power tools and similar equipment. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-6-5: SITE IDENTIFICATION:
All building sites shall be properly identified by owner/builder prior to the first inspection, and maintained throughout the course of inspections until final
house numbers are displayed. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-6-6: COST RECOVERY:
In addition to the fines imposed pursuant to sections 9-6-1 and 9-6-3 of this chapter, the village shall be entitled to recover its costs of cleaning any such
streets, construction and/or debris, whether by a third party with whom the village contracts to perform such cleanup work, or village staff if it performs the
work in the amounts set forth in section 9-6-1 of this chapter, should the developer and/or contractor fail to reimburse said costs to the village. (Ord. 2014-
46, 6-3-2014)
9-6-7: GREEN BUILDING CODE REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 320/702
A. Building Material: All nonresidential new construction shall require that not less than thirty percent (30%) of building materials used to construct the
building shall have been "manufactured regionally", meaning manufactured at a plant or facility located within a five hundred (500) mile radius of the
corporate limits of Bartlett.
B. Low Volatile Organic Compounds: All interior building materials shall be required to use low volatile organic compound ("VOC") materials and low VOC
substrate adhesives. "Volatile organic compounds" or "VOCs" shall mean any organic chemical compound of carbon which particulate in atmosphere,
photochemical reactions that have high enough vapor pressures under normal conditions to significantly vaporize and enter the atmosphere. This shall
include, but not be limited to, formaldehyde, and excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides or carbonates and
ammonium carbonate and excluding other compounds determined to have negligible photochemical reactivity by the U.S. environmental protection
agency.
For all building materials, building products, wall and floor coverings, paints, finishes and substrate adhesive, the allowable VOCs shall not exceed the
following ratios (grams/liter minus water):
Carpets1 150 g/l
Composite wood 30 g/l
Fiberglass 200 g/l
Metal to metal 30 g/l
Paints 75 g/l
Plastic foams 120 g/l
Porous materials (except wood) 120 g/l
Sealants 150 g/l
Wood 30 g/l
Note:
1. All carpets must meet or exceed the requirements of the Carpet And Rug Institute's green label indoor air quality test program.
C. Gray Or White Membrane Roofs: A reduction of a heat island effect will be required for all nonresidential flat roof applications on buildings that are four
thousand (4,000) square feet and larger. Flat roof applications shall use a highly reflective, thermal plastic membrane ("TPO") or a gray/white EPDM
roof (ethylene propylene diene (M) ASTM classification).
D. Bicycle Storage: All new nonresidential buildings shall provide bicycle storage racks for not less than five percent (5%) of the anticipated number of
building occupants. The location of the bicycle rack shall be depicted on a site plan and/or landscape plan for the project. In the event the future use is
known but the number of occupants is unknown, the occupants shall be determined by the building official based on occupant projection from tables for
that known or most similar use as set forth in the building code. In the event neither the use nor the number of occupants can be reasonably projected,
the contractor shall install a rack for not less than three (3) bicycles per building unit, but may be required to replace that bicycle rack or add additional
bicycle rack(s) as a condition of the final occupancy certificate for the last unit to be occupied in the building.
E. Recycling Dumpsters: On all new construction projects of new residential buildings of four (4) or more units, and for all commercial, industrial and/or
office building projects, the contractor shall be required to have at least one dumpster for recyclable materials in addition to any dumpster or waste
receptacle for general waste. The contractor shall be responsible to separate recyclable materials from nonrecyclable construction debris and waste,
and to keep records of the amount, type and disposal of waste, including recyclable materials generated at the construction site. The separation of
recyclable materials hauled from the site by licensed recyclers may be conducted off site. Upon the building official's request, a document prepared by
a local waste hauler or licensed recycler certifying the dates and amounts of recycled materials generated from the construction project shall be
produced as a condition to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
Note: All buildings as of January 1, 2013, will comply with the 2012 Illinois energy conservation code. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 7
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND SAFETY
9-7-1: ROOF/ATTIC VENTILATION:
To eliminate the problem of moisture condensation on roof framing in cold weather and to permit the escape of heat in hot weather, ventilation of all spaces
is required.
A. In all cases where soffit or eave vents are installed, approved deflectors (baffles) shall be used to ensure that insulation does not cover or reduce the
effectiveness of the soffit vents.
B. If blown in insulation is used, blocking will be required at attic eaves to prevent blockage. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 321/702
9-7-2: BATHROOM EXHAUST:
The duct piping shall be insulated when they are located in an unheated space. Bathroom and water closet compartments ventilation shall be provided by
one of the following:
A. Window Or Skylight: Operable windows or skylights located in exterior walls or roofs with the light and vent area, not less than three (3) square feet.
B. Mechanical Exhaust: Mechanical exhaust, one cfm per square foot, ducted to outside the exterior envelope.
Where a separate toilet room is provided (having a door separating each area), an additional three (3) square foot operable window and/or exhaust fan
providing one cfm per square foot shall be provided in each area. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-3: BASEMENT VENTILATION:
Basements with the finished floor greater than three feet six inches (3'6") below grade:
A. Provide light and ventilation by windows or doors, in exterior walls with both glazed and ventilating area not less than four percent (4%) of floor area.
Exception: Mechanical light and ventilation may be substituted for up to two percent (2%) of the overall four percent (4%) where approved by the
building director or assistant building director.
B. When an addition encloses an existing basement opening, said opening shall be compensated for by approved mechanical or artificial means; or the
same size window may be relocated elsewhere within the basement area. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-4: BELOW GRADE WINDOWS:
Where window or drain openings are provided below grade, protect with metal gratings, covers or equivalent methods acceptable to the building director or
assistant building director. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-5: ESCAPE WINDOWS:
All residential use groups shall be equipped with at least one emergency escape window per one thousand (1,000) square feet of area or fraction thereof.
Where emergency escape window(s) is/are used, the minimum net clear opening shall be twenty four inches (24") in height. The minimum net clear
opening width shall be twenty inches (20"). (Refer to IRC section R310 and IBC section 1029.) (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-6: PRIVATE GARAGES:
Private garages adjacent to or located beneath rooms in buildings of use groups R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or I-1 shall be provided with sills of all door openings
between the garage and adjacent interior spaces and all walls common with the dwelling unit shall be raised not less than four inches (4") above the
concrete garage floor with a concrete sill not less than four inches (4"). (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-7: UNDERFLOOR SPACES OR CRAWL SPACES:
A new section for all residential occupancies shall be as follows:
Crawl space areas shall not be less than thirty inches (30") high under all buildings in which the first floor construction does not bear directly on the
ground. All crawl spaces shall have a minimum six (6) mil vapor barrier lapped a minimum of twelve inches (12") at joints taped and a two inch (2") slush
(darby) coat of concrete. Exceptions: For slab on grade foundation additions with floor joist construction may be permitted. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-8: SOUND TRANSMISSION:
Walls, partitions and floor-ceiling assemblies separating dwelling units from each other or from public or service areas shall have a sound transmission
class (STC) of not less than fifty (50) (50 if field tested) for airborne noise when tested in accordance with ASTME 90. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-9: FIRE BARRIERS:
The groups listed below shall be separated with fire barriers with the ratings indicated (table 508.4 IBC).
Use Unsprinklered Sprinklered
One- and two-family dwellings 4 2
Townhouses as defined in the IRC 4 2
R-2 in the IBC 2 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 322/702
All other groups (new construction) 2 1
All other groups (existing buildings with change of use or tenant) 2 1
Between tenant spaces 2 1
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-10: FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS:
IBC section 903.2 is amended by adding the following additional requirement before the exception:
All buildings in every fire area, except detached single family, attached two family residences and townhouses shall be provided with complete sprinkler
protection in accordance with the requirements of the applicable stand NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R.
Fire Protection Systems: Automatic fire suppression systems shall be installed and maintained in full operating condition in all new construction for all
buildings one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or more in area containing any commercial, storage, industrial, or institutional uses, and for all
buildings in which dwelling units are located except detached single family homes, attached two-family residences, and townhouses.
The square footage is based on the footprint of the structure. The use of fire walls or fire barriers to reduce this footprint is not allowed.
Exception: Accessory structures located greater than 150 linear feet from the nearest village of Bartlett water main, that are less than 5,000 square feet,
are constructed as non-habitable (no restrooms) and that are provided a full fire alarm system (smoke and heat detectors) tied into Du Comm.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-10-1: LIMITED AREA SPRINKLERS:
All one- and two-family dwellings shall be protected with limited area sprinkler systems at the following locations:
A. Kitchens.
B. One hundred (100) square feet over furnace.
C. Laundry/utility rooms.
All limited area sprinkler systems shall comply with section 903.3.5.1.1 of the fire code. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-7-11: GARAGE TO DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION:
Garages shall be separated from dwelling units in all buildings regardless of classification with a minimum of one layer of five-eighths inch (5/8") drywall on
the garage side. If the wall supports the rated construction the wall shall equal the rating of the wall supported.
All beams, headers and horizontal supports shall be encased in the drywall.
The ceiling assembly shall have a minimum insulation value of R-30 or a sound transmission rating of fifty (50) when there is habitable space above the
garage. When mechanical duct systems are located in a garage ceiling area the R-30 insulation may not be compressed.
All doors in the garage to house wall shall be self-closing.
The other provisions of the IFC, which are not in conflict with the local amendments of this code shall be applicable. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 8
BUILDING GENERALLY (COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL)
9-8-1: DEPTH OF FOOTINGS AND CONCRETE REQUIREMENTS:
A. The frost line shall be forty two inches (42") below grade.
B. Concrete shall not be poured unless the outside temperature is at least twenty eight degrees Fahrenheit (28°F) and rising.
C. When an accelerator or additive is to be used in concrete, it must be "nonchloride".
D. No footing or foundation shall be poured for any building or structure on any construction site unless there has first been provided access to such
construction site over a first binder lift or paved road surface. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 323/702
9-8-2: FOOTINGS:
A. The minimum footing dimensions shall be ten inches by twenty inches (10" x 20") with keyway. A prepour inspection is required for all footings.
B. Wood footings/foundations are not permitted.
C. A soil test by a soils engineer shall be required at the time of the footing inspection by a soils engineer.
D. All habitable buildings shall have continuous footings. (Posttension is not permitted.) (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-3: FOUNDATION WALLS:
A. The minimum dimensions for foundation walls are ten inches (10") for masonry bearing walls and eight inches (8") for all other walls. A prepour
inspection is required for all concrete walls.
B. All beam pockets shall be grouted. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-4: TRENCH FOUNDATIONS:
Concrete footings formed by mechanically dug trenches shall be permitted only as follows:
A. For one-story structures, trenched footings shall be not less than twelve inches wide by forty two inches deep (12" x 42"). (Provide soil test and copy to
the village prior to prepour inspection.)
1. One- and/or two-family room additions: The minimum trench shall be ten inches wide by forty two inches deep (10" x 42"). (Posttension is not
permitted.)
B. For two-story and higher structures, trenched footings shall be not less than sixteen inches wide by forty two inches deep (16" x 42"). (Provide soil test
and copy to the village before prepour inspection.)
C. For all structures with concrete slab floors or on grade underlain by HVAC lines a vertical ribbed type rubber water strip at least six inches (6") high and
at least three-sixteenths inch (3/16") or one inch (1") thick shall be so installed on all nonmonolithic pours so that water will be effectively stopped
between the concrete slab and the trench footing.
D. A prepour inspection is required for all trench foundations. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-5: FOUNDATION DRAINAGE AND SPOT SURVEY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Foundation Drainage: Foundation drainage is required with no exceptions.
1. Provide drains in all below grade stair landings and window wells. Connect drains to footing drain tile with approved "T" fittings.
B. Spot Survey: After the foundation has been backfilled, but prior to the installation of any framing, there shall be submitted to the building department one
copy of a spot survey prepared by licensed Illinois land surveyors showing the location of the foundation and the following information:
1. The closest distance from the foundation to all property lines and easements.
2. The elevation of the top of the foundation, including the elevation of each portion of a stepped foundation.
3. The elevation of the top of the curb (or the invert at each end of the drainage ditch, and the elevation of the edge of road pavement, where no curb
exists) opposite each front lot corner.
4. The elevation of the top of the existing foundation walls on the adjacent sites closest to the common property line, or the proposed grade if no
structure exists on such adjacent sites. The elevation noted on the adjoining site should be noted as "existing" for an existing structure, or "proposed"
for a proposed structure.
5. The proposed garage floor elevation and the proposed driveway grade from the curb (or edge of road if no curb and gutter are proposed) to the front
lot line and from the front lot line to garage or structure.
6. A certification by the surveyor that the horizontal and vertical controls shown on the plat are as measured in the field and that all survey work was
performed under his supervision.
7. In the event that the actual elevation of the top of the foundation is three inches (3") lower than approved engineering plans or twelve inches (12") or
higher than the elevation shown on the site plan, the building director or assistant building director shall require construction to stop until the village
engineer approves or would require the foundation to be modified to meet the elevation shown on the approved site plan, within the tolerances above
set forth, or removed. (Provide 2 copies of the survey prepared by a licensed surveyor.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 324/702
8. In the event that the foundation encroaches upon a required front, side, corner side or rear yard by more than six inches (6"), or if a foundation is
placed closer to another structure than the minimum distance specified in an ordinance approving a planned unit development plan, by more than six
inches (6"), the permittee shall stop all further construction upon the issuance of a stop work order from the building director or community
development director, which shall remain in effect until the owner of the lot applies for and obtains a zoning variation. If such zoning variation is
denied, the building director shall require the foundation to be modified to meet the location shown on the approved site plan, within the tolerances
above set forth, or removed. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-6: CONCRETE FLOOR SLABS OR BASEMENT FLOORS:
A prepour inspection is required prior to the pouring of any concrete. No floor slab or basement floor is to be placed in water or on soft, wet subgrade.
Basements must be pumped dry. An underslab inspection is required when any electrical, plumbing and/or HVAC is installed prior to the placement of any
concrete.
A. Construction Requirements:
1. Subbase: Gravel, sand, screenings, or crushed rock a minimum thickness of four inches (4"). Remove all organic material before placing subbase;
level and compact before placing fill. All basement floors shall have a minimum six (6) mil vapor barrier lapped a minimum of twelve inches (12") at
joints and taped.
2. Wire Mesh Reinforcement Required: When using six inch by six inch (6" x 6") 10/10 woven wire fabric it shall be installed in the horizontal center of
the concrete slab.
B. Concrete Floor Finish:
1. Driveways shall have broom finish.
C. Slabs Used As Base For Floors Or As Finish Floor: Slabs on ground used as a base for floors or as a finish floor for habitable rooms shall be
constructed as follows:
1. Exterior perimeter of concrete floor slabs on grade shall be insulated with a minimum of two inches (2") of approved inorganic, waterproof
noncapillary material extending at least two feet (2') horizontally and two feet (2') vertically. Provide on surface of foundation under HVAC supply
lines.
Exception: Part of system in compliance with Illinois energy conservation code.
A six (6) mil polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than twelve inches (12") taped shall be placed between the base course or
subgrade and the concrete floor slab.
D. Basement Floor Slabs: Wire mesh reinforcing may be required when soil and/or weather conditions warrant enhancing stability.
E. Stoops And Steps:
1. Shall be supported on wing walls, eight inch (8") minimum foundations, or similar design features. A prepour inspection is required prior to the
placement of concrete.
2. Install a metal flashing at the intersection of the wall and the stoop or step. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-7: MINIMUM GARAGE SIZE FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION:
The minimum size for a garage shall be twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'), or four hundred (400) square feet.
A. Garage floor slabs shall be a minimum of five inch (5") concrete on four inch (4") compacted stone base. On attached garages where overdig exists for
foundation footings, excavation must be backfilled with clean stone with wire mesh or fiber mesh. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-8: DRIVEWAYS, APPROACHES AND SERVICE WALKS:
Only one driveway shall be permitted per principal dwelling with only one access to a public or private street per lot. No horseshoe or U-shaped drives
shall be permitted.
A. Concrete Driveway And Approaches: A prepour inspection is required for all driveways.
1. Excavate to eleven inches (11") below proposed grade.
2. The base shall be six inches (6") of compacted crushed rock or limestone, or other aggregate material approved by a building official on a
compacted subbase.
3. Wire mesh reinforcing with six inch by six inch (6" x 6") 10/10 woven wire fabric installed in the horizontal center of the concrete slab or fiber mesh.
4. Slab shall be a minimum of five inches (5") thick of three thousand (3,000) psi concrete with a maximum five inch (5") slump, except for flowing
concrete, which shall have a maximum eight inch (8") slump.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 325/702
5. Minimum 6-bag mix concrete with a maximum of six percent (6%) air entrainment.
6. Public walks and aprons/approaches shall be constructed per the concrete driveway specifications. No woven wire fabric shall be installed in the
sidewalk portion or the apron/approach. Private walks shall have woven wire fabric placed prior to the prepour inspection.
B. Bituminous Driveways And Approaches: A stone base inspection is required prior to installing surface coat.
1. Excavate to eleven inches (11") below grade.
2. The base shall be eight inches (8") of compacted crushed rock or limestone, or other aggregate material approved by a building official on a
compacted subbase.
3. Stone base shall be rolled with a minimum two (2) ton roller.
4. Apply hot bituminous surface course of three inches (3") compacted I-11 or equivalent.
5. Roll the bituminous surface course with a one and one-half (11/2) to two (2) ton roller.
6. Public walks between driveway and approaches shall not be bituminous material but shall be concrete and shall not be reinforced (wire mesh) and
constructed per concrete driveway specifications.
Concrete approaches shall not be reinforced (wire mesh).
C. Driveway And Approach Widths:
1. Single driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide. The approach shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide at the street side of the sidewalk,
with a flare to fourteen feet (14') at the curb or edge of pavement. The approach width may vary under the written approval of the public works
director.
2. Double driveways shall be a minimum of eighteen feet (18') wide. The approach width at the sidewalk shall be eighteen feet (18') with a flare to
twenty two feet (22') at the curb or roadway. The approach width may vary under the written approval of the public works director.
3. Triple driveway width shall be a minimum of twenty eight feet (28') wide. The driveway is to be reduced (flared) down at the sidewalk. The approach
shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') wide at the street side of the sidewalk, with a flare to twenty eight feet (28') at the curb or edge of
pavement. The approach width may vary under the written approval of the public works director.
D. Service Walks:
1. The service walk shall be constructed as follows: Concrete shall be a minimum of four inches (4") thick poured over four inches (4") of crushed stone
or gravel. A minimum of 6-bag mix with a five inch (5") slump (8 inch for flowing concrete) shall be used. Exception: Paver bricks may be used in lieu
of concrete.
2. An expansion joint shall be provided where service walks are adjacent to previously placed concrete.
E. Parking Lots And All Nonresidential Uses: A prepour inspection or a stone base is required prior to all surfaces being installed.
1. Excavate to twelve inches (12") below proposed grade.
2. The base shall be eight inches (8") of compacted crushed rock, limestone or other aggregate material approved by the building director or assistant
building director on a compacted subbase.
3. Stone base shall be rolled with a minimum two (2) ton roller.
4. Construct bituminous pavement consisting of a two inch (2") bituminous binder and a two inch (2") bituminous surface course. Exception:
Resurfaced lots need to be a minimum of three inches (3").
5. Roll with a minimum two (2) ton roller. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-9: PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be of portland cement concrete with a minimum 6-bag mix and a maximum of six percent (6%) air entrainment, not less than five feet (5')
wide (except in older subdivisions to match existing 4 foot wide sidewalks when approved by the public works director) nor less than four inches (4") thick,
placed over not less than four inches (4") of crushed gravel to IDOT gradation for a CA-6 granular material. Control joints shall be installed at five foot (5')
centers. Premolded fiber expansion joints should be placed against existing concrete. Control joints shall be installed at five foot (5') centers. No
reinforcement shall be placed in public sidewalks unless approved by the public works director.
Public walks where they cross a driveway shall be not less than five inches (5") thick, placed over not less than six inches (6") of crushed gravel to IDOT
gradation for a CA-6 granular material. (No reinforcement shall be used.) A prepour inspection is required prior to the placement of concrete. (Ord. 2014-
46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-10: WOOD FLOORS:
A. Truss Floor: Engineered lumber systems (truss floor joists, TJI or open web wood trusses) shall not be permitted. Exception 1: If preengineered wood Ijoists
are used, five-eighths inch (5/8") type X gypsum board shall be applied to the underside. Exception 2: Basement is sprinklered over all
mechanicals in basement for area coverage to be approved by code official.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 326/702
B. Plywood Subflooring: Shall not be less than three-fourths inch (3/4") thick tongue and groove flooring, glued and nailed, eight inch (8") spacing at the
edges and twelve inch (12") spacing in the field.
C. Special Loading Conditions:
1. Floor joists shall be required to support washing machines, whirlpool bathtubs, or special loading conditions, such as kitchen islands. Special loading
conditions shall require the floor joists to be spaced a minimum of twelve inches (12") on center.
D. Minimum Live Load:
1. Table R301.5 sleeping rooms' live load to be forty (40) pounds per square foot minimum.
2. Table R301.5 all attics' live load shall be twenty (20) pounds per square foot minimum.
E. For All Nonresidential Applications: Floors shall be in compliance with IBC section 2303.2 fire retardant treated wood or light gauge steel construction.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-11: WALL CONSTRUCTION:
Exterior walls are not permitted to have exposed concrete block as its final exterior wall covering. Add the following IBC new section 2304.3.4 and at the
end of IRC 602.3. All nonresidential wall construction shall comply with subsection C of this section.
A. All studs in both bearing and non-bearing wall and partitions shall be a minimum of two inch by four inch (2" by 4") nominal members and not spaced
more than sixteen inches (16") on center.
B. Exterior walls exceeding twelve feet (12') in height shall be a minimum of two inches by six inches (2" x 6") nominal material.
C. For All Non Residential Applications: Non residential walls shall be in compliance with IBC section 2303.2 fire retardant treated wood or light gauge
steel construction.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-12: INSULATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Compliance Requirements: All insulation shall be in compliance with Illinois energy conservation code that is in effect.
B. Walls:
1. Residential: All exterior and plumbing walls shall be carefully insulated with insulation having a minimum insulation value of R-13 and R-5 insulated
sheathing. The insulation shall not be so compressed during installation as to reduce its effectiveness.
C. Ceilings/Roof:
1. Commercial: Shall comply with the Illinois 2012 (or the code that is in effect) energy conservation code or the ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA standard 90.1-
2010.
2. Residential: All ceilings shall be carefully insulated with an insulation having a minimum insulation value of R-49.
3. All sloped areas will be insulated with batts only. Blown in material is prohibited.
4. All ceilings that will be insulated are required to have a batt/blanket for the first layer.
D. Underfloor And Crawl Spaces:
1. Insulation with a minimum insulation value of R-15/19 is required on the crawl space walls thirty inches (30") vertically below the box sill. All box sills
shall be insulated value of R-13.
E. Inspection: Insulation inspection is required before covering any insulation system. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-13: WINDOW STANDARDS:
Windows need to comply with the fenestration requirements of the 2012 Illinois energy conservation code or code that is in effect. When windows are
installed an insulation inspection is required.
If a builder/general contractor receives a complaint in writing from any of its buyers that a window or sliding glass door is not performing to the standards
set forth above, the builder shall respond to such complaint within five (5) working days and, unless the builder can demonstrate to the building department
that such window or door meets the above standards, and was installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions therefor, the builder shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 327/702
immediately prepare and deliver to the buyer a written work order detailing the scope of the corrective work to be performed and a time schedule
specifying when such work will be completed, which shall not exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-14: MIRRORS:
All mirrors over four (4) square feet will need to be secured by an approved adhesive and an approved mechanical/fastening device (clips). (Ord. 2014-46,
6-3-2014)
9-8-15: DOOR CLOSURES:
All doors from the garage to the house shall have an approved door closure. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-16: STAIR STRINGER SUPPORTS:
Where the stairway has four (4) or more risers, the contractor is responsible for supporting the stringers at mid run. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-17: ROOF REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum residential roof pitch shall be five to twelve (5:12). Where the existing roof pitch is less than five to twelve (5:12), any addition or alteration
shall maintain existing roofline as a minimum.
A. Truss Roofs: Provide temporary bracing during erection and permanent lateral and cross bracing as specified by the manufacturer. A stiff back will be
required at mid span above all rooms.
B. Roof Sheathing: Roof sheathing shall be exterior grade roof sheathing. Apply with face grain perpendicular to supports and panels continuous over two
(2) or more supports with clips.
1. Premanufactured roof trusses or conventional roof rafters spaced two feet (2') on center shall be installed along with five-eighths inch (5/8") plywood
and sheathing clips are required. Five-eighths inch (5/8") fire code drywall under all manufactured trusses is also required.
C. Protection Of Exposed Edges: Protect exposed edges of sheathing along the eaves and the rake of the roof with moldings or sheet metal flashing (drip
edge). Flashing along eaves may be integral with gutters.
D. Roof Shingles: Add new sections to IBC 1507.8.8, 1507.9.9 and IRC 905.7.8 and R905.8.10 to read as follows: "All roofing shingles shall have a
minimum twenty-five (25) year warranty. Said shingles shall be placed over a minimum fifteen pound (15 lb.) felt paper. Wood shakes shall have a
minimum twenty-five (25) year warranty. Said wood shakes shall be placed over thirty pound (30 lb.) felt paper."
E. Truss/Rafter Connection: Is required in accordance with 2012 IRC section 802.3.1. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-18: MINIMUM ROOM SIZES:
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, rooms for the following uses shall meet the standards specified below:
A. One- and two-story residences minimum gross floor area Per village of Bartlett zoning ordinance
B. Living, dining and cooking when in 1 room 220 square feet
C. Living and dining in 1 room 180 square feet
D. Living only in 1 room 160 square feet
E. Kitchen cooking only (includes area occupied by equipment) 70 square feet
F. If dining space is included in kitchen additional area 30 square feet
G. Dining only 100 square feet
H. Master bedroom 125 square feet
I. Other bedrooms 100 square feet
J. Minimum living room when unit has no bedroom 250 square feet
K. Additional habitable rooms 100 square feet
Notwithstanding the foregoing minimum room sizes, nothing contained herein shall change or modify the overall minimum square foot requirements as
provided in the Bartlett zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 328/702
9-8-19: ELEVATOR REQUIREMENTS:
In all buildings with an elevator the following shall apply. In addition to the rules below, all elevator owners must comply with all mandatory revisions to the
Illinois public act regarding Illinois elevator safety rules (41 Ill. adm. code 1000) reflecting the elevator safety and regulation act.
A. In all buildings at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all floors. Such elevator cars shall be sized to
accommodate a twenty four inch by eighty inch (24" x 80") (610 mm x 2032 mm) ambulance stretcher in the horizontal open position and shall be
identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life).
The symbol shall not be less than three inches by three inches (3" x 3") (76 mm x 76 mm) high and wide and shall be placed on both sides of the main
lobby hoistway doorframe. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-20: IBC SECTION 3007 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
The owner or the owner's legal agent for the building in which the equipment is located shall be responsible for the care, maintenance and safe operation
of all equipment covered by this article after the installation thereof and acceptance by such owner or agent. The owner or legal agent shall make or cause
to be made all periodic tests and inspections, and shall maintain all equipment in a safe operating condition, as required by this article.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-21: IBC SECTION 3007.1 CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY:
The person installing any device covered by this article shall make all acceptance tests and shall be responsible for the care and safe operation of such
equipment during its construction and until temporarily or finally accepted by the authority having jurisdiction (the "AHJ"), elevator inspector.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-22: IBC SECTION 3007.2 MAINTENANCE ITEMS:
All operating and electrical parts and accessory equipment or devices subject to this article shall be maintained in a safe operating condition. The
maintenance of elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall conform to ASME A17.1 listed in appendix A.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-23: IBC SECTION 3007.3 UNSAFE CONDITIONS:
If, upon inspection, any equipment covered in this article is found to be in an unsafe condition, or not in accordance with the provisions of this code, the
AHJ (authority having jurisdiction) shall thereupon serve a written notice of such finding upon the building owner or lessee, stating the time when
recommended repairs or changes shall be completed. After the service of such notice, it shall be the duty of the owner to proceed within the time allowed
to make such repairs or changes as necessary, to place the equipment in a safe condition. It shall be unlawful to operate such equipment after the date
stated in the notice unless such recommended repairs or changes have been made and the equipment has been approved, or unless an extension of time
has been secured from the AHJ in writing. The time duration to be 24 hrs, 7 days, 15 days or a maximum of 30 days.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-24: IBC SECTION 3007.4 POWER TO SEAL EQUIPMENT:
In cases of an emergency, the AHJ, in addition to any other penalties herein provided, shall have the power to seal out of service any device or equipment
covered by this article when, in the opinion of the AHJ, the condition of the device is such that the device is rendered unsafe for operation, or for willful
failure to comply with recommendations and orders.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-25: IBC SECTION 3007.5 ACCIDENTS REPORTED AND RECORDED:
The owner of the building shall immediately notify the AHJ of every accident involving personal injury or damage to apparatus on, about or in connection
with any equipment covered by this article, and shall afford the AHJ every facility for investigating such accident. When an accident involves the failure,
breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the apparatus or mechanism, it shall be unlawful to use such device until after an examination by the AHJ
is made and approval of the equipment for continued use is granted. It shall be the duty of the AHJ to make a prompt examination into the cause of the
accident and to enter a full and complete report thereof in the records of the building department. Such records shall be open for public inspection at all
reasonable hours.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-26: IBC SECTION 3008.1 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
The operation of all equipment governed by the provisions of this chapter and hereafter installed, relocated or altered shall be unlawful by persons other
than the installer until such equipment has been inspected and tested as herein required and a final certificate of compliance has been issued by the AHJ.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-27: IBC SECTION 3008.2 POSTING CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 329/702
The owner or lessee shall post the current-issued certificate of compliance in a conspicuous place inside the elevator.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-28: IBC SECTION 3009.1 APPLICATION:
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by construction documents in sufficient detail and indicating the location of the machinery room and
equipment to be installed, relocated or altered; and all supporting structural members, including foundations. The construction documents shall indicate all
materials to be used and all loads to be supported or conveyed. Documents to be reviewed and approved before a permit is issued.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-29: IBC SECTION 3009.2 PERMITS:
Equipment or devices subject to the provisions of this code shall not be constructed, installed, relocated or altered unless a permit has been received from
the AHJ before the work is commenced. A copy of such permit shall be kept at the construction site at all times while the work is in progress.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-30: IBC SECTION 3010.1 GENERAL:
All equipment and devices covered by the provisions of this code shall be subjected to acceptance, maintenance tests and periodic inspections as
required herein.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-31: IBC SECTION 3010.2 ACCEPTANCE TESTS:
Acceptance tests and inspections shall be required on all new, relocated and altered equipment subject to the provisions of this chapter. Tests and
inspections shall be of such a nature as to determine whether the entire installation is designed, constructed and installed in compliance with this code,
and shall include all parts of the equipment and machinery. In addition, full load tests to be done on the equipment. All such tests shall be made in
compliance with the requirements of section 8.10 and in the presence of the AHJ, or by an approved agency for the AHJ and by the person installing such
equipment.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-32: IBC SECTION 3010.3 FREQUENCY OF TEST AND INSPECTIONS:
Tests and inspections shall be conducted at intervals of not more than those set forth in ASME A17.1 listed in chapter 35 for elevators, escalators,
dumbwaiters and moving walks.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-8-33: IBC SECTION 3011.1 MISCELLANEOUS HOISTING AND ELEVATING EQUIPMENT:
All miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment shall be subjected to tests and inspections as required by the AHJ to ensure safe operation.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 9
ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
9-9-1: AMENDMENTS:
Electrical work including the planning, installing, altering, extending, repairing, maintaining or inspecting electrical systems within the village limits shall be
performed only by a person, firm, corporation, limited liability company or entity that undertakes or offers to undertake electrical contractor services to plan
for, lay out, supervise, or install, or to make additions, alterations, or maintenance of wiring apparatus or equipment for electric, light, heat or power with or
without compensation and possess an electrical contractor's license issued by an approved testing municipality in the state of Illinois, and the village
electrical contractor's license. Electrical work in or on commercial or industrial properties in the village limits shall be performed by an electrical contractor
possessing a commercial and industrial electrical contractor's license. New residential construction and home remodeling work involving electrical work
shall be performed only by an electrical contractor possessing an electrical contractor's license except an owner/occupant of a single-family home, or the
owner of a single-family home being remodeled or repaired for his or her occupancy within six (6) months after the date of completion of the remodeling or
repair work, provided the owner has filed an affidavit in compliance with subsection 9-4-2F of this title with the building department at the time of
application for a building permit, may perform minor electrical work that does not include the hookup or extension of electrical wiring to the electric panel.
Homeowners shall not be permitted to install electrical services.
The following articles have been deleted, added, modified, clarified, elected or amended from the 2011 national electrical code:
Articles:
310.106(B) Aluminum, copper-clad conductors (deleted)
320 Armored cable type AC (deleted)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 330/702
322 Flat cable assemblies type FC (deleted)
324 Flat conductor cable type FCC (deleted)
326 Integrated gas spacer cable (deleted)
328 Medium voltage cable type MV (deleted)
330 Metal-clad cable type MC (deleted)
332 Mineral-insulated, metal-sheathed cable type MI. It may be used for fire pumps, fire alarms, or hazardous locations (modified)
334 Nonmetallic sheathed cable types MN, NMC, NMS, NM-B (deleted)
336 Power and control tray cable type TC (deleted)
338 Service entrance cable type SE and USE (deleted)
348 Limited to indoor use only and shall be limited to 6 feet length (modified)
350 Not in direct contact with earth or concrete and shall be limited to 6 feet length (modified)
353 High density polyurethane conduit type HDPE conduit (deleted)
354 Nonmettalic underground conduit with conductors type NUCC (deleted)
355 Reinforced thermosetting rein conduit type RTRC (deleted)
358 Not permitted in concrete or in direct contact with earth or outside (modified)
362 Electrical nonmetallic tubing (deleted)
370 Cablebus (deleted)
372 Cellular concrete floor raceway (deleted)
374 Cellular metal floor raceway (deleted)
382 Nonmetallic extension (deleted)
394 Concealed knob-and-tube wiring (deleted)
396 Messenger supported wiring (deleted)
398 Open wiring on insulators (deleted)
590.4(B)&(C) Type NM and type NMC or similar wiring methods (deleted)
604 Manufactured wiring (deleted)
Annex H Administration and enforcement (deleted)
Any voltage over 24 volts shall be in conduit system (added)
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-9-2: LISTING; LABELING:
All electrical equipment shall be listed and labeled by a third party agency to U.S. standards. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-9-3: ELECTRICAL SERVICES:
Meter sockets on new construction must be installed on the side of the house closest to the source.
A. Metering: For all new construction, underground wiring and metering must be used.
B. Conduit: Rigid metallic conduit shall be used from the meter socket to the panel. For elements below grade, rigid nonmetallic conduit shall be permitted.
C. Service Requirements:
1. Services for residential shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) amps and shall comply with the following table. New construction shall comply with
the following:
1 to 1,199 square foot home = 100 amps
1,200 to 3,500 square foot home = 200 amps
3,501 and larger square foot home = 400 amps
2. Commercial and industrial services shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) amps.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 331/702
D. NEC Modifications: Article 310.15(B)(7) and its table 310.15(B)(7) have been deleted from the 2011 NEC.
E. Overhead Electrical Services: All overhead electrical services shall be in rigid metal pipe for the riser (conduit) and shall be installed with galvanized
backs and straps (a type of clamp to hold the conduit in place), with three-eighths inch (3/8") galvanized mounting hardware. No zinc parts shall be
used.
F. Grounding Electrodes And Ground Electrode Conductors: Rod electrodes shall be five-eighths inch (5/8") copper rods eight feet (8') in length and delete
250.52(A)(5)(a). There shall be two (2) rods in all cases. The rods shall be not less than six feet (6') apart. Modifying 250.53(A)(2) and the exception
from the 2011 NEC. Ground electrode conductors shall be protected from physical damage by means of RMC 344, EMT 358, electrical PVC 352.
Modifying 250.64(B) Exception: The wire between ground rods will not be required to be in pipe.
G. Main Disconnect: Each service shall be provided with one main disconnect. Shunt trip capability shall be required for all services other than those
serving dwelling units. Shunt trip shall be remotely operated from a knox box as located and installed per direction of the fire district. One main
disconnect shall be provided per building.
H. Fusible Disconnecting: "Fusible disconnecting" means shall be installed for more than five feet (5') of conduit between the panel and the metering
device or a transformer. This includes under a building.
I. Mogul LB: Mogul LB shall be used for all conductors larger than #8.
J. Panel Sizing:
Size 100 amp 150 amp 200 amp
Circuit spaces available 24/30 24/30 42/60
Service conductor sizing #3 THHN 1/0 THHN 3/0 THHN
K. Prohibited Circuit Breakers: No tandem, buddy, duplex, piggyback and half circuit breakers.
L. Subpanels Prohibited: No subpanels for any new construction dwelling unit.
M. Identification: Identification of the contractor shall be permanently displayed on the main service panel board upon completion of the project. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-9-4: WIRING METHODS:
A. All two hundred twenty (220) volt electric ranges shall be installed with a minimum of three-fourths inch (3/4") conduit and wired with two (2) #6s, one #8
white and green and one #10.
B. The microwave shall be on its own circuit (20 amps).
C. The family room shall be on its own circuit (20 amps).
D. Wires terminated on receptacles or switches shall be under the screw of the device. Backstabbing shall not be permitted.
E. Article and table 210.21(B)(3) have been changed to all outlets or receptacles. Must be rated at the branch circuit rating.
15 amp = 15 amp receptacle on circuit rating
20 amp = 20 amp receptacle on circuit rating
F. The minimum wire size for commercial and industrial shall be #12 AWG. Exception: Control wiring installation.
G. Bracketed boxes shall be used in new construction and remodeling if the wall cavity has been made accessible.
H. All center ceiling boxes in rooms that are not listed in article 210.70(A) shall be fan rated.
I. For one- and two-family and apartment buildings, a GFCI protected outlet shall be installed at all balconies with doors (amending 210.52(E)).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 332/702
J. All closets at least five (5) square feet or larger in area shall have an approved lighting fixture installed. All walk-in closets shall have a wall control
switch for the light fixture(s).
K. There shall be no electrical device(s) within three feet (3') of a bathtub or shower (low voltage or 110/220 voltage). Exception: Power for hydromassage
bathtub or listed steamer showers.
L. All furnace areas shall be equipped with a lighting fixture within six feet (6') of the furnace service panel and this light shall not be on the furnace circuit.
In the same area there shall be a single outlet for a future water softener.
M. All flexible cords shall be grounded and rated for loads. The use of cords from fixture to fixture is not permitted (daisy chaining).
N. All underground conductors shall be installed in heavy wall conduit, PVC or metal.
O. All commercial low voltage wiring that is not accessible or is subject to damage shall be in conduit and the stubs must have connectors and bushings
and in bridle rings a maximum of ten feet (10') apart. All residential doorbell and thermostat wiring shall be in conduit system.
P. The fire alarm wiring shall be in conduit. Fire alarm conduit and boxes shall be red in color.
Q. All conduit systems and raceways and like systems shall have a green equipment grounding conductor sized in accordance with 250.122.
R. There shall be a minimum of two (2) kitchen appliance circuits that are required to be for countertop use only. Both circuits shall be available on all
countertops if there is more than one outlet present.
S. There shall be additional supports for floor boxes by expander braces or two by four (2 x 4) means or a listed/approved device.
T. All island and peninsular outlets shall be hard piped into place.
U. Residential smoke detectors shall be wall mounted to manufacturer's installation instructions. If ceiling mounted, pipes shall enter the sides of the
boxes. (No overhead entry.) Smoke detectors shall be located within fifteen feet (15') of a sleeping room doorway and within all sleeping rooms
(bedrooms). Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed within fifteen feet (15') of a sleeping room on all levels that have sleeping rooms. These
detectors shall be one hundred twenty (120) volts with battery backup interconnected.
V. All dishwashers shall have a kill switch within six feet (6') of the unit.
W. Separately derived system- All bonding and grounding shall be done at the first point of disconnect.
X. A single receptacle (simplex outlet) shall be required for all sump and ejector pits. Amending 210.8, no GFCI protection is required.
Y. A single receptacle (simplex outlet) shall be required for all washers and gas dryers. Amending 210.8, no GFCI protection is required. GFCI protection
shall be required for finished or nonfinished basements for receptacle only.
Z. A single receptacle with Garvin cover (simplex outlet) shall be required for all radon vent pipes in the attic. This receptacle shall be within three feet (3')
of the radon vent pipe. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-9-5: ROUGH INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL:
A. All wires shall be in at the time of rough inspection. This includes low voltage thermostat and doorbell wiring.
B. The basement must be roughed in and the wire pulled at the time of the rough inspection.
C. All splices shall have been made.
D. All drywall rings and flexible whips shall be installed at the time of the rough inspections. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-9-6: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ATTACHED OR DETACHED GARAGE:
A. All garages shall be provided with at least one branch circuit.
B. A separate twenty (20) amp circuit shall be installed to a GFCI protected wall receptacle in the garage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 333/702
C. Overhead outlets shall be installed for future garage door openers. These outlets shall be of a single receptacle type (simplex outlet). Amending 210.8,
no GFCI protection is required. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-9-7: SWIMMING POOL/HOT TUB:
A. All swimming pool lighting fixtures shall be low voltage having not more than fifteen (15) volts between conductors.
B. The maintenance disconnecting means shall be six feet (6') from the inside wall of the pool for aboveground and inground pools only. Hot tub's
disconnect shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from the inside wall of the spa. But all shall be readily accessible and within sight. (Ord. 2014-46,
6-3-2014)
9-9-8: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNS:
A. All signs' metal parts shall be grounded.
B. All signs shall have a disconnect means outside.
C. All signs shall be third party listed and labeled to U.S. standards. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 10
PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS
9-10-1: AMENDMENTS:
The following deletions, changes and additions are made to the Illinois state plumbing code, latest edition, which is adopted by reference in subsection 9-
1-2E of this title, in lieu of the 2012 international plumbing code which is deleted. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-2: COMMERCIAL WATER SERVICES:
All commercial buildings with more than one tenant or use shall have separate water services (shutoffs) provided unless written authority waiving
requirement is obtained from public works director. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-3: CROSSES:
Plumbing crosses in the drainage system are not allowed. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-4: BUILDING WASTE LINES:
The minimum size of any building waste lines shall be four inches (4") in diameter. Underground P-traps shall be four inches (4"). Drains for a bathtub,
shower, lavatory, washing machine, bar sink or kitchen sink, within twelve feet (12') of the four inch (4") waste line may be two inches (2"). (Ord. 2014-46,
6-3-2014)
9-10-5: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF GREASE INTERCEPTORS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings prescribed herein:
GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A constructed device, and its appurtenant surfaces and working parts, for the function of removing fats, oils and grease
from wastewaters before such wastewaters are discharged to village sewers.
PROHIBITED CONCENTRATION: Discharges of wastewaters from a grease interceptor in the village shall not exceed two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l) (total) of fats, oils and grease in any sample, whether obtained as a composite or grab sample.
B. Required Installation And Use Of Grease Interceptors: Each person constructing or operating a facility within the village, other than a private residence,
which will be used for the manufacture, processing or preparation of food or food products, must install and use, at its own expense, a properly sized
grease interceptor adequate to prevent a discharge of fats, oils and grease to the village sewers in prohibited concentrations designed and installed
according to IDPH 890.510 in its entirety.
C. Required Maintenance Of Grease Interceptors: Each person who owns or operates a grease interceptor as required by subsection B of this section
shall cause collected or trapped fats, oils and grease to be cleaned and removed from such device on a periodic basis, and delivered to a facility
authorized to use, treat or dispose of such material. Such cleanout and removal shall be accomplished on a monthly basis unless the village, upon
receipt of proof from the owner or operator or on the basis of its own inspection of the grease interceptor, determines that a less or more frequent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 334/702
maintenance schedule is required to achieve the purposes of this section and to minimize the discharge of a prohibited concentration of fats, oils or
grease.
No fats, oils or grease removed from a grease interceptor may be offered to a person for transportation, nor transported off the site where such material
was collected, except by a hauler licensed as required by subsection F of this section.
D. Prohibition On Discharge Of Fats, Oils And Grease: No person shall discharge a prohibited concentration of fats, oils or grease into village sewers, from
a facility required to install and use a grease interceptor.
In addition, no person shall reintroduce or deposit into the village sewers any fats, oils or grease that have been removed from the sewer system by a
grease interceptor.
No person shall deposit or discharge into the village sewers any fats, oils or grease that have been removed from a grease interceptor or sewer system
outside the village.
E. Prohibition On Introduction Of Enzymes And Emulsifiers: No person shall introduce, nor allow the physical, chemical or biological agents into a grease
interceptor for the purpose of resuspending, dissolving, emulsifying or rendering any fats, oils or grease removed from a wastewater by such grease
interceptor and reintroducing them into the village sewer system.
F. Permitting Of Grease Haulers: No person or entity shall own or operate a vehicle used to transport fats, oils, or grease collected from a grease
interceptor unless that vehicle is validly permitted by, and is inscribed with such permit numbers issued by the Illinois department of agriculture
pursuant to 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 610/9.1 and 610/9.2 (a scrap and grease permit); and the person or entity holds a current contractor's
license issued by the village.
G. Requirements For Grease Haulers:
1. No person may cause or allow the transportation of fats, oils or grease away from the grease interceptor at which such materials were collected
unless such materials are accompanied by a shipping paper containing the information prescribed in subsection G2 of this section. No specific form
of shipping paper is required.
2. Each shipping paper shall contain at a minimum the following information:
a. The name and telephone number of the owner or operator of the grease interceptor from which the fats, oils or grease were collected, the street
address of the grease interceptor, the volume of fats, oils or grease and any associated water removed, the legible signature of an authorized
representative of the owner or operator and the date of the material removal; and
b. The name, address, village or department of agriculture permit number, and telephone number of the transporter, an acknowledgment of receipt of
the collected materials, the legible signature of an authorized representative of the transporter, and the date of collection; and
c. The name, street address, and telephone number of the facility to which the material was delivered for use, treatment or disposal, the date and
time of delivery, the volume delivered, and the legible signature of an authorized representative of the transporter verifying delivery.
3. The grease interceptor owner or operator and transporter shall each retain a copy of the shipping document for a minimum of two (2) years, and
shall produce the documents upon request of the village or the owner or operator of the sewage treatment works to which the village's sewers are
tributary. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-6: WATER SERVICES:
This code shall apply to all piping, including lawn sprinklers, swimming pools and process piping. The minimum water service piping requirements shall be:
A. Size; Water Service: The size of the water service shall be determined by the load occupant value in water fixture units and not be smaller than one
inch (1") in diameter. All new construction where fire suppression is required shall not have a water service line less than one and a half inch (1.5") in
diameter.
B. Size; Nonresidential Buildings And Structures: All nonresidential buildings and structures shall be sized based upon the number of water fixture units,
fire protection consideration and public health and safety.
C. Copper Pipe: A minimum of type K copper pipe shall be used below ground. A minimum of type L copper pipe shall be used above ground.
D. Air Chambers: Air chambers shall not be less than twelve inches (12") nor more than twenty four inches (24") in height and shall be installed on all
water supply connections to plumbing fixtures.
E. Shutoff Boxes: Shutoff boxes shall be of the type specified by the village.
F. Meter Spread: There shall be a twelve inch (12") meter spread at the main interior shutoff valves for the installation of a water meter.
G. Valve Vaults: Valve vaults not less than five feet (5') in diameter shall be installed for all pressure taps three inches (3") and larger.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 335/702
H. Hose Bibs; Vacuum Breakers: A minimum of two (2) hose bibs shall be installed on opposite sides of all single-family residences. Vacuum breakers
shall be provided.
I. Submerged Water Supply: No plumbing fixtures shall be installed unless the water supply enters said fixtures at least two inches (2") above any overflow
connection or the supply is connected to an approved and certified RPZ valve.
J. Separate Water Service Required: Provide a separate water service for each owner/tenant and/or occupied unit. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-7: SANITARY SEWER:
All new buildings constructed with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below ground level at the building site shall have overhead plumbing for
backwater protection. All sewage originating below grade shall be collected into a suitable ejector and discharged by automatic equipment into an
overhead gravity sewer. If required, a second sump pump shall be installed to discharge the basement floor drains and laundry tub, and shall be
connected to the overhead sanitary sewer.
A. Service Pipe Size: All PVC service pipe shall be six inch (6") SDR schedule 40 or 26, five feet (5') from foundation, with six inch by four inch (6" x 4")
mission coupling and a full size PVC cleanout outside within five feet (5') of the building at grade for all new installations.
When sewer repair work involves a cleanout, a full size cleanout shall be installed unless one is already present. All underground couplings shall be
nonshear type.
B. Vertical Deflection: The vertical deflection of PVC pipe shall not exceed five percent (5%). No deflection is permitted for iron pipe.
C. Crawl Spaces, Slabs: Crawl spaces and slabs on grade shall have cleanouts outside of building foundation, within five feet (5') of building area at
grade.
D. Service Trenches: All service trenches shall remain open until the appropriate village inspector makes the inspection; however, no trenches shall
remain open overnight. Services under driveways and sidewalks shall be backfilled completely with stone. All trench drains shall have silt/sediment
traps before entering the drainage system.
E. Granular Fill: Granular fill is required from the spring line to a point twelve inches (12") above the sewer service. Granular material to be used can be
any gravel or stone with a gradation ranging from the no. 200 sieve through one inch (1") and two inch (2") sieves.
F. Bedding Material: Bedding material at least four inches (4") thick shall be placed under each sewer service pipe and carried to the spring line of the
pipe, and extended bedding should extend twelve inches (12") above PVC.
G. Future Venting: A two inch (2") grinder pump shall be installed into sanitary ejector in a thirty inch (30") pit with a two inch (2") vent extended into
basement or lower level for future venting of plumbing fixtures.
H. Separate Sanitary Service Required: Provide a separate sanitary service for each owner/tenant and/or occupied unit. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-8: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS:
The entire plumbing and drainage system of every building shall be entirely separate and independent from that of other buildings or as approved by the
public works director. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-9: STORMWATER DRAINS:
Rainspouts or roof leaders shall not be connected to any sanitary sewer, trunk line or branch thereof. It is expressly prohibited to discharge drainage from
downspouts, window wells, building footing drain tile, outside area drains, or from any other source of stormwater, into sanitary sewers.
A. Storm Sump Pumps: For lots or tracts served by a storm sewer system with drainage structures lying either in the road right of way immediately
adjacent to the lot or in utility easement at the rear of the lot, all primary storm sump pumps shall discharge into and be connected by PVC (schedule
35 or better) from the point of discharge to a drainage structure, including any manhole, catch basin, inlet or by tapping into the storm sewer pipe using
a tapping method acceptable to the building director. For lots or tracts served with an open drainage system, all sump pumps shall be discharged only
into the rear yard at a point no closer than ten feet (10') from any lot line and in no event into a street. The owner shall be responsible to maintain all
sump pumps and discharge pipes and lines. Sump discharge cannot cause a nuisance in the public right of way.
B. Drain Tile: Drain tile shall be installed around all basement and crawl space areas, connected to a sump and discharged into the village storm sewer, a
dry well or onto a splash block which discharges at least two feet (2') from the foundation at the rear of the house.
C. Gutters: Exterior gutters and downspouts discharging onto splash blocks are required on attached and detached single-family buildings. In addition,
gutters would be required on all accessory structures within five feet (5') of adjoining lot lines. Gutter downspout must discharge at the rear of the
house and at the front of the house not at/toward side yard and locations cannot cause a nuisance to adjoining lots. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 336/702
9-10-10: FLOOR DRAINS:
A. Underground floor drains shall be a minimum of four inch (4") pipe, trap with cover and shall be vented.
B. Floor drains shall be within six feet (6') of water heater(s)/furnace area and in the same room as these appliances.
C. Any structure which has a drain installed shall have at least one vent stack carried full size through the roof to the outside atmosphere. The minimum
stack size shall be three inches (3") in diameter with an increaser out the roof. No penetrations of a fire wall shall be allowed. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-11: STUD GUARDS:
Stud guards are to be installed on all water/sewer and vent lines when less than three-fourths (3/4) of an inch of framing remains.
The plumbing stack wall shall be constructed with not less than two inch by six inch (2" x 6") studs, top and bottom plate. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-12: MECHANICAL AND LAUNDRY ROOMS:
Where water appliances such as water heaters, steam generators, or washing machines are installed above all habitable areas above the basement, they
shall have a safe pan installed under each appliance connected to the floor drain or drain into a trapped and vented P-trap or mop sink. No water heater
tank over twenty (20) gallons shall be installed above the ceiling or overhead unless it is on a landing and accessible by code approved stairs. A six (6)
gallon water heater shall service one hand sink only, a minimum of fifteen (15) gallon water heater shall be required for a mop sink or other high flow
faucet. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-13: WELLS:
Where wells are permitted under this code, their type, construction and location shall be in accordance with the regulations, rules and recommendations of
the board of health of the county in which they are located.
In all cases where a well is used as a source of water supply, the plumbing inspector shall approve the construction and location of such well. Before any
water from such well is used, the builder, owner or well contractor shall submit a water sample to the state of Illinois department of health ("IDH"). The use
of water from a well for drinking purposes shall not be permitted until the IDH and/or the other applicable county health authority has certified that the water
from such well is fit for drinking, and no occupancy certificate for any building which has a well for its water supply shall be issued until the building director
has received such certification from the IDH and/or the other applicable county health authority. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-14: SEPTIC TANK:
Where septic tanks are permitted under this code, they shall comply with the appropriate county code and applicable regulations. The installer and owner
must notify the village before installing any septic system. A certificate of acceptance from the applicable county department shall be required before a
building permit will be issued. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-15: KITCHEN:
Only one kitchen shall be permitted per dwelling unit. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-10-16: OWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENCE PLUMBING IMPROVEMENTS:
All planning and designing of plumbing systems and all plumbing shall be performed by plumbers licensed under the Illinois plumbing license act, except
nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owner-occupant or lessee-occupant of a single-family residence or the owner of a single-family residence under
construction for his or her occupancy, from planning, installing, altering or repairing the plumbing system of such residence, provided: a) that such
plumbing shall comply with the minimum standards for plumbing contained in the Illinois state plumbing code (latest edition), and shall be subject to
inspection by the village; b) such owner-occupant or lessee-occupant shall not employ other than a plumber licensed pursuant to the Illinois plumbing
license act to assist him or her; and c) the owner-occupant has taken possession of the single-family residence as bona fide sole and exclusive residence
under construction for his or her occupancy, he or she intends to take possession of and live in the premises as his or her bona fide residence, and he or
she has a current intention to live in such premises as his or her sole and exclusive residence for a period of not less than six (6) months after completion
of the plumbing work, or in the case of an owner of a single-family residence under construction for his or her occupancy, for a period of not less than six
(6) months after the completion of construction of the residence, and has submitted an affidavit in compliance with subsection 9-4-2F of this title. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 11
MECHANICAL CODE
9-11-1: RETURN AIR DUCTS:
Return air ducts are required for all habitable rooms except kitchens and bathrooms in new construction and in alterations to existing buildings. (Ord. 2014-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 337/702
46, 6-3-2014)
9-11-2: FLUES:
All mechanical flues that extend above the roofline shall be covered with decorative flue housing or of the same material used on the exterior sides of the
house. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-11-3: MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
All rooftop or ground mechanical units are required to be screened on all sides. Said screening shall be of noncombustible material and of the same
character and design as the building upon which the screening is erected. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-11-4: GAS PIPING:
All gas piping shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") below grade.
All gas piping shall be malleable iron or CSST installed by a certified installer.
All gas piping shall be pressure tested by fifty (50) psi of air for a minimum of fifteen (15) minutes witnessed by the inspector. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-11-5: ALL HEATING AND COOLING SYSTEMS:
All heating and cooling systems will need to be in compliance with the Illinois energy conservation code, 2012, or code that is in effect. For new
construction the above will apply or equal Energy Star Compliance. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 12
FIRE CODE
9-12-1: SPRINKLER PLANS:
Sprinkler plans are to be submitted to the Bartlett building department and/or Bartlett fire protection district or the South Elgin fire protection district. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-2: SPRINKLER ALARMS:
Add to IBC 903.4.2 and IFC 903.4.2 to provide an outside visual (no bell) device over the fire department connection (red strobe light).
A. Add to IBC 903.5 and IFC 903.6 to provide a minimum 5 psi safety factor in the fire protection system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall
be 5 psi minimum below the seasonal low water flow test supply.
B. Add to IBC 903.4.3 and IFC 903.4.3: In multiple story buildings, provide floor control valves with water flow switches for each floor.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-3: SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
Add to IBC 903.5 and IFC 903.6: By each hydraulically calculated area on each drawing, provide a copy of the hydraulic name plate.
A. IBC 903.5 and IFC 903.5: All references to NFPA 2002 standards are to be considered part of this code.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-4: FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM; FIRE PUMP TEST HEADER:
A. Add the following to IBC 903.5 and IFC 903.5: Provide an OS&Y control valve on all fire pump test headers.
B. Provide an outside test header on fire pump installations.
C. Inspector test valves shall be located in a remote location approved by the fire protection district.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-5: MANUAL PULLS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 338/702
Manual pulls shall be installed in accordance with NFPA standards and tied into Du Comm.
A. Add section IFC 907.2 Where Required: An approved manual, automatic or manual and automatic fire alarm system shall be provided in all use groups.
B. Exception: As specified in IFC section 907.2.6 of this code.
C. Exception: Not required for single family homes.
D. An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in all use groups (except single-family homes) not provided with an automatic sprinkler
system, and in accordance with NFPA 72. Devices, combination of devices, appliances, and equipment shall comply with section 907.1.2. The
automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such as boiler rooms
where during normal operation products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to activate a smoke detector.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-6: KEY BOXES:
Key boxes are required outside all front entrances and all sprinkler rooms for all buildings, except single-family homes, two-family dwellings and
townhouses. Provide a key box on all existing buildings that are renovated or at change of occupancy. Additionally, a key box is required for each tenant
space for multi-tenant factory, storage, or strip type business occupancies. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-7: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Amend IFC section 508.5 to read:
The fire hydrant shall be located at a minimum of 40' from the building structure.
Add IBC 913:
Fire hydrants shall be provided around the perimeter of the building in three hundred foot (300') increments. Also, a fire hydrant shall be located within one
hundred feet (100') of the fire department connection on the fire protection water supply to the building.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-8: ADDITIONS:
Except for single-family homes, two-family dwellings and townhomes, additions to existing buildings totaling one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet
or more, the existing building and addition, regardless of fire walls or fire barriers shall be sprinklered. In addition, a manual fire alarm system complying
with NFPA 72 will be required and tied into Du Comm. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-9: SMOKE AND HEAT DETECTORS:
All buildings that are not sprinklered are required to be equipped with heat and smoke detectors tied into the fire protection district's dispatch center (Du
Comm). Exception: Single-family homes, two-family dwellings, townhouses and buildings equipped with a fully automated suppression system. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-10: FIRE PROTECTION REVIEW:
All new uses and build-outs of existing uses need to be reviewed by the local fire protection district. The building department will require an approval letter
from the fire district that the proposed plans have been reviewed and approved before permit is issued. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-11: SPRINKLER CONTROLS AND/OR FIRE PUMP ROOMS:
IBC 903.12 and IFC 903.12: Provide a minimum of a one hour separation of sprinkler valve room and/or fire pump room. All sprinkler control and fire pump
rooms shall be accessible by a direct outside access door and accessible from the inside of the building with six inch letters identifying the room.
A. Fire alarm panels shall be located in the sprinkler control room.
B. The fire alarm wiring shall be in conduit. Fire alarm boxes and conduit shall be red in color.
C. All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type and shall be installed per NFPA 72.
D. Fire department sprinkler connections shall be a four inch (4") Storz type quick release with a thirty degree (30°) downward elbow.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 339/702
9-12-12: STANDPIPES:
Add the following:
A. IBC section 905.3 Building Height: Revise this section so that standpipes are required in all buildings over two stories high or more than two stories
below grade.
B. All fire hose valves (1-1/2" and 2-1/2") shall be of the field adjustable type. The local authority shall approve all valves.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-13: SPRINKLER REQUIREMENTS:
The fire hose valves system piping shall be:
A. A separate riser piping system.
B. The two and one-half inch (21/2") valves shall be supplied by a minimum of four inches (4") with two and one-half inch (21/2") drops to each valve.
C. Where system's pressures exceed one hundred (100) psi provide Potter reduced pressure field adjustable type valves.
All buildings of all use groups, other than one- and two-family dwellings, greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet shall be protected
with an automatic fire sprinkler system installed per NFPA 13. Provide all spec warehouse buildings (use groups S or F) with a ceiling roof height of twenty
five feet (25') or greater to be protected with an ESFR fire sprinkler system or a hydraulically calculated system for class IV commodities with rack storage
calculated to the greatest storage height. All sprinkler systems shall be electronically supervised by a fire alarm system.
All one- and two-family dwellings shall be protected with limited area sprinkler systems at the following locations:
A. Kitchens.
B. One hundred (100) square feet over furnace.
C. Laundry/utility rooms.
All limited area sprinkler systems shall comply with section 903.3.5.1.1 of the fire code. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-14: SPRINKLER BUILDING EXCEPTION:
All new nonresidential multiple-tenant buildings will be "ring by tenant" activated by the fire, a fire sprinkler system flow switch for that space or automatic
fire detection and shall include a weatherproof clear outside strobe over the entrance to each tenant space as directed by the fire department. All outside
strobes shall be seventy five (75) candela minimum. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-15: SMOKE DETECTORS:
Combination heat and smoke detectors shall be installed in all new or renovated buildings that are not provided with an automatic sprinkler system.
Smoke detectors are required in the common areas in all new multi-family residential buildings. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12-16: TEST VALVES:
Fire sprinkler system inspector test valves shall be accessible at all times and located no more than six feet (6') above the finished floor. On multiple riser
systems, test valves shall be marked as to which riser and area they test. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
ARTICLE A. ANNUAL INSPECTION PROGRAM
9-12A-1: AUTHORIZATION:
The village of Bartlett (the "village") building department (the "building department") and the Bartlett fire protection district (the "fire department") are
hereby authorized to conduct annual inspections of properties described in section 9-12A-2 of this article to be performed in accordance with the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 340/702
9-12A-2: FIRE INSPECTION AREA:
The following properties located within the corporate limits of the village have been designated for annual inspections: a) commercial and/or industrial
properties located in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, O-R, P-1, I-1 or I-2 districts, or within a PD planned development district that has been designated as
office/research, industrial, commercial and/or business, or within a PUD that contains industrial, commercial and/or business uses; and b) the common
areas of multi-family buildings located in the SR-5 or SR-6 districts (including SR-5 PUD and SR-6 PUD districts), or in a PD planned development district
that has been designated as SR-5 or SR-6. A list of properties subject to the annual inspection is on file with the building department, and is updated from
time to time by the building department. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12A-3: PURPOSE OF ANNUAL INSPECTION PROGRAM:
The purpose of the annual inspection program is to:
A. Identify and control actual and potential fire hazards or code violations that threaten person and/or property;
B. Inform and educate owners and tenants of sound fire protection techniques;
C. Identify specific fire hazards within buildings for corrective action; and
D. Enhance safety for employees, customers and residents occupying and/or using the above described properties. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-12A-4: TIME OF INSPECTIONS:
A. Mandatory Inspection Period: Beginning May 1, 2000, mandatory annual inspections shall commence for all properties listed and on file with the
building department as updated from time to time by the building director.
B. Inspection Times: All inspections shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth herein and shall be performed only on Monday through
Friday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M., excluding holidays. Restaurants shall not be inspected during the peak business hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) P.M. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
9-13-1: AMENDMENTS:
The following deletions, modifications, additions, clarifications, elections and amendments are hereby made to the 2012 international property
maintenance code. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-2: TITLE:
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall be known as the VILLAGE OF BARTLETT PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, hereinafter referred to in this
chapter as "this code". (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-3: APPLICATION OF OTHER CODES:
Any repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be constructed and/or performed in accordance with the procedures and
provisions of the Bartlett building code, the Bartlett zoning ordinance and all other ordinances of the village and the applicable state and county laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-4: GENERAL:
The code official shall enforce all of the provisions of this code. The community development director and/or building director, or his/her designee, is
hereby designated as the code official for the village of Bartlett for purposes of this code. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-5: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
GARBAGE: Items subject to decay, including, but not limited to, animal and vegetable wastes and all putrescible matter and all other material resulting
from the handling, preparing, cooking and/or consumption of food waste that may attract insects or rodents and/or vermin; dead animals; and any matter
subject to rapid decay, putrefaction and generation of noxious gases or odor, excluding compost piles.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, including, but not limited to, paper, newspaper, magazines, books, cartons,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 341/702
boxes, wrappings, packaging materials, excelsior, straw, tin cans, metals, scraps and shavings, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other similar
materials; construction debris, including nails, wood, concrete, lumber, bricks, concrete blocks, shingles, aluminum trim, pipes and fittings on any lot where
no active building permit is in effect; abandoned or inoperable vehicles; used appliances and refrigerators; furnishings, fixtures and bedding; yard
trimmings, grass and leaves (except in compost piles), downed trees and shrubs, and loose branches (excluding neatly stacked firewood), mud and debris
on public or private streets, sidewalks or pathways created by construction traffic; textile products, including, but not limited to, rags, shoes and articles of
clothing; residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials, including ashes and cinders, and any materials that create a danger
or nuisance to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-6: MAINTENANCE OF PARKING LOTS:
All parking areas shall be maintained at all times in broom clean condition without potholes, broken wheel stops or curbing, or other surface irregularities.
Striping shall be visible at all times and illuminations shall be maintained in functioning condition. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-7: WEEDS:
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds, grasses, plant growth and vegetation (except trees, bushes, shrubs and cultivated
flowers and gardens) in excess of eight inches (8"). All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-8: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
All accessory structures including, but not limited to, detached garages, sheds, decks, fences and walls shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair. All accessory structures are prohibited from being placed in easements. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-9: INSECT SCREENS:
During the period from April 1 to November 30, every door, window and other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes serving any
structure, habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh
per inch and every swinging storm door shall have self-closing devices in good working condition. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-10: DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH:
Every occupant of a building shall dispose of garbage and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage
disposal facility or approved garbage containers. In a residential district, containers shall be located in a rear yard or that portion of an interior side yard
which is located to the rear of the front elevation of the principal residence located upon such zoning lot, or in a front yard if adequately screened by
evergreen plant materials equal to or greater than the height of such containers. All other zoning districts must have enclosed refuse areas. (Ord. 2014-46,
6-3-2014)
9-13-11: INFESTATION:
All structures shall be kept free from insect and vermin infestation. A licensed Illinois pest control operator shall promptly exterminate all structures in which
insects or vermin are found. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-12: HEAT SUPPLY TO DWELLINGS:
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitories or guestrooms on terms, either
express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall supply sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to June 1, to maintain the room
temperatures specified in section IPMC 602.2 during the hours between six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. and ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. of each day and not
less than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) (18°C) during other hours. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-13: HEAT SUPPLY NONRESIDENTIAL:
Every enclosed occupied workspace shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to June 1, to maintain a temperature of not less
than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) (18°C) during all work hours. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-13-14: TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The village of Bartlett shall have the authority upon receiving a complaint, to inspect dead, diseased, or infested trees on private property. The village
arborist will inspect the trees on the property and determine the extent that the trees are dead, or the degree of disease, or infestation, and recommend
that said trees be removed in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. A written report shall be submitted to the village's code enforcement officer
who has the authority to provide written notice to the property owner that said trees need to be removed within thirty (30) days of said notice. Failure to
remove said trees shall result in the issuance of a ticket and/or notice to appear in court. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 342/702
Chapter 14
CONCRETE PATIOS/PAVERS
9-14-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
Permits are required for all concrete and brick paver patios, and they shall be constructed as follows:
A. General Requirements: Concrete shall be a minimum of four inches (4") thick poured over four inches (4") of crushed stone or gravel, with six inch by
six inch (6" x 6") 10/10 woven wire mesh or fiber mesh placed in the horizontal center of the poured concrete or fiber mesh. When poured against the
house, rebar shall be drilled into the primary structure every three feet (3') on center. A minimum of 6-bag mix with a five inch (5") slump (8 inches for
flowing concrete) shall be used. Fiber mesh may be used in lieu of woven wire mesh. All vegetation shall be removed prior to placing the gravel base.
B. Patios Abutting Previously Placed Concrete: An expansion joint shall be provided where patios abut previously placed concrete.
C. Door Sills: The concrete shall be poured not less than two inches (2") below the sill of any door within three feet (3') of the patio.
D. Guard And Hand Rails: Guard and hand rails shall be provided where a concrete or paver patio is elevated thirty inches (30") above grade.
E. Solid Roof: Any patio covered with a solid roof shall have a continuous foundation to the forty two inch (42") frost line. Where a solid roof is constructed
over a patio, this will be considered an addition to the structure. The structure would then be required to comply with all associated village building and
zoning codes. All plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by an architect or structural engineer licensed by the state of Illinois.
F. Removal Of Vegetation: All vegetation shall be removed and excess soil removed from the property prior to placing the gravel base for any concrete or
brick pavers.
G. Pavers: Gravel base shall be installed with sufficient voids to allow water to drain into the subgrade. A minimum of four inches to six inches (4" - 6") of
compacted stone shall be provided. A minimum of one inch (1") of screeded bed of sand shall be provided. Pavers installed shall be compacted with
joint polymetric and sand applied. Paver edge restraints shall be installed.
H. Inspections: A base inspection shall be performed prior to pouring or installing any concrete or brick paver patio or service walk. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-
2014)
Chapter 15
BASEMENT BUILD-OUT REQUIREMENTS
9-15-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; PLANS; STANDARDS:
Permits are required and plans shall include the following:
A. Provide all room sizes, ceiling height, and windowsill height.
B. Provide electrical outlet, switch and lighting locations. (All wiring must be run in conduit.) Provide outlets every twelve feet (12') and on any wall
section over two feet (2').
C. Provide heating duct and return air locations. A supply and a return are required in all rooms. Exception: A return is not required in any restroom.
The returns shall be ducted.
D. Provide minimum four percent (4%) natural light and four percent (4%) ventilation. Also provide all window locations and their sizes. Exception:
Mechanical light and vent may be substituted for up to two percent (2%) of the overall four percent (4%) where approved by the code official.
E. Provide framing detail (minimum 2 inches by 4 inches, 16 inches on center). Provide R-value insulation (minimum in walls is R-13).
F. When building out for the furnace area, provide the BTU data on the furnace and water heater. Also provide information on louvered door and
combustion air openings.
G. Provide all plumbing fixture locations. Also, provide a material list including material sizes and specific type (example: water piping type L
aboveground). Provide an isometric drawing of the plumbing system.
H. Provide the type of interior wall finish (paneling, drywall, etc.).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 343/702
I. Provide the smoke detector locations. Provide CO detector locations when applicable for sleeping rooms.
J. Provide door sizes and escape window location(s).
K. Provide the circuit panel location.
L. Provide type of ceiling (drywall, drop, etc.).
M. Provide the tax identification number, street address and a copy of the signed contract.
No kitchens shall be allowed in basements. Wet bars are permitted. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 16
FENCES
9-16-1: FENCE REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of the Bartlett building code, a "fence" shall be defined as an accessory structure which is a barrier and is used as a boundary, screen,
separation, means of privacy, protection, or confinement, and is constructed of wood, plastic (PVC), metal, masonry, or other similar material. Fence
permits are required for all new, enlarged, repaired, altered, and replaced fences. Final inspection is required for all fence permits.
A. Excess Fill: Excess fill or soil from excavating fence must be removed from the property. A fill permit must accompany the use of excess fill. (Ord. 2014-
46, 6-3-2014)
9-16-2: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. Residential: No fence or wall may be erected, placed, or maintained on any zoned residential lot to a height exceeding six feet (6') above the ground
level, except that no such fence or wall, which is located in a required front or corner side yard, shall exceed a height of three feet (3').
Where such lot line is adjacent to nonresidential zoned property there shall be an eight foot (8') limit on the height of a fence or wall along such lot line.
B. Nonresidential: No fence or wall shall be erected, placed or maintained on any nonresidential zoned property to a height exceeding eight feet (8').
C. Wire Fence: The minimum gauge of wire for a wire mesh fence shall be not less than 11-gauge, and the minimum size wire mesh shall be not less than
two and one-fourth inches (21/4"). No chicken wire or barbed wire fences shall be permitted on any residential lot. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-16-3: FENCE LOCATION:
No fence or other structure, nor any plant material, shall be so placed in the vision triangle as to obstruct the clear visibility of any intersection. The "vision
triangle", as defined in the zoning ordinance, is a triangular area determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points measured thirty five feet (35')
equidistant from the lot corner of the two (2) intersecting lot lines adjacent to the public rights of way.
Fences located in the interior side and rear yards shall have a maximum height of six feet (6'). Fences located in the front yard shall have a maximum
height of three feet (3'). A side yard adjacent to the public right of way shall be considered a corner side yard and shall be regulated as a front yard with a
maximum fence height of three feet (3').
It shall be the homeowner's responsibility to make sure that any fence installed on his or her property is within his or her property line. No fence shall be
installed directly on the property line. The bottom of a board fence shall be placed three inches (3") above grade (ground level) to assure that drainage
swales will function properly. If there is a better side to the fence, it is to be facing out.
A. All fence materials including fence posts shall be installed entirely on the property of the owner(s) that which said permit had been applied for and
granted and/or approved. The depth of the fence posts should be one-third (1/3) of the height of the fence. Exception: In corners or supporting gates,
the depth in this case shall be to frost. Fill should be base gravel with concrete fill six inches (6") below grade.
B. Fences shall not be placed closer than eighteen inches (18") from telephone, ComEd, cable, gas, or pedestals that would interfere with the
maintenance for these utilities, if necessary. Fences shall not be placed on storm manholes, catch basins, or pipes. Exception: When an easily
removable panel(s) is(are) installed above a catch basin or manhole.
C. Homeowners are responsible for locating their sump pump line if buried in the back yard to avoid damaging it during construction. Swimming pool
fences shall be regulated by the IBC and this Bartlett building code. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 344/702
Chapter 17
WOOD DECKS
9-17-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
Permits are required for wood decks and shall be constructed to the following requirements:
A. Depth Of Support Posts And Spacing: The holes for support posts for a wood deck shall be dug no less than forty two inches (42") below grade and six
inch by six inch (6" x 6") posts may not be spaced more than eight feet (8') apart. (Exception: Plans submitted by design professional.) The pier
diameter shall be a minimum of fifteen inches (15"). If a post is placed in a pier, sixteen inch (16") diameter is required. Lumber spans for decks shall
be a minimum of forty (40) pound live loads.
B. Excess Fill: Excess fill or spoil from excavating deck must be removed from property. A fill permit must accompany the use of excess fill.
C. Guardrails: A guardrail not less than thirty six inches (36") high shall be required for any deck over thirty inches (30") above finished grade. In addition,
the baluster spacing must not allow a four inch (4") diameter object to pass. Ledger: One-half inch (1/2") diameter lag screws with washers must be hot
dipped galvanized or stainless steel only. One and one-half inch (11/2") shank must extend through existing band board and beyond band board a
minimum of one-half inch (1/2"). Stagger fasteners in two (2) rows.
D. Stairs: Stairs shall be required for any wood decks over eight inches (8") above finished grade. The maximum riser height shall be seven and threefourths
inches (73/4") and the minimum tread depth shall be ten inches (10"). Open risers are permitted provided that the opening between treads does
not permit the passage of a four inch (4") diameter sphere.
E. Handrails; Diagonal Bracing: Handrails shall be required for any set of stairs thirty inches (30") or more above finished grade. Decks greater than two
feet (2') above grade shall be provided with diagonal bracing.
F. Location: No decks are permitted on or over any easement per village of Bartlett zoning ordinance.
G. Additional Regulations: Decks that have a roof over the deck would be required to have a continuous trench footing or foundation under the deck. The
plans shall be signed and sealed by a state of Illinois licensed architect. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 18
DETACHED GARAGES
9-18-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
Permits are required and detached garages shall be constructed to the following requirements. All one-story detached garages shall be built in full
compliance with the requirements of the code sections regulating one-story dwelling units with the following exceptions:
A. Footings: Footings shall be a minimum of twenty inches (20") wide and ten inches (10") below ground level.
B. Wall Studs: Wall studs shall be spaced a maximum of sixteen inches (16") on center.
C. Top Plate: The top plate shall be double.
D. Rafter Ties: Rafter ties at the eaves shall not be less than two inch by four inch (2" x 4") boards spaced not to exceed four feet (4') on center.
E. Bottom Plates: Bottom plates shall be wolmanized or equal.
F. Roof Shingle Warranty: The roof shingle shall be a minimum of twenty five (25) year warranty.
G. Garage Floor Slab: The garage floor slab shall be a minimum of five inch (5") concrete on four inch (4") stone base. Wire mesh reinforcing with six inch
by six inch (6" x 6") 10/10 woven wire mesh installed in the horizontal center of the concrete slab or fiber mesh.
H. Location: Detached garages shall be placed on the lot to conform to the village of Bartlett's zoning ordinance. At no time shall a detached garage
encroach on any public utility and/or drainage easement. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 345/702
Chapter 19
ATTACHED GARAGES
9-19-1: CONSTRUCTION STANDARD:
All garages attached to or built in a residence or other buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the same code provisions applicable to the
construction of such residence or other buildings. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-19-2: CURB OR STEP REQUIRED:
All door openings between the garage and the dwelling or other building to which it is attached shall have at least a four inch (4") concrete curb or step at
each such door. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-19-3: SEPARATION:
For garage to dwelling unit separation requirements see section 9-7-11 of this title. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-19-4: HEATING AND VENTILATION:
When heaters are located in garages or accessory use buildings where motor driven vehicles or devices utilizing volatile liquids are housed or stored,
combustion air openings and vents shall be located at least eighteen inches (18") above the exterior finished grade, and an interior pilot light access
opening shall be located at least eighteen inches (18") above the finished floor. Where combustion air intake openings are located immediately adjacent to
a driveway, the exterior eighteen inch (18") height requirements shall apply. The ventilating equipment shall be protected from any type of mechanical
injury from vehicular traffic. Vents from such heaters shall not be located within twelve inches (12") of any window, door or opening into a building. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-19-5: GARAGE FLOOR SLABS:
Garage floor slabs shall be a minimum of five inch (5") concrete on four inch (4") stone base. On attached garages where overdig exists for foundation
footing, excavation must be backfilled with clean stone. Wire mesh reinforcing with six inch by six inch (6" x 6") 10/10 woven wire fabric shall be installed in
the horizontal center of the concrete slab or fiber mesh. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-19-6: PLANS TO BE SIGNED AND SEALED:
All attached garages are additions and the plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by a licensed architect or engineer licensed by the state of
Illinois. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-19-7: LOCATION:
Attached garages shall be located on the lot in conformance with the Bartlett zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 20
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
9-20-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Permits are required for accessory buildings. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-20-2: ACCESSORY BUILDING DEFINED:
For the purposes of this section, an "accessory building" shall be defined as follows: A building secondary in construction, size, and use to the principal
structure on the lot and not attached in any way to the principal structure. The accessory building is located on the same zoning lot as the principal
building. An "accessory building", as defined herein, excludes detached garages. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-20-3: PRIVATE COVENANTS:
Some of Bartlett's subdivisions have private covenants that prohibit, limit or otherwise pertain to sheds and should be reviewed by all owners and
applicants prior to construction. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 346/702
9-20-4: EXCESS FILL, SPOIL:
Excess fill or spoil from excavating building site must be removed from the property. A fill permit must accompany the use of excess fill. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-
3-2014)
9-20-5: FLOORING:
Accessory buildings may be located on concrete slabs on a minimum of four inches (4") crushed stone or gravel. Pea gravel is not allowed. If structure is
located on a wood deck, corners need to be secured by post-hole method, two feet (2') below grade. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-20-6: STUD SPACING:
Except for metal storage sheds, the maximum spacing for studs shall be twenty four inches (24") on center; doubling of studs shall be required on all
openings. Corner bracing is required. Corner post may be two (2) two inch by four inch (2" x 4") or one four inch by four inch (4" x 4") post. (Ord. 2014-46,
6-3-2014)
9-20-7: SIDING:
Siding shall be wood or other approved material to match principal structure (example: brick, aluminum, or vinyl). (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-20-8: ROOFING:
Roofing shall be fifteen (15) pound felt paper and have a twenty five (25) year warranty. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-20-9: LOCATION:
The accessory building shall be located in accordance with the Bartlett zoning ordinance. At no time shall an accessory building encroach on any public
utility and/or drainage easement. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-20-10: DOOR SIZE:
The accessory building (shed) shall not have a door larger than forty eight inches (48") wide. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 21
SWIMMING POOLS1
9-21-1: PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS GENERALLY; APPLICABILITY:
Any swimming pool and/or bathing pool which is used, or intended to be used, as a swimming pool in connection with a residential building and available
only to the family of the householder and his private guests shall be classified as a private residential swimming pool. Pools used for swimming or bathing
shall be in conformity with the requirements of this code, provided, however, these regulations shall not be applicable to any such pool less than twenty
four inches (24") deep or having a surface area less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet. This includes inground, aboveground, and onground
swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following deletions, changes and modifications are made to IBC section 3109 and IRC appendix G. Permits are required for all inground/aboveground
swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-3: LOCATION:
No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be located at a distance less than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property line and not closer
than four feet (4') from the dwelling. No swimming pool shall be located within any public utility easement. No portion of a private residential swimming pool
shall be located at a distance less than five feet (5') from any underground service wire nor shall it be located at a distance less than twenty two feet (22')
measured horizontally from any overhead service wire. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-4: DISINFECTION EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION:
Pumps, filters, and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall be located at a distance not less than eight feet (8') from any side property line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 347/702
Swimming pools and appurtenant equipment shall be located to the rear of the residence only and shall not be permitted in the side yard between
dwellings. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-5: RECIRCULATION OF POOL WATER:
All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type, in which circulation of the water is maintained through the swimming pool by pumps, the water drawn
from the swimming pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-6: BARRIER:
A fence, a wall, a building wall, the wall of an aboveground swimming pool or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the swimming pool and
obstructs access to the swimming pool, is required.
The top of the barrier shall be at least sixty inches (60") above grade measured on the side of the barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool.
Power safety covers for all pools are not required. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-7: MATERIALS:
All inground swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of impervious material, which will provide a tight tank with white or light colored finish and
easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the swimming pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-8: STRUCTURAL DESIGN:
The swimming pool structure shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the earth when the swimming pool
is empty, to a pressure of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-9: WALL SLOPES:
Two feet nine inches (2'9") from the top, the wall slope shall not be more than one unit horizontal in five (5) units vertical. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-10: FLOOR SLOPES:
The slope of the floor on the shallow side of transition point shall not exceed one unit vertical to seven (7) units horizontal. For public pools greater than
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, the slope of the floor on the shallow side of the transition point shall not exceed one unit vertical to ten (10)
units horizontal. The transition point between shallow and deep water shall not be more than five feet (5') deep. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-11: SURFACE CLEANING:
All swimming pools shall be provided with a recirculating skimming device or overflow gutters to remove scum and foreign matter from the surface of the
water. Where skimmers are used there shall be at least one skimming device for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of surface area or fraction thereof.
Where overflow gutters are used, they shall be not less than three inches (3") deep, pitched to a slope of one unit vertical to forty eight (48) units horizontal
toward drains, and constructed so they are safe, cleanable and that matter entering the gutters will not be washed out by a sudden surge of entering water.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-12: WALKWAYS:
All public swimming pools shall have walkways not less than four feet (4') in width extending entirely around the pool. Curbs or sidewalks around any
swimming pool shall have a slip resistant surface for a width of not less than one foot (1') at the edge of the pool, and shall be so arranged as to prevent
return of surface water to the pool. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-13: PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL WALKWAYS:
Walkways (deck) may not be located in, on, or above any drainage or utility easement. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-14: STEPS AND LADDERS:
One or more means of egress shall be provided from the pool. Treads of steps or ladders shall have slip resistant surfaces and handrails on both sides,
except that handrails may be omitted when there are not more than four (4) steps or when they extend the full width of the side or end of the pool. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-15: WATER SUPPLY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 348/702
All swimming pools shall be provided with a potable water supply, free of cross connections with the pool or its equipment. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-16: WATER TREATMENT:
Private swimming pools shall be designed and installed so that there is a pool water turnover at least once every eighteen (18) hours. Filters shall not filter
water at a rate in excess of five (5) gallons per minute per square foot of surface area. The pool owner shall be instructed in proper care and maintenance
of the pool by the supplier or builder, including the use of high test calcium hypochlorite (dry chlorine) or sodium hypochlorite (liquid chlorine) or equally
effective germicide and algicide and the importance of proper pH (alkalinity and acidity) control. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-17: RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES:
A. Swimming pool water recirculation system inlet shall be located so as to produce so far as possible uniform circulation of water throughout the pool
without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits to the outlets, and shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten inches (10") below
the pool overflow level. A minimum of one recirculation system shall be provided for every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet of surface area of the
pool.
B. Swimming pool recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and lint catcher filters, together with the necessary pipe connections to
the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing filters, and facilities and equipment for disinfecting the pool.
C. The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity to provide a filter backwash rate of at least twelve (12) gallons per minute per
square foot of filter area.
D. A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint, and other extraneous matter from
reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catcher shall be so designed that it can easily be dismantled for cleaning and inspection and shall be so
located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall be as follows: Water passes through the strainer from the outside; the strainer
is made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter of strainer openings shall be not more than one-eighth inch (1/8"); the area of the strainer
openings shall be at least five (5) times the cross sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer.
E. In all swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one outlet at the deepest
point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty feet (30') apart, nor
closer than four feet (4') to any wall. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not less than four (4) times the
cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and will not injure the
bathers' fingers. One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-18: WATER DRAINAGE:
A. Discharge Rate: Swimming pool shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool water to the storm
sewer shall be at a rate not exceeding two hundred (200) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to the storm sewer. No direct or
indirect connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer system.
B. Discharge During Storms Prohibited: Water drained from the swimming pool shall not be discharged to the storm sewer system during periods of rain or
storms. At no time shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred (200) gallons per minute. No direct or indirect connection shall
be made to the sanitary sewer system.
C. Disposal Of Discharged Water: The swimming pool and equipment shall be equipped to be completely emptied of water, and the discharged water shall
be disposed of in an approved manner that will not create a nuisance to adjoining property.
D. Backwashing And Winterizing: When backwashing and/or winterizing a private home pool, the owner, operator and/or pool service provider of said pool
shall discharge the water by either: 1) a hose to the parkway grass before the public walk at a minimum distance of ten feet (10') before the curb and
gutter or 2) a hose to the grass area approximately ten feet (10') from an open storm structure located on the same property, if available. No direct
connection to the storm sewer adjacent to the property, however, shall be allowed. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-19: SWIMMING POOL SAFETY DEVICES:
A. Enclosure Required: Every person owning land on which there is situated a swimming pool, which contains twenty four inches (24") or more of water in
depth at any point, shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure either surrounding the property or pool area, sufficient to make such body
of water inaccessible to small children. Such enclosure, including gates therein, must be not less than four feet (4') above the underlying ground. All
gates must be self-latching with latches placed four feet (4') above the underlying ground and otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small
children. Openings in the barrier shall not allow a passage of a four inch (4") diameter sphere.
B. Grounding Required: All metal fences, enclosures, or railings near or adjacent to any swimming pool which might become electrically alive as a result of
contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause shall be effectively grounded.
C. Mechanical And Electrical Equipment Enclosure Required: Pumps, filters, and other mechanical and electrical equipment for swimming pools shall be
enclosed in such a manner as to be inaccessible to children. Construction and drainage shall be such as to avoid the entrance and accumulation of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 349/702
water in the vicinity of electrical equipment. Swimming pools will need to comply with all electrical requirements of this code and section 9-9-7 of this
title.
D. Accessories: All swimming pool accessories shall be designed, constructed, and installed so as not to be a safety hazard. Installations or structures for
diving purposes shall be properly anchored to ensure stability, and properly designed and located for maximum safety.
E. Diving Boards: Minimum water depths and distances for diving hoppers for pools, based on board height above water, shall comply with table 421.11(1)
for public pools and table 421.11(2) for private pools.
F. Safety Cover: A spa or hot tub would be allowed to be constructed without a fence provided that an approved safety cover that locks is used. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-20: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
All swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and all equipment shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating condition during
periods the pool is in use. No swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in the village if such use, keeping, maintaining, or operating shall
be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. A two foot (2') fence attached to the top of the pool will be required
for all aboveground pools when a fence does not protect the yard. A barrier of sixty inches (60") shall apply to all aboveground pools. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-
2014)
9-21-21: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
An inground swimming pool or aboveground pool, hot tub or spa shall not be constructed, installed, enlarged, or altered until plans have been submitted
and a building permit has been obtained from the building department.
Building permits expire one year from the date the permit is issued. However, if work has not started within six (6) months of the date of the permit, the
building permit shall automatically become void. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-22: DRAWINGS AND PLANS:
A. All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances for which
a permit is required shall first be presented to the building department for examination and approval as to proper location, construction, and use.
B. All plans and drawings shall be drawn to scale and shall accurately show dimensions and construction of the pool and appurtenances and properly
established distances to lot lines, buildings, walks, fences and distance from overhead or underground service wires, as well as details of water supply
system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-23: BUILDING PERMIT FEE:
The building permit fee for an inground pool, hot tub or spa shall be based on the cost of construction per section 9-3-9 of this title. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-
2014)
9-21-24: INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
The building inspector shall inspect the pool installation during its initial construction or installation and shall periodically inspect all swimming pools to
determine whether or not the provisions of this code regarding health, sanitation, and safety applicable thereto are being complied with. Inspections during
the initial construction or installation shall be requested in person or by telephone to the building department at least twenty four (24) hours in advance.
(Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-21-25: CONTRACTOR LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of installing or constructing inground or aboveground swimming pools, or any pool equipment or
appurtenances, in the village of Bartlett as a contractor without first having obtained a building contractor license.
A homeowner is not required to be licensed to install a pool or pool equipment on his or her own property. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 22
INSPECTIONS
9-22-1: REQUIRED:
Contractors/homeowners shall request inspections to the building department, by telephone or in person, at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of the
inspection. Required inspections are as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 350/702
A. Preliminary site inspection.
B. Footing/trench footing inspection/electric service grounding.
C. Prepour foundation wall inspection.
D. Sewer and water and storm connection inspection before backfill.
E. Dampproofing/drain tile backfill inspection.
F. Electric service inspection.
G. Underground plumbing/mechanical inspection.
H. Prepour basement, garage, and slab on grades.
I. Sheathing inspection.
J. Rough plumbing, framing and heating and electrical inspections.
K. Insulation inspection.
L. Concrete stoops, service walks, public walks and driveways.
M. Topographic survey inspection.
N. Final inspection, a minimum of ten (10) days' notice is required for a landscaping final inspection. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 23
STOP ORDERS, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
9-23-1: INTERPRETATION:
Wherever in this code it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the building director, assistant building
director, building official or any other officer of the village, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether the rules
and standards established by this code have been complied with; and no such provision shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to
what such regulations or standards shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by this code or other ordinance or to enforce this code in an
arbitrary or discriminatory manner. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-23-2: STOP ORDER:
Whenever any work is being conducted in violation of the provisions of this code, or in variance with the terms of any permit issued for such work, the
building director or the assistant building director may order all work on the job stopped until such violation or variance is eliminated and any work or
installation made in violation of this code corrected. Such stop order, if oral, shall be followed by a written stop order within forty eight (48) hours unless the
following day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, in which event, said written stop order shall issue within twenty four (24) hours of the next succeeding
workday.
It shall be unlawful to perform any work in violation of such stop order, except as may be necessary to prevent injury or damage to persons or property.
The building director, assistant building director or the village administrator may revoke such stop order. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-23-3: APPEALS:
Appeals must be submitted in writing to the village administrator within thirty (30) days after the building director or other code official issues the written
ruling from which the appeal is taken. The village administrator shall hear and rule upon appeals from the decisions of the building director with regard to
the interpretation and application of the provisions of this code, with respect to all matters in which he/she is given discretionary powers. In the event any
permit is denied to any applicant, the village administrator shall hear and rule upon the appeal from the decision denying such permit. The applicant shall
be given the opportunity to present evidence that the building director or other code official has unreasonably denied the permit requested, or has
unreasonably stopped the appellant's work or has otherwise acted unreasonably in the enforcement of this code. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 351/702
9-23-4: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this code (except for sections 9-6-1
and 9-6-3 of this title) shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day in which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-23-5: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this title shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity for enforcement of this title, including,
but not limited to, all rights and remedies pursuant to section 11-31-2 of the Illinois municipal code1. In the event the building director, assistant building
director or village engineer reasonably determines that: a) the condition of a building or structure poses a risk of immediate harm to any person and/or
property, or b) the delay in complying with the notice provisions and in permitting said owner and/or developer an opportunity to cause the building or
structure to conform to minimum applicable health and safety standards as required under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-2 would unreasonably
endanger the safety or health of any person(s) and/or property, then the village attorney and/or the village prosecutor may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction and/or permanent injunction requiring compliance. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 24
ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENTS AND BUILDING IN FLOODPLAINS
AND WETLANDS
9-24-1: PURPOSE:
Floodplain and wetland areas in their natural or relatively undisturbed state serve water resource values such as natural moderation of floods, water quality
maintenance and groundwater recharge. They also provide living resource values such as habitat for fish, wildlife and plant resources. In this natural state,
the water of adjacent floodplains and wetlands are in a state of dynamic equilibrium. If the floodplain and/or wetland system is disturbed, the entire system
usually readjusts toward a new equilibrium. The effects of this readjustment may occur in areas other than the original site. Therefore, floodplain and/or
wetland encroachments must be approached with caution.
A careful assessment shall be made of any proposed encroachment to determine the impact on the natural floodplain and/or wetland values, as well as
the effect on adjacent properties.
The provisions herein are enacted to lessen or avoid hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or
flood waters, and are deemed essential for the protection of the public safety and general welfare of the people of the village. In order to achieve this
purpose, the following objectives shall be observed:
A. Preventing developments from increasing the flood or drainage hazards to others.
B. Protecting new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage.
C. Protecting human life and health from the hazards of flooding.
D. Lessening the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations.
E. Making federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village.
F. Providing for the orderly growth and development of those areas in the village which are especially sensitive to changes from human activity. (Ord.
2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-24-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
In the administration of these provisions, the building department shall, in all official actions related to land management, take cognizance of flood hazards
and wetland conditions to the extent they are known. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to supersede or modify the provisions of the Bartlett
subdivision and PUD ordinance (title 11 of this code) and in particular title 11, chapter 8 of the Bartlett subdivision and PUD ordinance relating to
stormwater and floodplain management, and the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance, as amended, which is expressly
incorporated therein (the "DuPage County regulations"), which have been adopted for the entire village and made applicable to unincorporated areas of
DuPage, Cook and Kane Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or to property in said counties that may be annexed to the
village. The following regulations and requirements to obtain a special use permit from the corporate authorities of the village after a public hearing before
the Bartlett plan commission are additional requirements above and beyond any other applicable federal, state or county laws, regulations, rules and
ordinances, and the DuPage County regulations.
A. Definitions: The definitions set forth in appendix A of the DuPage County regulations as updated and supplemented by ordinance 2013-59 are expressly
incorporated herein by this reference. For purposes of interpreting this chapter only, if there is a conflict between the definitions set forth in the Bartlett
building code or the Bartlett zoning ordinance and the definitions set forth in appendix A of the DuPage County regulations, as amended and
supplemented by ordinance 2013-59, the DuPage County regulations, as amended and supplemented by ordinance 2013-59, shall be controlling.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 352/702
B. Preparation Of Plans: The Bartlett plan commission, when considering any amendment or revision to any portion of the comprehensive plan for the
village, shall take the following into consideration:
1. Maintaining wetland areas in their natural conditions to avoid harm to the public associated with the loss of natural wetland values, and where this is
not possible, encouraging uses such as agriculture and recreation.
2. Providing guidelines for the location of hazardous facilities or uses critically necessary to the functioning of the community outside of any wetland
areas.
3. Identifying the base flood and historic flood elevations on public buildings and bridges, or at other prominent locations.
4. Other flood hazard mitigation techniques or floodplain management activities that could aid in the accomplishment of the purposes of the ordinance
codified herein.
C. Review Of Development Plans And Activities: All plans for development activities to be undertaken by the village, other local governmental entities or
public utilities, including those regulated by the Illinois commerce commission and private developers, subdividers and builders, which require a
location within the special flood hazard area (SFHA) and/or wetland area shall be reviewed by the Bartlett plan commission and the building
department to ensure that they comply with the objectives and criteria of ordinance 2008-79. Where it is determined that any of these entities are
exempt by federal or state enabling legislation from the regulations under the Bartlett building code, the Bartlett subdivision and PUD ordinance,
including the DuPage County regulations which are incorporated therein, they shall not be required to obtain a special use permit; however, compliance
with the purpose, intent and standards of ordinance 2008-79 is expected.
D. Permitted Uses: When permitted by the underlying zoning base district, the following uses shall be permitted within a special flood hazard area (SFHA)
and/or wetland area, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other law, regulation, rule, and ordinance or by the provisions of this code:
1. Normal maintenance of waterways, provided that such maintenance is limited to the removal of accumulated debris and the control of vegetation
which can interfere with flows in the waterways. Materials removed shall be properly disposed of in a sanitary landfill or shall be placed in sites
recommended by the zoning administrator as defined in the Bartlett zoning ordinance and approved by the village board.
2. Ordinary repairs, maintenance and nonstructural alterations may be made to any nonconforming building, structure or facility. For the purpose of this
subsection, repairs shall include the replacement of storage tanks, septic tanks, and septic fields where health requirements or where the safety of
operation of the building, structure or facility requires such replacement. Ordinary repairs shall not include the reconstruction of any nonconforming
building, structure or facility which has been damaged or destroyed to the extent that the cost of restoration of such building, structure or facility to
the condition immediately preceding such damage or destruction shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the building, structure or
facility.
3. Agricultural uses without permanent buildings, such as, but not limited to, general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, floriculture,
apiculture, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting.
4. Private or public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, golf driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, camping grounds, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and
skeet ranges, hunting and fishing area, hiking, horseback riding and bicycle riding.
5. Portions of industrial, business, institutional and residential uses such as natural area, lawns, gardens and unpaved play areas.
E. Uses Permitted Only By Special Use Permit: No special flood hazard area (SFHA) and/or wetland area shall be disturbed, reshaped, filled or otherwise
affected by any of the following activities except by special use permit by the corporate authorities, and from the COE, which will be required unless the
village engineer determines that only a single permit is required and approves it and the issuance of all necessary and proper federal, state and county
permits, and permits required by the agencies of said governmental entities with jurisdiction over such development activities.
1. Construction, reconstruction or placement of any structure or facility (excluding buildings) including, but not limited to, the following: highways, roads
and bridges and appurtenances thereto; culverts, docks or dams or appurtenances thereto; construction or erection of railroads or other
transportation facilities or public utilities, water lines, storm and/or sanitary sewer lines, levees, walls or bulkheads and appurtenances thereto; and
signs and fences.
2. New buildings or structures (both residential and nonresidential) or additions and structural improvements to existing nonconforming buildings or
structures, including the elevation of such building and structures above the flood protection elevation (FPE) and the floodproofing of such buildings
or structures where the topography of the property within a special flood hazard area (SFHA) and/or wetland area must be altered, after compliance
with sections 9-24-3 and 9-24-5 of this chapter.
3. Drilling, mining or excavation of lakes or ponds.
4. Channel relocation, channel deepening, filling, dredging, excavation, grading of any type or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface.
5. Any other excavation, filling, constructing or storage which might cause a change in the direction, height, or velocity of the flood or surface waters or
wetland area, including, but not limited to, landfills. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-24-3: INITIATION OF SPECIAL USE:
Prior to the excavation in or filling of any special flood hazard area ("SFHA") or wetland area located within the corporate limits of the village, or within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village and/or on property being annexed to the village, the owner thereof or any person having an interest in such
property which is affected by the provisions of this chapter shall file an application for a special use permit to use such land for one or more of the special
uses provided for in this code pursuant to the requirements established in this chapter. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-24-4: PUBLIC HEARING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 353/702
Upon application to the building department, the Bartlett plan commission shall schedule a public hearing and shall give not less than fifteen (15) days'
notice of such hearing in accordance with the requirements of the Bartlett zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-24-5: CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING REQUESTS FOR SPECIAL USES:
The following conditions and requirements are established for the utilization or alteration of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) and/or wetland area.
Such criteria are to be used in determining whether a special use should be granted and what conditions or performance criteria should be placed on the
property should it be granted a special use permit in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
A. Minimum Requirements To Be Met: No special use permit shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates:
1. That the granting of the special use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of section 9-24-1 of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare, or in conflict with the village's comprehensive plan and official map for development.
2. That the granting of the special use permit will not:
a. Diminish the value of land and buildings in its neighborhood.
b. Increase the potential for flood damages to adjacent property.
c. Incur additional public expenses for flood protection, rescue or relief.
d. Increase the hazard from other dangers to said property.
e. Otherwise impair the public health, safety, comfort, or general welfare of the inhabitants of the village, nor will it otherwise create a nuisance.
B. Additional Criteria For Evaluating Requests For Special Use Permit Issuance And Conditions: In reviewing all applications for a special use permit, the
following additional criteria shall be used:
1. Protection Of Natural Floodwater Storage Areas: Natural drainage and associated flooding requiring space allocation are land use problems and to
the degree practicable, the natural storage areas (floodplains and wetlands) will be allocated to those purposes, rather than for purposes of building
additional manmade structures which results in increased cost to the public in construction and maintenance. Therefore, no modifications of a special
flood hazard area (SFHA) and/or wetland area shall be allowed which would result in a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood height or
increase in velocity of the downstream flow of water.
New residential and nonresidential buildings or structures and additions or structural improvements to nonconforming buildings or structures
proposed to be located in a special flood hazard area (SFHA) and/or wetland area shall be elevated in accordance with the following:
a. The building, structure or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, crawl spaces or other foundations that are permanently open to
floodwaters, are not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures, and allow water to soak into the ground underneath.
b. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, shaped and aligned so as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves and floating debris.
c. All areas below the flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The bottom of the joists of the
lowest floor and all utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation (FPE).
d. No area below the flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be used for storage or materials or supplies or HVAC systems.
The cost of construction of any addition or structural improvement to any building or structure currently located within a special flood hazard area
and/or wetland area, shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the existing building or structure, or in the case of a building or
structure which has been damaged or destroyed, the cost of construction of any addition or structural improvement to any building, in combination
with the cost of construction to repair the building or structure shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the building or structure
before such damage.
The building department shall maintain a record of the "as built" elevation of the lowest floor.
2. Protection And Enhancement Of Groundwater And Surface Water Resources: Groundwater and surface water resources located in a special flood
hazard area (SFHA) and/or wetland area should be protected and enhanced. Therefore, the following criteria shall be used to evaluate any proposed
development or encroachment upon such special flood hazard area (SFHA) and/or wetland area:
a. No development shall be allowed which includes locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants,
garbage, solid wastes, ash, or hazardous or toxic materials, including, but not limited to, petroleum products, solvents and paints.
b. New and replacement water and sewer lines may be allowed, providing all manholes or other aboveground openings are located at or above the
flood protection elevation (FPE). Any manhole or other aboveground opening proposed at an elevation below the flood protection elevation (FPE)
shall be watertight.
c. If such system is otherwise permitted under this code, no new or replacement on site soil absorption type waste disposal system shall be permitted
at an elevation below the flood protection elevation (FPE).
d. If a well is otherwise permitted under this code, such well shall be built or rebuilt so that its opening is not less than seventy five feet (75') from any
property sealed according to the county department's specifications to prevent contamination of the aquifer.
3. Protection Of Significant Floodplain And Wetland Flora And Fauna: Significant floodplain and wetland flora and fauna shall be preserved and
enhanced whenever possible. A special use shall not be granted where significant areas (as determined by the village board) of floodplain and/or
wetland flora or fauna have been identified as being present. The existence of endangered species of flora and fauna shall be the criteria for
determination that the specific area is significant. Restoration of significant flora and fauna in disturbed areas shall be encouraged. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-
3-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 354/702
9-24-6: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
No building permit shall be issued for any building, structure or improvement which does not comply with title 11, chapter 8 of the Bartlett subdivision and
PUD ordinance, even if the underlying property is not proposed to be subdivided. To the extent any development is not subject to the provisions of the
Bartlett subdivision and PUD ordinance, the purpose of this section is to provide standards and regulations governing stormwater management for such
land development in order to reduce or to prevent flooding and, at the same time, minimize damage to real property, and the following requirements shall
apply in all districts. In addition, all stormwater management will need to comply with section 10-5-6, "Impervious Surface", of the Bartlett zoning
ordinance.
A. Excess Stormwater: The controlled release and storage of excess stormwater runoff shall be required in combination for all business and industrial
development sites which exceed one acre in area, and for all residential developments of fifty (50) lots or three (3) acres, whichever is less. Exceptions
may be granted based on evidence by an engineering drainage study approved by the village board.
B. Release Rate Of Stormwater: The controlled release of stormwater runoff from all developments shall not exceed the existing safe storm drainage
capacity of the natural downstream outlet channel or storm sewer system. The release rate shall be an average value computed as a direct ratio to the
tributary watershed area. In any case, the value shall not exceed 0.10 cfs per acre from an area designed to provide storage from excess stormwater
or at a proportional rate of the most restrictive capacity of downstream channel or compatible with the "safe" capacity of most village rivers and
streams. The rate of which stormwater runoff is transported into a designated stormwater storage area shall be unrestricted. Control structure piping
shall be not less than four inches (4") in diameter. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-24-7: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by the Bartlett subdivision and PUD ordinance and by section 9-24-6 of this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. The village's various ordinances do not imply that development either inside or outside of a
special flood hazard area (SFHA) will be free from flooding or damage. Neither the Bartlett subdivision and PUD ordinance, nor this chapter create liability
on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damage that results from reliance on the ordinances of the village, or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Chapter 25
VACANT BUILDINGS
9-25-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by enactment of this chapter which:
A. Establishes a program for identification, registration, and regulation of buildings which are or become "vacant" as defined herein; and
B. Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings; and
C. Provides for administration, enforcement, abatement of public nuisances, and the imposition of penalties.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-2: OTHER ORDINANCES:
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which prescribe
standards other than are provided herein. When a provision of this chapter conflicts with any other provision of the code regulating the same subject
matter, the more stringent or restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
indicated in this section:
BOARDED BUILDING: A building that has had, in a manner intended to be temporary or permanent, any or all of its openings covered by some material
for the purpose of securing or preventing access or damage to the building or its components, whether such material is opaque, solid or transparent, and
whether such material is affixed to the interior or exterior of the building. For the purpose of this definition, such openings shall include any doors, windows
or other openings that exist for the purpose of providing light, ventilation, ingress and egress to the building or other access to a part or portion of the
building.
BUILDING: Any residential structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more dwelling units used or intended to be used for human habitation, or any
business or commercial structure occupied or intended for supporting any occupancy.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: A. Any building that is dangerous to the public health because of its construction or condition, or which may cause or aid in the
spread of disease or cause injury to the health of its occupants or to neighboring structures; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 355/702
B. Any building which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates
a fire hazard; or
C. Any building, which, by reason of faulty construction, age or lack of repair is likely to collapse or fall.
DANGEROUS STRUCTURE: Any structure which is in a condition that is dangerous to the public health in any way.
DIRECTOR: The building director, or his or her designee. All references to the director in this chapter shall be deemed to include the building director or
his or her designee.
DWELLING: A structure, or portion thereof, used for human habitation.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms containing individualized cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities which is designated, occupied or intended for use
by one household.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the
property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Substantially all lawful residential or business activity has ceased.
B. The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units.
C. The building is substantially devoid of contents.
D. The condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building.
E. Lack of utility services (water, sewer, electric or natural gas).
F. The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
G. The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
H. Overgrown and/or dead vegetation.
I. Accumulation of newspapers, circulars, fliers and/or mail.
J. Abandonment by owner.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, land trust, inter vivos trust, or other entity
having a legal or equitable interest in a property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including, but not limited to, the guardian of the estate of any such person if ordered to take possession of real
property by a court, the executor or administrator of the estate of any such person if authorized by statute or ordered to take possession of real property by
a court, or any person maintaining, operating or collecting rent with respect to a property.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability company, a joint venture, or other entity as well as an individual.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Shall include the following:
A. Any physical condition or uses of any premises that is regarded as a public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under
this code, as amended; or
B. Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, swimming pools and unsafe fences or structures; or
C. Any building that has unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities; or
D. Any building designated by the director as unsafe for human habitation or use; or
E. Any building that constitutes a fire hazard, or is unsafe or insecure to a degree that endangers life, limb or property; or
F. Any premises that is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 356/702
G. Any building that is: in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; improperly constructed; unsecured; vacant and boarded; damaged by fire to the
extent that it no longer provides shelter; in danger of collapse or structural failure; or dangerous to anyone on or near the premises; or
H. Any premises that contains evidence of unlawful activity to a degree that such activity may endanger, threaten or otherwise negatively impact the
users and value of adjacent premises; or
I. Any premises found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be a criminal public nuisance under title 5, chapter 10 of this code; or
J. Any building deemed to be a "dangerous building" or any structure deemed to be a "dangerous structure" under this section.
UNOCCUPIED BUILDING: Any business, industrial, retail, or commercial building, or any single-family or multi-family building, or portion thereof, which is
vacant and lacks the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, including buildings ordered vacated by the director
pursuant to authority granted to him by this code.
In determining whether a building is "unoccupied", the director may consider these factors, among others:
A. A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business activity has ceased.
B. The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units.
C. The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination.
D. The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric or natural gas.
E. The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
F. The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual agreement to sell the building, and lacks "For Sale", "For Rent" or similar signage.
G. The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
VACANT BUILDING: A building or portion of a building which is:
A. Unoccupied and unsecured; or
B. Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means for more than thirty (30) days; or
C. Unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or
D. Unoccupied as a result of having been declared unsafe for occupancy by the director pursuant to applicable law; or
E. Unoccupied and having multiple violations of this code, as amended; or
F. Unoccupied and the building or its premises have been the site of unlawful activity within the previous six (6) months; or
G. Condemned or declared unsafe for occupancy by the director and unlawfully occupied; or
H. Unoccupied for over ninety (90) days and during which time the director has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and the same
have not been corrected in a code compliant manner; or
I. Unoccupied and the subject of either pending mortgage foreclosure proceedings or mortgage foreclosure proceedings that have been completed
within the past two (2) years and the building has not since been reoccupied; or
J. Unoccupied for over one year; or
K. Abandoned by persons who surrender their claim, right or interest in the property; or
L. Unoccupied residential property found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be "abandoned residential property" as defined in sections 15-1200.5
and 15-1200.7 of the code of civil procedure1.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 357/702
But not including an:
Unoccupied building: a) which is undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which is in compliance with all applicable ordinances,
codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which a building permit has issued therefor, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is
proceeding diligently to completion; or b) which is unoccupied as a result of the owner who is a member of the military and is deployed for
military service and is otherwise secure; or c) which is secure but is the subject of a probate action, action to quiet title or other ownership
dispute; or d) which is occupied only on a seasonal basis and is otherwise secure and in substantial compliance with all applicable codes,
regulations and laws.
VILLAGE: The village of Bartlett, an Illinois municipal corporation of Cook, DuPage and Kane Counties, Illinois. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-4: VACANT BUILDING DETERMINATION:
A. The director may evaluate buildings in the village that he or she believes to be unoccupied by means of any lawful inspection and based on evidence of
vacancy factors and make a determination as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning of section 9-25-3 of this chapter. For the
purposes of conducting this evaluation, the director is authorized to enter upon any and all premises and within any and all unsecured structures. The
director may determine that a building which meets any of the criteria set forth in the definition of "vacant building" in section 9-25-3 of this chapter is
not to be regulated under this chapter for a stated period, if upon consideration of reliable, substantiated and sufficient evidence, he or she determines
that the circumstances which give rise to the building being eligible for regulation hereunder are clearly temporary in nature and are either in the
process of being addressed or will soon be addressed by the owner and that therefore regulation of the building under this chapter would not serve the
public health, welfare, and safety and makes written findings in support of his or her decision. The determination shall be in writing and shall state the
factual basis for the determination. For buildings the director determines to be "vacant buildings", he or she shall, within seven (7) days of making that
determination, send notice of his/her written determination with the factual findings to the name and address of the last taxpayer of record for such
parcel listed on the most recent Cook County, DuPage County or Kane County tax roll. Said notice of determination shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by regular first class United States mail, with proper postage prepaid, or by personal substitute service and posted in a
conspicuous location on the building. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with this chapter. The director may personally serve
or cause personal service of the notice of determination. Any person making such service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The
director shall maintain a record of such mailing for each notice of determination sent.
B. Unless waived by the director for good cause, the notice shall specify a date and time upon which the owner shall allow for a code compliance
inspection of the interior of all "vacant buildings" to determine the extent of any compliance with village property maintenance, building, zoning, health,
fire, water and sewer codes, and/or to determine whether there is any unsecured access to the building (doors, windows and other points of entry);
whether flammable liquids or other hazardous materials are stored on the premises or in the vacant building; whether the utilities, including water,
sanitary sewer, gas and/or electricity are running or have been shut off; whether the sump pump is working; whether there is any standing water in the
basement or crawl space; whether the furnace and/or hot water heater are operable if the gas has not been turned off to the vacant building; whether
the roof or other exterior surface or enclosures are leaking or have been water damaged, whether there are any visible signs of mold; whether there
are animals, rodents, vermin or insects present on the premises or in the building; and whether all outdoor pools and/or hot tubs are securely covered
and/or drained. Said inspection shall also determine the existence of any unlawful improvements to the property and any portions of the building,
including attic and basement areas, that appear to have been unlawfully occupied.
C. If the director requests a code compliance inspection of the interior of the building at the time he or she issues the notice of determination, the director
shall set a tentative date and time for the code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building. After receipt of the notice of determination
that includes a tentative walk-through inspection date, if the owner does not appeal the determination, the owner shall either confirm the tentative date
for the inspection or shall schedule a new date and time for same. If the owner fails to confirm the tentative date and time for the inspection or refuses
to schedule or permit the inspection within a reasonable time, the village may obtain an administrative search warrant to accomplish the inspection, and
will not conduct an interior inspection of the premises without obtaining such warrant, except when there is evidence of vacancy and access to the
building is unsecured or there is an actual emergency or if the village administrator or the chief of police determines that there is an actual threat to
health or safety based on reliable, substantiated and sufficient evidence.
D. The village shall charge the owner a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to offset the cost to the village of said inspection. The owner shall pay the
inspection fee to the village within thirty (30) days of the initial inspection.
E. Village real estate transfer stamps will not be issued by the village for the sale of such property until such inspection has taken place, if requested by the
director, and the fee therefor or the fee without inspection has been paid and, if deemed necessary by the director, an administrative search warrant for
the same has been timely obtained.
F. The notice of determination shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the
registration from the owner is required to file pursuant to section 9-25-6 of this chapter, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the director's
determination. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-5: APPEAL OF VACANT BUILDING DETERMINATION:
A. An owner of a building determined by the director to be a vacant building as provided for in this chapter may appeal that determination to the village
administrator. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the village administrator within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the notice
of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register his or her building as required by section 9-25-6 of this chapter. The
appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the director's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support
thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The village administrator or her designee shall decide the appeal on
the basis of facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the director's written determination.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 358/702
B. The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade the village administrator that it is more likely than not that the subject building
is not a "vacant building" within the meaning of this chapter.
C. The village administrator, or her designee, shall send a written decision to the owner within ten (10) days of her receipt of the appeal. The village
administrator may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the owner. The village administrator, or her designee, may, upon written
notice thereof to the owner, take ten (10) additional days, to decide the appeal if she determines that such additional time is required for consideration
of the appeal.
D. An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this chapter to his/her building prior to the director's determination having been made shall set forth
specific facts to support inapplicability in writing to the director. In the event the director determines that the subject building is a "vacant building", the
owner shall have the right to appeal the director's determination to the village administrator as provided for herein.
E. If the village administrator, or her designee, fails to grant or deny an appeal within the time periods set forth in this section, the appeal shall be deemed
denied.
F. All references to the village administrator in this chapter shall be deemed to include the village administrator or her designee. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-6: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER VACANT BUILDINGS AND FORECLOSED UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS:
Owners of "vacant buildings" and mortgage lenders who acquire title to unoccupied buildings shall be required to register the same with the director as
prescribed below:
A. Owner's Obligation To Register Vacant Buildings: The owner of a building that the director has determined to be a "vacant building", or the owner of a
building whose appeal from the director's determination has been denied by the village administrator, or the owner of a building who knows, or from all
the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has become a "vacant building" within the meaning of this chapter, shall take the
actions provided for in this section within fifteen (15) days after either the date of director's notice of determination, the denial of the owner's appeal, or
the occurrence of facts that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building was a "vacant building".
1. Registration Of Building: The owner of a "vacant building" shall be required to register the building with the director on a form provided by the director
and pay a two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual nonprorated vacant building registration fee. This annual registration fee shall be in addition to the
two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) inspection fee set forth in subsection 9-25-4D of this chapter.
a. The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner; the case name and number of any litigation
pending concerning or affecting the building, including bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address, and telephone number of all persons with
any legal, equitable or beneficial interest in the building or the premises. The form shall require the owner to identify and authorize a natural person
twenty one (21) years of age or older who maintains a permanent address in Cook, DuPage or Kane County to accept service on behalf of the
owner with respect to any notices the director sends pursuant to this chapter or service of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any
provision of this chapter, and file with the director on the registration form, the name, address, telephone number, of said person. A street address
is required; a post office box is not an acceptable address.
b. The form shall state that the owner, by affixing his or her signature, is advised that the village will not issue real estate transfer stamps without the
director, or his designee, having first conducted an interior inspection for code compliance and the other items listed in subsection 9-25-4B of this
chapter.
c. The form shall require the owner to:
(1) Indicate his or her "acceptance of notice by posting" consenting to service of notices sent or required to be sent, pursuant to this chapter, by
posting on the building if the owner fails to renew the registration if required, or maintain as current with the director the information required
regarding the person designated and authorized to accept notice and service of process;
(2) Renew the vacant building registration each year on the anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant and pay the
required two hundred dollar ($200.00) annual fee; and
(3) File an amended registration within fifteen (15) days of any change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new registration is
required for any change in ownership whatsoever.
d. Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, including this chapter, nor does it preclude
any of the actions that the village is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter or elsewhere in this code.
2. Inspection Conducted: The village shall send the inspection report to the owner within thirty (30) days. The owner shall allow for a code compliance
inspection of the interior of the vacant building and pay the two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fee therefor to defray the cost of said inspection. The
inspection report shall include a reasonable date by which code compliance shall be required, and periodic reinspections shall take place, as
necessary, until code compliance is achieved.
3. Insurance Required: The owner shall obtain liability insurance and maintain such insurance for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of
such insurance with the director, as follows: five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for a vacant residential building of one to three (3) units;
seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) for a vacant residential building of four (4) to eleven (11) units; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
for a vacant residential building of twelve (12) to forty eight (48) units; two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant residential building of more
than forty eight (48) units; and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage, or nonresidential commercial
building.
4. Vacant Building Plan: Unless waived in writing by the director at the time of his or her determination that the building is a "vacant building", the owner
shall submit a vacant building plan at the time a building is registered as required herein. The director may prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner
fails to submit the plan if so requested and as provided for by this chapter, the director may determine the plan, which he may allow to be modified
after conducting a code compliance inspection and follow up inspections for code compliance. The plan shall contain the following as a minimum:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 359/702
a. A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured or covered by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in
openings being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type
with board removed. Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods described by the director and available from the director. The
owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or made available for immediate occupancy. If the
owner demonstrates that securing of the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the director may waive the requirement of an
enclosure.
b. For buildings and/or premises which are determined by the director as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in section 9-25-3 of this
chapter, then the vacant building/premises plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s).
c. A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance
identified by the director.
d. When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition. The owner
shall ensure all necessary permits and approvals are obtained prior to commencing demolition.
e. A plan of action to maintain the building and/or premises thereof in conformance with this chapter.
f. A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The time
schedule shall include date(s) by which all necessary permits shall be procured, date(s) of commencement and completion of all actions required
to achieve habitability. No plan which fails to provide for compliance with this chapter or, which will not, as determined by the director, achieve such
compliance, within thirty (30) days, in the case of a vacant boarded building, and within one year, in the case of a vacant, unboarded, and code
compliant building will be approved, except that the director may approve an extension of the time during which the building will be unoccupied
beyond one year to a date certain but then only based upon clear and documented evidence of good cause shown by the owner as determined by
the director.
g. All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are located shall at all times be maintained in compliance with this code, as amended,
including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Interior: All interior structures shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition. Special attention shall be made to utilities and,
if applicable, sump pumps and other related devices shall be kept operational. Winterization of structures shall be completed as necessary.
(2) Exterior: All exterior structures and property shall be maintained and kept free of items that give the appearance that the property is
abandoned, including, but not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, fliers and/or mail, past due
utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, or the accumulation of junk or debris.
h. For vacant commercial property exterior lighting shall be maintained according to standards established by the director and available from the
director.
i. For vacant commercial property, all ground floor windows facing street frontage, including, but not limited to, all display windows in unoccupied or
vacant commercial buildings shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition and shall be covered on the interior side in a professionally
finished manner with an opaque window covering material manufactured for that purpose and approved by the director, or in the case of display
windows, such windows shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition and the display area shall be enclosed with a professionally finished
backdrop, floor, side walls and ceiling all of which shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition and shall be well lighted from ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day unless waived by the director in the event electricity has been shut off to the commercial building.
Photographs, paintings and other works of art or other tasteful forms of decoration may be professionally displayed in these properly enclosed
clear glass display windows. If opaque window covering material is used, a one foot by one foot (1' x 1') clear glass opening through which the
interior space is clearly visible shall be maintained at standing eye level along one edge of one such window.
5. Security Guard Service: In the event the director makes a written determination that the vacant commercial or industrial building constitutes a fire
hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves illegal or improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under such
conditions that securing the building is insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm, the director shall provide notice thereof to the owner and
may require the owner to provide bonded, licensed and insured security guard service at the building between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. as part of its vacant building plan.
6. Additional Information Posted: Affix to any building which is boarded, a weatherproof eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (8.5" x 11") sign which
provides the following information: the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, the name, address and telephone number of the person
authorized to accept notice and service of process and in addition, for buildings which are the subject of a foreclosure action, the name, address, and
telephone number of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's attorney, if any, in the foreclosure action. The sign must be placed so that its message is legible
from the public way.
B. Mortgage Lender's Obligation To Register Unoccupied Buildings Acquired Through Mortgage Foreclosure: The obligation to register buildings shall
extend to mortgage lenders that have obtained title to unoccupied buildings through a mortgage foreclosure action.
1. Mortgage lenders shall register unoccupied buildings with the director within fifteen (15) days of the date it knew or should have known that the
building was unoccupied after the initiation of mortgage foreclosure proceedings, or within fifteen (15) days of obtaining title to same.
2. Mortgage lenders obtaining title to properties containing an unoccupied building shall comply with all of the requirements of this chapter with respect
to ownership of vacant buildings.
3. An amended registration form shall be filed in accordance with subsection A of this section, within fifteen (15) days of any change in the information
provided in any registration form provided hereunder, and a vacant building plan shall be filed in accordance with subsection A4 of this section within
thirty (30) days of obtaining title to an unoccupied building, unless said requirement has been waived or extended in writing by the director prior to
the expiration for said thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-7: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
A. Review Of Vacant Building Plan: If required by this chapter, the director shall review the proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards
below. The director shall send notice to the owner of the vacant building of his or her determination.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 360/702
B. Standards For Vacant Building Plan Approval: In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the director shall include the following in his
or her consideration and shall make written findings as to each:
1. The purposes of this chapter and intent of the village board to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant.
2. The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining property.
3. The length of time the building has been vacant.
4. The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
5. The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-8: AUTHORITY TO MODIFY PLAN; RIGHT TO APPEAL:
The director shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right to request an interior inspection and/or to request a vacant building plan at any
time after making his or her initial written determination of a vacant building and to require the owner to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the
dates of performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent with this chapter he or she deems necessary to
protect the public health, safety, or welfare. The owner may appeal the director's determination under this section by filing an appeal in writing with the
village administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing such a determination. Appeals under this section shall be reviewed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in section 9-25-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-9: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH PLAN:
Failure to have an approved vacant building plan within thirty (30) days of filing the registration form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall
constitute a violation of this chapter subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as provided in this chapter and to any remedies the village may avail
itself of as provided for herein and elsewhere in this code, as amended, including, but not limited to, an action to compel correction of property
maintenance violations. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-10: OTHER ENFORCEMENT:
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the village to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other
provisions of this chapter, this code, or other applicable legislation. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-11: REAL ESTATE TRANSFER STAMPS:
A premises upon which is situated a vacant building for which an interior inspection has been requested by the director, but which has not been conducted,
or for which inspection fees or registration fees imposed pursuant to this chapter have not been paid in full, or which is not otherwise eligible under this
chapter for the village real estate transfer stamps shall not be permitted to acquire same until such inspection has been conducted, all fees are paid and/or
the eligibility issues are addressed. Unpaid fees shall be a lien upon the property. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-12: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
An occupancy permit for vacant buildings issued by the building department and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to waive or modify the requirements to procure a
building permit for any work or improvements to any vacant building or structure as provided in this code. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-13: TIME RESTRICTIONS FOR BOARDED BUILDINGS:
Boarded buildings are declared to be a public nuisance. Boarding is only a temporary solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building. A
vacant building may not remain boarded longer than sixty (60) days unless an extension of that time is part of a vacant building plan approved by the
director. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
9-25-14: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day per
violation to a maximum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day per violation, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to
the village. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition,
or condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the village may have thereon.
B. A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
C. The village may enforce this chapter through filing an appropriate action in the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois; in the circuit court for the 18th
judicial circuit, DuPage County, Illinois; or in the circuit court for the 16th judicial circuit, Kane County, Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 361/702
D. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the village from immediately condemning as provided in this code, a building or taking other immediate action
upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 2014-46, 6-3-2014)
Title 10
ZONING
Chapter 1
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the BARTLETT ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. This title is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, and the general welfare of the people;
2. To zone all properties in such a manner as to reflect their best use and to conserve and enhance their value;
3. To ensure that high quality standards of light, air, and open space are maintained in areas where people live and work;
4. To prevent overcrowding of land with buildings and thereby ensure maximum living and working conditions and prevent blight and slums;
5. To implement the goals and objectives of the Bartlett comprehensive plan;
6. To set reasonable zoning standards to which buildings or structures shall conform;
7. To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing uses;
8. To foster a rational pattern of relationships among residential, commercial, and industrial uses for the benefit of all;
9. To lessen or avoid the hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters; and
10. To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, and other hazards, in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort, and the general
welfare.
B. To achieve these purposes, this title sets forth regulations and standards to:
1. Divide the entire village of Bartlett into districts and restricting and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
building structures and land, whether for residential, commercial, industrial or other specified use;
2. Control and regulate density by limiting the development of land to a degree consistent with the ability of the village to furnish adequate public
services and utilities;
3. Prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations
imposed hereinafter;
4. Provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are incompatible and adversely affecting the character and
value of desirable development in each zoning district;
5. Protect residential, commercial, and industrial areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that land allocated to a
class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate uses;
6. Provide convenient access to properties;
7. Relieve street congestion through adequate requirements for off street parking and loading facilities;
8. Encourage the preservation and enhancement of natural resources, aesthetic amenities, and natural features;
9. Encourage the use of alternative, sustainable or renewable energy sources;
10. Define the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies, as provided hereinafter; and
11. Prescribe penalties for the violations of the provisions of this title, or of any amendment thereto. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this title shall be interpreted to promote the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the village of Bartlett.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 362/702
A. Conflicting Laws: Where conditions imposed by any provisions of this title upon the use of land or buildings or upon bulk of buildings are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or
other governmental regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
All prior ordinances and resolutions in conflict or inconsistent herewith are hereby expressly repealed only to the extent of such conflict or
inconsistency.
B. Existing Agreements: This title shall not abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this
title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements
of this title shall govern.
C. Existing Violations: No building, structure or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this title shall become or be made lawful
solely by reason of the adoption of this title; and to the extent that said building, structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of this title, said
building, structure, or use remains unlawful hereunder.
D. Permit: Nothing contained in the Bartlett zoning ordinance shall be deemed to be a consent, license or permit to use any property or to locate,
construct, or maintain any building, structure, or facility or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity.
E. Cumulative Regulations: The provisions in the Bartlett zoning ordinance are cumulative. Additional restrictions heretofore passed or which may be
passed hereafter by the village board, governing any subject matter in the Bartlett zoning ordinance shall also apply.
F. Interpretation Of Uses: The village board, upon recommendation of the plan commission, shall have the right to permit without formal amendment any
other use not specifically listed as a permitted use in a particular district, provided that the proposed use is similar to and compatible with those uses
permitted in the district in question, and which is consistent with the purposes of this title. Such determination shall be made following the same
procedure as those required for a special use permit. A record shall be kept by the zoning administrator of each additional use allowed and added to
the permitted use list.
G. Headings And Illustrations: Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any
provision of this title. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this title and any heading, drawing, table, figure,
photograph, or illustration, the text controls.
H. Lists And Examples: Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of items or examples that use "including", "such as", or similar terms are intended to
provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village that the various provisions of this title are severable; and that:
A. Ordinance Provisions: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this title not specifically included in said judgment.
B. Property Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular property,
building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in said judgment. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-5: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
It is hereby declared that the provisions of this title shall apply to all properties as hereinafter specifically provided:
A. New Uses: All new uses lawfully established on or after the effective date of this title shall conform to the regulations of this title for the zoning district in
which such use is located.
B. Existing Uses: Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date of this title, rendered nonconforming by the provisions herein shall be subject
to the regulations of chapter 9 of this title. Except as may otherwise be provided, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring
hereafter, and all additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning districts in
which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
C. New Buildings, Structures And Lots: All new buildings, structures or lots shall conform to the bulk regulations established herein for the district in which
each building, structure or lot is located.
D. Existing Buildings, Structures And Lots: Buildings, structures and lots that lawfully existed on the effective date of this title, rendered nonconforming by
the provisions herein shall be subject to the regulations of chapter 9 of this title. Except as may otherwise be provided, all structural alterations or
relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all additions to existing buildings or structures occurring hereafter shall be subject to all
regulations herein which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, structures or lots shall be located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 363/702
E. Previously Issued Building Permits: Buildings or structures that have been lawfully issued a building permit prior to the effective date of this title, and
provided that construction is begun within six (6) months of such effective date and diligently pursued to completion, said building or structure may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further, may upon completion be
occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated subject thereafter to the provisions of this title. This section shall
also control future buildings that are lawfully issued building permits prior to adopted future amendments to this title.
F. Special Uses: Where a structure and use thereof lawfully exists on the effective date of this title and is classified by this title as a special use in the
district where it is located, such use shall be considered a lawful special use. A special use permit issued in accordance with procedures herein set
forth shall be required only for any expansion or major alteration of such existing legal special use. Where a use is not allowed as a special or permitted
use in the district in which it is zoned under this title, and exists as a special use under the terms of the zoning ordinance in effect immediately prior to
the date of the adoption of this title, it shall be considered to be a nonconforming use and shall be subject to the applicable nonconforming use
provision outlined in chapter 9 of this title. If the special use ceases for a period of more than one year, the special use permit shall be void and the
special use cannot again be started.
G. Planned Unit Developments: Where special uses for planned unit developments (PUDs) were granted by the village board prior to the effective date of
this title, such special use shall remain in full force and effect. All property that remains subject to a previously granted special use for PUD may be
developed and maintained in accordance with the approved plans and ordinance granting and/or amending the special use for a PUD.
H. Uses With No Buildings: Where a lot is to be occupied for a permitted or special use without buildings, the yard, landscaping and fencing requirements
for such lot shall be provided and maintained unless otherwise stipulated in this title.
I. Variations: All variations granted by the village board prior to the effective date of this title shall remain in full force and effect, subject to the provisions of
chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-6: GENERAL BULK REGULATIONS:
All new buildings, additions, and structures shall conform to the bulk regulations established herein for the district in which each building shall be located
as specified in this title. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-7: LOTS:
A. Lots Of Record: In any residential district, on a lot of record on the effective date of this title, a single-family dwelling may be established regardless of
the area of the lot, provided that the requirements of this title pertaining to yards, water and sewer, floodplains and stormwater detention are met. All
other requirements of this title shall also be complied with.
B. Division Of Zoning Lots: No zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless each improved zoning lot resulting from such
division shall conform with all applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located. If a lot is built upon under one building
permit, and then divided for selling purposes, it can only be so divided if each saleable lot is platted as a lot of record and conforms to the Bartlett
subdivision and PUD ordinance.
C. Corner Lots: On a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line having the shorter dimension along the street line.
D. Reverse Corner Lots: On a reverse corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line having the shorter dimension along the street line. Residential
buildings located on reverse corner lots shall be oriented to face the primary street as determined by the zoning administrator or the orientation of
existing buildings within the established block face.
E. Corner Lots - Vision Clearance Triangle: On corner lots no structures or plant materials shall obstruct the "vision clearance triangle" as defined in
chapter 2 of this title.
F. Through Lots: For through lots the required yards adjacent to public streets shall be equal to the required front yard for the zoning district the lot is
located in. Residential buildings located on through lots shall be oriented to face the primary street as determined by the zoning administrator or the
orientation of existing buildings within the established block face.
G. Number Of Structures On A Zoning Lot: Not more than one principal structure shall be located on a zoning lot, except in the case of planned unit
developments and special uses that may be approved by the village board.
H. Lot Access To Public Streets: Except as otherwise provided for herein, every lot or tract of land shall abut a public street or a permanent easement of
access to a public street. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-8: YARDS:
A. Yards, General:
1. The maintenance of yards and other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of
such building or of the property on which it is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 364/702
2. No legally required yards, other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other
reason, be used to satisfy yard, other open space, or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
B. Location Of Required Open Space: All yards and other open spaces allocated to a building or buildings shall be located on the same zoning lot as such
building or buildings.
C. Yards, Required:
1. Obstructions Prohibited: All required yards shall be unobstructed from ground level to the sky except as otherwise permitted in this title.
2. Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings which are attached to principal buildings shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal
buildings.
3. Street Widenings:
a. Existing Structures: For existing lots with lawfully constructed structures, the required yard adjoining a street may be reduced below the required
minimum to provide right of way for a street widening. Such reduction in the required yard shall not create a nonconforming structure.
b. Construction And Alterations: Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no building or structure shall be erected, constructed, structurally
altered or enlarged closer to the centerline of an existing or proposed street than provided for by the minimum required yard plus one-half (1/2) the
established right of way width designated by the Bartlett official zoning map or comprehensive plan's thoroughfare plan. The minimum required
yards on lots abutting a street or thoroughfare shall be the distance required for a front yard, or side yard adjoining a street, in all districts where
such lots are located, measured from the existing right of way line of the street or thoroughfare, or from the proposed right of way line as duly
established by other ordinances or as established by county or state highway authorities, whichever has the greater right of way width
requirements. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-9: COMPREHENSIVE VILLAGE PLAN:
The official comprehensive plan, West Bartlett Road corridor plan and the official future land use plan map adopted May 16, 1978, amended 9-5-1995, 11-
4-1997, 3-17-1998, 8-20-2002, 12-21-2004 and 4-17-2007 (and any subsequent officially adopted amendments), is by this reference expressly made a
part hereof. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-10: FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS:
All development of land within the village or its planning jurisdictional area shall be subject to the floodplain regulations established in section 11-8-1 of the
Bartlett subdivision and PUD ordinance and title 9, chapter 24 of the Bartlett municipal code. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-11: PUBLIC UTILITY EXEMPTIONS:
The alteration, or maintenance by the village or utility companies of overhead utility lines and poles and underground gas, electrical, steam or water,
distribution or transmission systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, tunnels,
wires, cables, traffic signals and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such public utility or the village or for the public health, safety or general welfare, shall be exempt from the regulations of this title. However, the
installation shall conform to federal communications commission and federal aviation administration rules and regulations, and those of other authorities
having jurisdiction. Any other aboveground utilities are subject to all of the applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-1-12: MISCELLANEOUS:
A. Village Corporate Limits: Corporate limits of the village for the purpose of this title shall be those which are a matter of record in the offices of the Cook
County, DuPage County or Kane County recorders.
B. Zoning Of Annexed Land: All land annexed to the village shall be zoned upon annexation as ER-1 estate residence until otherwise rezoned by an
ordinance approved by the village board.
C. Building Permits: A building permit shall be required for any structure or building prior to its construction, repair, expansion, replacement, movement or
alteration and in nonresidential districts, when a change in ownership or occupancy has occurred.
D. Stormwater Management, Erosion Control And Wetland Protection: All land within the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett shall comply with all
applicable stormwater management ordinances in effect and adopted by the village of Bartlett as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2011-70,
10-18-2011)
10-1-13: VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall
upon conviction be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
B. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 365/702
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
10-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this title and any subsequent amendment, the rules and definitions contained in this chapter shall be observed and applied, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory.
D. The words "may" and "should" are permissive.
E. The word "lot" shall include the words "place" and "parcel".
F. The word "structure" shall include the word "building".
G. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for".
H. The word "person" shall include a "firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation or any other entity as well as an
individual".
I. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neutral. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-2011)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the
meaning indicated by common dictionary definition.
ACRE: A measure of land containing forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
ADJACENT: To touch, to abut, to lie immediately next to, and/or to share a common wall or lot line.
ADULT USES: Adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult entertainment establishments, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult motion picture theaters and
adult novelty stores, or any combination thereof, as follows:
Adult Bookstore: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, "adult motion pictures" (as
defined herein) and/or other periodicals that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.
Adult Cabaret: An establishment offering to its patrons as entertainment, any live exhibition or display or any theatrical or live performances that
feature topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or any persons singing,
reading, posing, modeling or serving food or beverages where such exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to sexually arouse the
entertainer or the patrons, or where the attire of the persons involved is such to expose "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein).
Adult Entertainment Establishment: Any adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-picture theater, cabaret or other commercial
establishment open to the public which: a) displays, distributes, issues, gives, provides, lends, delivers, transfers, transmits, circulates, disseminates,
presents, exhibits, advertises, sells, rents or leases a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, any material depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas; b) utilizes a substantial or significant part of its display areas, including, but
not limited to, floor, shelf, rack, table, stand, case, display areas, boxes, cabinets, drawers, cartons or any other storage area or apparatus, for any
material characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or c) exhibits for a substantial or significant portion
of the total representation time, any material characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. An "adult
entertainment establishment" shall be further defined as any commercial establishment open to the public which involves employees or customers
who engage in conduct which is distinguished or characterized by specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting "adult motion pictures" (as
defined herein) material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting "adult motion pictures" (as
defined herein) and/or material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 366/702
Adult Motion Pictures: Films, motion pictures, video cassettes or tapes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Novelty Store: An establishment having at least twenty five percent (25%) of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing,
novelties, lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for specialized sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual
sales, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
Specified Anatomical Areas: Less than completely and opaquely covered:
A. Human genitals, pubic region, and
B. Buttock, and
C. Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and
D. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities: Means and includes any of the following:
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation.
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through C of this definition.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure existing or erected on land used principally for agricultural purposes, with the
exception of dwelling units.
AGRICULTURE: The use of at least two (2) acres of land for crop production or raising of livestock and farm animals. The term "agricultural" encompasses
the farmhouse, and accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to agricultural activities.
AIRPORT: Any premises which is used or intended for use for the landing or takeoff of aircraft, including any associated areas which are used or intended
for use by buildings and structures incidental to aircraft uses.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: Any motorized device designed to travel primarily off public streets, fifty inches (50") or less in width, having a manufacturer's
dry weight of one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds or less, traveling on three (3) or more tires, designed with a seat or saddle for operator use, and
handlebars or steering wheel for steering control, except lawnmowers.
ALLEY: Any public right-of-way which normally affords a secondary means of access to adjoining property. Frontage on an alley shall not be construed as
satisfying the requirements related to frontage on a dedicated street. A street shall not be considered an alley.
AMENDMENT: A revision or addition to all or a portion of this title which has been adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett.
AMORTIZATION: A method of eliminating nonconforming uses or structures by requiring the termination of the nonconforming use or structure after a
specified period of time.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or electronic device which may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, electronic and other mechanical amusement
machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, video games, virtual reality games and other similar games, operations or devices however designated;
but shall not include any music vending machines, contrivance or device commonly known as a "jukebox" which produces, plays or emits songs, music or
other prerecorded entertainment; bowling alleys; pool and billiard games; sports training devices, provided they are not operated by the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate, disk or debit card, and using full size regulation equipment; miniature golf, games played on a computer on the internet provided the
computer is not operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token or disk; and games at carnivals approved in accordance with this title as a temporary use.
ANIMAL, DOMESTIC: An animal, bird or reptile that is tame or domesticated and is not normally found on a farm or in the wild. Hybrids or animals
normally found on a farm or in the wild are not included within the definition of a domestic animal.
ANIMAL GROOMING, SALES AND SERVICE: Any place or establishment, public or private, where animals are bathed, clipped, or combed for the
purpose of enhancing their aesthetic value or health and for which a fee is charged.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL AND VETERINARY OFFICE: A structure where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment on an outpatient and/or
overnight basis.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a
public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted
to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals.
ANNEXATION: The incorporation of a contiguous land area into an existing municipality with a resulting change in the corporate boundaries of that
municipality.
APARTMENT: Self-contained housing unit arranged, intended or designed as living quarters for an individual, group of individuals, or a family, that
occupies only part of a building. Apartments may be owned (by an owner-occupier) or rented (by tenants).
ARCADE: Public gaming facility offering five (5) or more amusement devices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 367/702
ART GALLERY: An establishment engaged in the sale, loan or display of art, paintings, sculpture, or other works of art. Does not include a place designed
to be used as a dwelling unit.
ART STUDIO: Place designed to be used as, both a dwelling place and a place of work by the artisan, or craftsperson, including persons engaged in the
application, teaching, or performance of fine art.
AWNING: Any structure entirely supported by the wall to which it is attached and which has a frame covered by a temporary material and/or which can be
retracted against the wall by which it is supported.
BALCONY: An elevated platform projecting from and supported by a structure without additional independent supports.
BANK, CREDIT UNION, OR SAVINGS AND LOAN: A financial institution that is open to the public and engaged in deposit banking, and that performs
closely related functions such as making loans, investments, and fiduciary activities.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below lot grade.
BAY WINDOW: A window projecting beyond the wall line of the building and not supported by a foundation.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS: An owner occupied structure providing overnight accommodations for a charge to the public. Breakfasts may
be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfasts shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
BERM: A mound of soil, either natural or manmade, used to screen and visually separate, in part or entirely, one (1) area, site or property from the view of
another area.
BIOSWALE: A shallow, low gradient swale vegetated with turf grass or native plants. Water runs through the swale as a slow shallow sheet flow, allowing
infiltration and evaporation. These can be designed with adequate storage volume and cross sectional areas to hold and convey runoff from a desired
design storm event.
FIGURE 2-1
BIOSWALE CROSS SECTION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 368/702
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways, or boundary lines of the village.
BLOCK FACE: The properties on one side of a street, between two (2) intersecting streets or, in the case of a dead end street, between an intersecting
street and the end of the street.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The president and board of trustees of the village of Bartlett, Illinois.
BUFFERING: Any means of protecting adjacent properties from the visual or auditory effects of a different or more intense use. "Buffering" may include,
but is not limited to, berming, fencing, landscaping, providing greater setbacks or providing open spaces.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of the lot remaining after the minimum open space, setback and yard requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building, Accessory: A detached subordinate building or a portion of a principal building, the use of which is incidental to that of the primary use of
the principal building. (See figure 2-2 of this section.)
Building, Conforming: Any building or structure which:
A. Complies with all the regulations of this title and of any amendment hereto;
B. Complies with all the bulk regulations of the district in which it is located; and
C. Is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 369/702
Building, Detached: A building which does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure. (See figure 2-2 of this section.)
Building, Nonconforming: Any building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this title, or amendment thereto, which
does not comply with all of the bulk regulations of this title for the district in which it is located.
Building, Principal: A permanent building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. (See figure 2-2 of this section.)
FIGURE 2-2
BUILDINGS
BUILDING CODE: The building code of the village of Bartlett.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the finished grade to the average overall height of the roof surface.
FIGURE 2-3
EXAMPLE OF BUILDING HEIGHTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 370/702
BUILDING MATERIAL SALES: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale, from the premises, of materials used in the
construction of buildings or other structures. Typical uses include building material stores and home supply establishments.
BULK (REGULATIONS): Standards that control the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and the location of same with respect to one another, and
includes, but not limited to, the following:
A. Size and height of buildings.
B. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets or to other buildings (yards and setbacks).
C. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area ratio).
D. All open spaces allocated to buildings.
E. Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
F. Lot width and area.
BUSINESS PARK: A planned, coordinated development of a tract of land designed and equipped to accommodate a combination of commercial, office
and light industrial uses, providing them with all necessary facilities and services with special attention to circulation, parking, aesthetics and compatibility
among neighbors.
CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis grown and cultivated to be packaged and distributed to registered medical
cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois. In addition a cultivation center must be
located at least two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') from any daycare center, school or area zoned for residential use.
CANOPY: Any permanent exterior roof structure attached to a building at the inner end and supported on the outer end in conformance with the Building
Code of the Village of Bartlett.
CAR WASH: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing one (1) or more motor vehicles, using automatic production line methods with a
chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices; or providing space, water and equipment for the hand washing of autos,
whether by the customer or the operator.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums,
crematorium, columbaria, chapels and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
CEMETERY, PET: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of domestic animal remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
crematories, mausoleums, crematorium, columbaria, chapels and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
CHIMNEY: A primarily vertical enclosure containing one (1) or more passageways for conveying flue gases to the outside atmosphere.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A facility operated by one (1) or more physicians, dentists, or other licensed practitioner for the examination and
treatment of persons on an outpatient basis only.
CLUB, PRIVATE (NONPROFIT): A nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a
building, or portion thereof; the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. Food and alcoholic beverages may be served on its
premises, provided that they are secondary and incidental to the principal use, provided that sale of the alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the
applicable Federal, State, County and Village laws.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used
for recreation, common open space and preservation of environmentally sensitive features.
COLONY: A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood.
COMMODITY: A tangible item that may be bought or sold; something produced for commerce. Intangibles, such as human labor, services, or advertising,
are generally not considered to be commodities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land or water unoccupied by structures, buildings, streets, rights-of-way and automobile parking lots and designed and
intended for the use or enjoyment in common of residents of a residential development. Common open space may contain walks, patios and structures for
recreational use. Area used for individual open space, such as private courtyards, and not available to all residents of the residential development shall not
be included as common open space.
COMMUNICATION ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephone, personal wireless services, broadband, radio or television communications
through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
COMMUNICATION TOWER: A structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more communications antennas,
including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopole towers. This use includes radio and television transmission towers, personal
communication services (PCS), microwave towers, common carriers towers, and the like. This use does not include any structure erected solely for a
residential, noncommercial individual use, such as television reception antennas, satellite dishes or noncommercial wireless antennas (amateur radio).
COMMUNITY CENTER: A facility providing social, cultural and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and
serve significant segments of the community.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A group home or specialized residential care home which is owned and/or operated by a public or private institution, and is
used for or intended to be used for rehabilitative programs that serve either persons with disabilities, persons as an alternative to incarceration for a
criminal offense or persons whose primary reason for placement is treatment of a communicable disease. Community residences shall be licensed,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 371/702
certified and/or accredited by the appropriate state and/or local agency.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The official comprehensive plan of the village of Bartlett adopted by the village board in May 1978 and as amended from time
to time.
CONFORMING BUILDING: See definition of Building: Building, Conforming.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail establishment offering for sale a limited line of groceries and household items intended for the convenience of the
neighborhood.
DAYCARE CENTER, ADULT: A facility providing care for the elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for less than twenty four (24)
hours per day.
DAYCARE CENTER, CHILD: A facility, other than a residential building, providing care for children for less than twenty four (24) hours per day, which
meets the licensing requirements of the state of Illinois, department of children and family services. Child daycare center does not include programs
operated by public or private elementary and secondary schools, or institutions of higher learning which serve children who are three (3) years of age or
older.
DAYCARE, GROUP HOME: A family home which receives four (4) up to a maximum of sixteen (16) children for less than twenty four (24) hours per day,
which meets the licensing requirements of the state of Illinois, department of children and family services. The number counted includes the family's
natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12).
DAYCARE, HOME: A family home which receives four (4) up to a maximum of twelve (12) children for less than twenty four (24) hours per day, which
meets the licensing requirements of the state of Illinois, department of children and family services. The number counted includes the family's natural or
adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). The term does not include facilities which receive only children from a single
household.
DECK: An exterior floor supported on at least two (2) opposing sides by an adjacent structure and/or posts, piers or other independent supports and which
is typically constructed of wood.
DENSITY, GROSS: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the gross area of the tract of land in
acres within a development. For this purpose, gross area includes all nonresidential land uses as well as rights of way of dedicated streets; the result
being the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
DENSITY, NET: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of dwelling units in a development by the area of the actual tract of land in
acres upon which the dwelling units are proposed to be located, common open space, and associated recreational facilities within the area; the result
being the number of dwelling units per net residential acre of land. Net density calculations exclude rights of way of publicly dedicated streets and
nonresidential land uses.
DETENTION: A stormwater storage area designed to be normally dry and contains water only when excess stormwater runoff occurs.
DISTRICT ENERGY: An energy system that produces steam, hot water or chilled water at a central location and provides it, through underground pipes, to
buildings for individual use.
DOG RUN: An enclosed outdoor area intended for the exercising and/or containment of dogs or other animals.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: A facility which is designed to provide products or services to patrons in their car for use or consumption off site.
DRIVEWAY: A pathway for motor vehicles from a street to a structure or use used for service purposes or for access to the structure or use only.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,
and multiple-family dwellings, but not including mobile homes, hotels or motels.
Dwelling, Attached Single-Family: A building consisting of dwelling units each of which is attached by a common vertical wall to at least one other
dwelling unit with each dwelling unit having a separate exterior entrance and occupying the ground, including, but not limited to, the following:
"townhouse", "row house", and "duplex". In addition, no dwelling unit or portion thereof within an attached single-family dwelling shall be located
above or below another dwelling unit, and each dwelling unit shall have its primary access to the outside on the ground floor. (See figure 2-4 of this
section.)
Dwelling, Detached Single-Family: A freestanding building containing one dwelling unit. (See figure 2-5 of this section.)
Dwelling, Duplex: A building containing two (2) attached dwelling units only, located side by side. (See figure 2-6 of this section.)
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. Dwelling units or portions thereof may be located above or below
another dwelling unit, and each dwelling unit may or may not share a common entrance. (See figure 2-7 of this section.)
Dwelling, Single-Family: A building containing one dwelling unit and occupied by one family.
FIGURE 2-4
ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS EXAMPLE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 372/702
FIGURE 2-5
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING EXAMPLE
FIGURE 2-6
DUPLEX EXAMPLE
FIGURE 2-7
MULTI-FAMILY EXAMPLE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 373/702
DWELLING UNIT: Consists of one (1) or more rooms which are used as living quarters for one (1) family only. Individual bathrooms and complete kitchen
facilities, permanently installed, shall be included in each "dwelling unit".
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY: A "dwelling unit" consisting of not more than one (1) habitable room with adjoining cooking and sanitary facilities.
EASEMENT: A legal interest in land, granted by the owner to another party, which allows that party's use of all or a portion of the owner's land, generally
for a stated purpose including, but not limited to, access, placement of utilities, drainage, or tree preservation.
EAVE: The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of the building.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY: A public, parochial, private, charitable or non-profit school, junior college or university, trade or business schools, including
instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and other incidental facilities for students,
teachers and employees.
ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL SERVICES: Establishments whose principal use is providing amusement or entertainment for a fee or
admission charge. Such establishments include dance halls; theaters and studios for theatrical productions, bands, orchestras and other musical
entertainment; bowling alleys; billiard and pool establishments; commercial sport facilities, such as arenas, rings, racetracks and golf courses, amusement
parks, membership sports and recreational clubs, swimming pools, riding academies; carnival operations; and game and amusement arcades and parlors.
Entertainment and recreational services do not include any "adult uses" as defined herein.
ENTERTAINMENT, LIVE: Live musical, theatrical, dance, cabaret or comedy acts and other comparable events as determined by the zoning administrator
that is conducted indoors. Any form of dancing by patrons and guests at an eating or drinking establishment is live entertainment. Live entertainment does
not include any "adult uses" as defined herein.
ENTERTAINMENT, LIVE TEMPORARY OUTDOOR: The performance of live musical, theatrical, dance, cabaret or comedy acts and other comparable
events as determined by the Zoning Administrator outside of an enclosed building in an outdoor space as part of a community festival or an event hosted
by the Village, Park District, School District, or other governmental body, or as a temporary accessory use to a business.
ENTERTAINMENT VENUE: An outdoor or indoor area, building, or part of a building, devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic, dance, musical,
sports, or other live performances. An entertainment venue does not include any "adult uses" as defined herein.
FACADE: The exterior face of a building, including, but not limited to, the wall, windows, windowsills and doorways.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, civil union, adoption or guardianship, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit,
or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, civil union, adoption or guardianship, living and cooking together
as a single housekeeping unit, in either case exclusive of servants.
FARM: Land being used for agricultural purposes.
FENCE: A structure which is a barrier and is used as a boundary, screen, separation, means of privacy, protection or confinement, and is constructed of
wood, plastic, metal, wire mesh, masonry or other similar material, and which is over twelve inches (12") in height above the ground level. Examples
include, but are not limited to, open fences, solid fences, masonry and stone walls.
Fence, Natural: A fence which consists of natural growth, such as shrubs, hedges and evergreens which are thirty inches (30") or more in height and
spaced less than ten feet (10') apart.
Fence, Open: A fence which has, for each one foot (1') wide segment extending over the entire length and height of the fence, at least sixty percent
(60%) of the surface area in open spaces which afford a direct view through the fence.
Fence, Solid: A fence, which when viewed perpendicularly, has no open breaks or divisions, which conceals from view from adjoining properties,
streets or alleys, activities conducted behind it.
Fence, Stockade: A solid fence with two (2) to three inch (3") wide half round boards pointed at the top.
FLOOR AREA (FOR DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO): For the purpose of determining the floor area ratio, the floor area of a building is the sum of
the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls
separating two (2) buildings. The floor area of a building shall include basement floors when more than one-half (1/2) of the basement height is above the
established curb level or above the finished lot grade level where the curb level has not been established, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor
space used for mechanical equipment - except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof - penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet
six inches (7'6") or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses. Any enclosed space devoted to
off street parking or loading shall be included in the floor area. The floor area of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials including, but not limited to,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 374/702
grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks shall be determined on the basis of height in feet; i.e., ten feet (10') in height shall equal one floor.
FLOOR AREA, NET (FOR DETERMINING OFF STREET PARKING AND OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS): The floor area of a building
occupied by a designated use, consisting of the gross floor area excluding any floor area occupied by restrooms, utility rooms, public foyers, common area
atriums, interior off street parking and loading facilities, and areas primarily devoted to accessory storage.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The floor area of the building or buildings on the zoning lot divided by the gross area of such zoning lot, or, in the case of
planned unit developments, by the gross site area, exclusive of dedicated streets.
FIGURE 2-8
FLOOR AREA RATIO EXAMPLES
GARAGE: A structure or area designed for the covered storage of motor vehicles and may be attached to or detached from the principal building.
Garage, Private Commercial: A garage used in the business of sheltering motor vehicles owned by persons other than the garage owner and of
which occupation and business profit is carried on.
Garage, Private Residential: A garage owned by a person for sheltering motor vehicles owned by such person, and in which no occupation or
business profit is carried on.
Garage, Public: A garage owned and operated by a governmental unit for public use.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY: Energy derived from naturally occurring underground heat, usually recovered by use of a heat pump or by tapping heated
water.
GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEM: An energy system that utilizes heat from within the earth's surface; it is obtained through wells dug at varying depths
to capture the earth's heat into energy to power buildings.
GOVERNMENT/PUBLIC FACILITY: Any public facility, including, without limitation, police, fire stations, and civic buildings providing municipal services.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure.
GRADING: Reshaping natural land contours, using natural land materials such as soil, gravel, sand, black dirt, etc., for purpose of eliminating erosion or
sedimentation problems, creating or improving surface drainage, providing for the natural aesthetic contouring of property, or to accommodate a building
plan by making changes in land elevation.
GREEN BUILDING: Structures that incorporate the principles of sustainable design. Green buildings incorporate principles of energy and resource
efficiency, practical applications of waste reduction and pollution prevention, good indoor air quality and natural light to promote occupant health and
productivity, and transportation efficiency in design and construction, during use and reuse.
GREEN ROOF: A rooftop consisting of plants and soil, or other lightweight growing medium, installed on top of a waterproof membrane.
GROCERY STORE: Store where the majority of the floor area is devoted to the sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, which
typically also offer other home care and personal care products, and which are substantially larger and carry a broader range of merchandise than
convenience stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 375/702
GROUP HOME: See definition of community residence.
GUESTHOUSE: Detached accessory building located on the same zoning lot as the principal building and containing living quarters for temporary guests;
such quarters shall not be rented.
GUESTS, TEMPORARY: A person whose permanent place of residence is elsewhere.
HEALTH CLUB OR PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITY: A building or portion of a building designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise,
leisure time activities, or other customary or usual recreational activities, operated for profit or not for profit and which can be open only to members and
guests of the organization or open to the public for a fee.
HELIPORT: An area of land, water and/or a structure or building which is used or intended for use for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any
appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for heliport buildings or other heliport facilities or rights-of-way, including all necessary pads,
helicopter storage and tie down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
HIVE: A structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory office or personal service use conducted from a residential dwelling unit by a person or persons residing in the
dwelling unit which is clearly subordinate and incidental to the principal use of the dwelling.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION: A community association which is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests.
HOSPITAL: An institution that provides emergency room and other services including, but not limited to, physical or mental health services, inpatient or
overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick and injured, that is licensed by the State of Illinois under the Hospital Licensing Act.
This definition shall not include assisted, supportive or independent living residences or medical/dental clinics.
HOTEL: An establishment which is open to transient guests, containing lodging rooms, a common entrance lobby, halls and stairway; and where lodging
rooms do not have a doorway opening directly to the outdoors, except for emergencies.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL: Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface which does not allow water to be absorbed into the ground. Pools will not be calculated as impervious.
FIGURE 2-9
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 376/702
Impervious surfaces: Improvements (illustrative) considered impervious surfaces in the calculation of lot coverage.
Pervious surfaces: Area of lot not included in the calculation of impervious lot coverage.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO: The ratio of the sum of all impervious surfaces on a lot to the developable site area of the lot.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A planned, coordinated development of a tract of land designed and equipped to accommodate industrial uses, providing them with
all necessary facilities and services in attractive surroundings among compatible neighbors.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY: A use engaged in the basic processing, manufacturing or storage of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw
materials.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT: A use that involves the manufacturing, production, processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, repair, or packaging of finished
products, predominately from previously prepared or refined materials (or from raw materials that do not need refining). Warehousing, wholesaling and
distribution of the final products produced on the site are allowed as part of this use.
INVENTORY: The quantity of goods or materials on hand and raw materials, work in process goods and completely finished goods that are considered to
be the portion of a business's assets that are ready or will be ready for sale.
JUNK CAR: See definition of vehicle: inoperable vehicle.
JUNKYARD: A tract of land, including any accessory structures thereon, that is used for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing,
disassembling or handling waste or scrap materials. Such scrap materials include vehicles, machinery and equipment not in operable condition (or parts
thereof) and metals, glass, paper, plastics, rags and rubber tires. A lot on which three (3) or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a
junkyard. A "junkyard" includes an automobile wrecking yard. This definition does not apply to businesses where vehicles are being stored awaiting repair.
KENNEL: Any premises or portion thereof on which four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals over six (6) months in age are kept, boarded,
bred or cared for, in return for remuneration, or for the purpose of sale. This use includes animal day care establishments, but does not include the retail
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 377/702
sale of household domestic animals.
LAND USE: A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
LANDFILL: See definition of solid waste facility.
LANDSCAPE MATERIAL: Includes such living materials as trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines, turf grasses, and nonliving materials such as rocks,
pebbles, sand, bark, brick pavers, earthen mounds (excluding pavement), and other items of a decorative or embellishment nature such as fountains,
pools, walls, fencing, sculpture, etc.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: The graphical depiction of the location and arrangement of existing and proposed plant material and land forms on a lot.
LANDSCAPING: An expanse of scenery including lawns, trees, plants, and other organic and inorganic materials used for an aesthetic or functional
purpose. All definitions related to the requirements for landscaping are contained in chapter 10, article B of this title.
LEED (LEADERSHIP IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN): The green building rating system developed by the U.S. Green Building Council.
LEED CERTIFICATION: A third party certification program and the nationally accepted benchmark for the design, construction and operation of high
performance green buildings. The LEED rating system offers four (4) certification levels for new construction: certified, silver, gold and platinum.
LIGHTING: The illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade device located outdoors. All definitions related to the requirements for lighting
are contained in chapter 10, article D of this title.
LIQUOR STORE: A place of business selling beer, wine and/or distilled liquors at retail, to the general public in sealed bottles or containers for
consumption or use away from the premises where said establishment is located.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space used for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LODGE (FRATERNAL AND CIVIC): A group of people formally organized for a common interest, usually cultural, religious, or entertainment, with regular
meetings and formal written membership requirements.
LOT: A zoning lot or a lot of record.
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°). (See figure 2-10 of this section.)
Lot, Flag: An irregularly shaped lot which consists of two (2) sections: the primary mass and buildable portion of the lot (the flag), which is set back
from the street access and located behind one (1) or more other lots, and a narrow access corridor (the flagpole), which connects the primary mass
of the lot to the street right-of-way. The front lot line for a flag lot may be established on a lot line which is not a street frontage, and which is generally
either parallel with or perpendicular to the street right-of-way. (See figure 2-10 of this section.)
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner or reverse corner lot. (See figure 2-10 of this section.)
Lot, Nonconforming: A lot of record not in conformity with the zoning ordinance.
Lot, Reverse Corner: A corner lot where the street side lot line is a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear. (See figure 2-10 of this
section.)
Lot, Through: A lot having a pair of opposite nonintersecting lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel public streets, and which is not a corner lot.
On a "through lot", both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. (See figure 2-10 of this section.)
Lot, Zoning: A parcel, tract, plot or area of land accessible by means of a street or other permanently reserved principal means of access. It may be a
single parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds, or it may include parts of or a
combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one (1).
FIGURE 2-10
TYPES OF LOTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 378/702
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines.
FIGURE 2-11
LOT AREA
LOT AREA, BUILDABLE: The space remaining after the required yard and open space requirements of this title have been complied with.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by the principal and accessory buildings and structures.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line measured within the lot boundaries.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 379/702
LOT FRONTAGE: That horizontal length of a lot line adjoining a public or private street.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot.
Lot Line, Corner Side: That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated public street and which is not a front lot line.
Lot Line, Front: That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated public street, or where no public street exists, is along a recorded
access or ingress/egress easement. On a corner lot, the lot line having the shortest length adjoining a street line shall be the front lot line.
Lot Line, Rear: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook, DuPage or
Kane Counties, or registered in the Office of the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Cook, DuPage or Kane Counties, or registered in the Office of the Registrar of Titles of Cook County.
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured within the lot boundary.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: The production, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic
industrial processing and custom manufacturing.
MANUFACTURING, MEDIUM: The processing and manufacturing of materials or products, typically in the initial processing stage or manufacturing of
products that require additional processing, fabrication, or assembly for ultimate use by the consumer. These activities do not necessitate the storage of
large volumes of highly flammable, toxic or explosive materials. Medium manufacturing shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in any
industrial zoning district as a permitted or special use.
MASONRY WALL: A wall constructed of a type of masonry product permitted by Village Codes, such as stone or brick.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of therapeutic massage.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related
supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois. In addition a dispensary cannot be
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a school or daycare center or located in a residential neighborhood.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and ceiling of a story. A mezzanine is usually just above the ground or main floor and
extends over only part of the main floor.
MINIWAREHOUSE: A structure containing small separate storage areas of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land or building or structure developed for two (2) or more different uses such as, but not limited to, residential,
office, manufacturing, retail, public or entertainment uses.
MOBILE HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet
or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. The term includes any structure that meets all of the requirements of this
definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the United States Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under title 42 of the United States Code. The term "manufactured home"
does not include campers and recreational vehicles.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A tract of land or two (2) or more contiguous tracts of land upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for five (5) or more
independent mobile homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle, or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not
preclude the tracts of land from common licensure as a mobile home park if they are maintained and operated jointly. Neither an immobilized mobile home
nor a motorized recreational vehicle shall be construed as being a part of a mobile home park.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a
single zoning lot and designed for use by transient automobile tourists. Each room has direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing
through a main lobby of the building.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate and interstate
shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR HOME, MINI-MOTOR HOME, OR VAN CAMPER: A self-contained motor vehicle, not used commercially, designed or permanently converted to
provide living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, with direct walk-through access to the living quarters from the driver's seat. Such vehicles
must include at least four (4) of the following:
A. A cooking facility with an onboard fuel source;
B. A gas or electric refrigerator;
C. A toilet with exterior evacuation;
D. A heating or air conditioning system with an onboard power or fuel source separate from the vehicle engine;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 380/702
E. A potable water supply system that includes at least a sink, a faucet, and a water tank with an exterior service supply connection;
F. A 110-125-volt electric power supply.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical or electrical power but not operated upon rails.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY AND REPAIR: An establishment, building, or land used for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks or
similar vehicles including but not limited to body, fender, muffler, or oil change and lubrication, painting, motor replacement or rebuilding, but excluding
dismantling and salvage and establishments and facilities where the servicing and repair of vehicles is incidental to marketing and selling activities. All
such service shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES: A building or part of a building and parcel of land where vehicles are sold to the public.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION OR GAS STATION: Any building or premises used for dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail to the public,
gasoline stored only in underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease for the operation of automobiles and including the sale and installation of
tires, batteries and other minor accessories and services for automobiles, but not including major automobile repairs; and including washing of
automobiles where no production line methods are employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels is incidental to the conduct of a
public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. May also include, as accessory uses, convenience stores and/or restaurants.
MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING YARD: See definition of "junkyard".
MUNICIPAL CODE: The Municipal Code of the Village of Bartlett.
NAMEPLATE: A sign denoting the business name of an occupation legally conducted on the building or premises, provided that the sign area does not
exceed two (2) square feet in area.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: See definition of building: building, nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING LOT: See definition of lot: lot, nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING USE: See definition of use: use, nonconforming.
NUISANCE: Any thing, condition or conduct that endangers health or unreasonably offends the senses or obstructs the free use and comfortable
enjoyment of property or essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life.
NURSING AND PERSONAL CARE FACILITY: An establishment that provides full time nursing and health related personal care, but not hospital services,
with inpatient beds for three (3) or more individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator and who, by reason of advanced age, chronic
illness, or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. A hospital shall not be construed to be included within this definition.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: An off street paved area used for the storage of one (1) automobile or other motor vehicle with access to a dedicated
road right-of-way.
OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL: An office used for business, professional or administrative uses, which may or may not offer services to the
public, and is engaged in the processing, manipulation or application of business information or professional expertise. This use may include as accessory
uses, facilities not available for use by the general public such as meeting facilities, employee amenities such as exercise rooms, and food service. This
use does not involve the fabricating, assembling, warehousing, or repair of physical products, and does not include medical/dental clinics, financial
institutions or professional training centers.
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved or otherwise devoid of buildings or other structures and paved areas and set
aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space.
ORDINANCE: The Bartlett zoning ordinance.
OUTDOOR SALES: The sale or display for sale at retail of goods, or the provision of services, out of doors in conjunction with or accessory to a principal
use.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The storage of any goods, material, merchandise or equipment outside of an enclosed building. Outdoor storage does not include
the display of goods for sale at retail or temporary storage of refuse, nor does it include outdoor refuse dumpsters, recycling containers, compacting
equipment, pallet storage, baled cardboard, and other refuse and recycling materials.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A district which acts in conjunction with the underlying zoning district or districts.
OWNER: A titleholder of record, or if title is held in trust, the beneficiary of the trust.
PARCEL: A lot or tract of land.
PARKING FACILITY: Any land or structure utilized for the parking of motor vehicles, including, but not limited to, parking structures, parking garages,
parking lots, residential parking areas, and the components thereof, including, but not limited to, parking stalls, parking aisles, driveways, and approaches.
PARKWAY: That portion of a public street right-of-way on either side of an improved public street lying between the back of curb or the edge of pavement
and the closest edge of sidewalk pavement or the right-of-way line.
PERFORMANCE ART STUDIO OR SPORTS ACADEMY/SCHOOL: An educational institution, either for profit or not for profit, where classes in the
various arts (e.g., dance, painting, sculpture, music, performance) or for the teaching of athletic skills (e.g., martial arts, baseball, soccer) are taught to four
(4) or more persons at a time.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A set of criteria or limits relating to nuisance elements that a use or process may not exceed. All definitions related to the
requirements of performance standards are contained in chapter 6 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 381/702
PERSONAL SERVICE: A business that provides personal services directly to customers at the site of the business or that receives goods from or returns
goods to the customer which have been treated or processed at another location, including, without limitation, travel agencies, dry cleaning and laundry
drop off and pick up stations, tailors, hair stylists, cosmeticians, tanning salons, currency exchanges, postal substations, package delivery and pick up
stations, shoe repair shops and interior design studios.
PERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface which allows water to be absorbed directly into the ground.
PET: See definition of animal, domestic.
PET STORE: A retail establishment primarily involved in the sale of domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, fish, birds and reptiles, excluding exotic animals
and farm animals such as horses, goats, sheep and poultry.
PLACES OF ASSEMBLY: Any amphitheater, assembly hall, auditorium, religious institution, coliseum, concert hall, hall, meeting room, sanctuary stadium,
or other main activity area of a building, structure, or place, whether enclosed or out of doors, whether a principal use or an accessory use, which is used
or intended for use as a place for the gathering together of a group of persons for any purpose or purposes.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the Village of Bartlett.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A tract of land which is developed as a unit under single ownership or control, which includes one or more
principal buildings or uses, and is processed under the planned unit development provisions of this title. Also, a parcel of land planned as a single unit
rather than as an aggregate of individual lots, with design flexibility from traditional siting regulations (such as side yards, setbacks and height limitations)
or land use restrictions (such as prohibitions against mixing land uses within a development).
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAT/PLAN: A drawing or map made to measurable scale upon which is presented a description and definition of the
way in which the design requirements of the planned unit development are to be met and intended for recording with the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage,
Kane or Cook County or the Registrar of Titles of Cook County.
PLAT OF SUBDIVISION: A drawing showing the division of land into lots. Such plat shall be in conformance with the requirements of the subdivision
ordinance of the Village and all County and State statutory requirements.
PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT: A structure intended for recreational or athletic use including, but not limited to: playhouses, sandboxes, swing sets,
trampolines and jungle gyms.
PORCH: An unenclosed roofed structure at an entrance to a building which is not heated or cooled that is attached to the building.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT, TEMPORARY: Any movable, fully enclosed container placed outdoors which is designed and intended to temporarily serve
as a storage containment unit for household or commercial goods or equipment.
PROFESSIONAL TRAINING CENTER: A training center with classrooms, administrative offices, food preparation and service, residential
accommodations for trainees, and recreational facilities.
PROPERTY LINE: See definition of lot line.
PUBLIC HEARING: A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act at which petitioners and members of the general
public may give testimony, evidence or opinions relevant to the subject matter of such hearing.
PUBLIC MEETING: A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
RECREATIONAL UNIT: One recreational vehicle or one or more all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles or watercraft on a single trailer.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or van camper used primarily for recreational
purposes.
RECYCLING: The collection and often reprocessing of discarded materials for reuse.
RECYCLING FACILITY: A facility where newspapers, magazines, books and other paper products, glass, metal cans, and other products are received,
sorted, reprocessed and/or treated as part of a process to return such products to a condition in which they may be used again as a raw material in
finished products. This use does not include a junkyard.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A place of worship or religious assembly with related facilities such as: rectory; private school; meeting hall; offices for
administration of the institution; licensed child or adult care, playground or cemetery.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESTAURANT: An establishment in which food, drinks or refreshments are prepared and sold to customers primarily for consumption on the premises,
and for which carryout services and facilities are clearly subordinate to the principal use of providing prepared foods for consumption on the premises. The
term "restaurant" includes, without limitation, establishments such as cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, or other similar businesses, but does not include
drive-in or fast food restaurants.
Restaurant, Drive-In: A business in which the sale and purchase of food or beverages is designed and equipped so as to allow its patrons to be
served or accommodated primarily while remaining in their motor vehicles.
Restaurant, Fast Food Or Carryout: Any business in which the principal part of the business is providing food or meals for compensation in
disposable wrappers or containers for consumption within the principal building or off the premises at which it is prepared.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES: A commercial enterprise that provides goods and/or services directly to the consumer, where such goods are available
for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 382/702
RETENTION: A stormwater storage area designed to contain a specified volume of water and discharges additional volume at limited rate only when
excess stormwater runoff occurs.
REZONING: Changing the zoning classification of a particular lot or parcel of land.
ROADSIDE FARM STAND: A structure erected for the display and sale of agriculture products. These products are generally grown on site or on other
premises owned by the operator of the roadside stand.
SCHOOL: Any public or private educational facility (with or without boarding) including business or trade schools.
SEMI-TRAILER: A non-motorized, portable container on wheels that is designed to be attached and pulled for the purpose of transporting primarily goods
and materials customarily for commercial purposes over public roads. The size and weight of a semi-trailer enables it to only be pulled by a large truck or
semi-tractor. Semi-trailers may be tankers, flatbeds or enclosed.
SENIOR HOUSING, ASSISTED AND SUPPORTIVE LIVING RESIDENCES: A special combination of housing, supportive services, personalized
assistance, and healthcare designed to respond to the individual needs of those who need help with activities of daily living. Most offer private rooms with
kitchenettes and common living and dining areas. Services vary, but often include: assistance with activities of daily living; administration of medicine; first
aid and medical care for minor ailments; and round the clock protective oversight.
SENIOR HOUSING, INDEPENDENT LIVING RESIDENCES: Senior apartments or multi-family residential apartments designed for persons aged fifty five
(55) years and older. These properties may or may not offer meal service to residents and typically offer a limited array of supportive care services and/or
service coordination.
SEPTIC SYSTEM, PRIVATE: An underground system with a septic tank used for the decomposition of domestic wastes.
SETBACK: The required minimum horizontal distance between any line of a building or structure and any property line. The term "required yard" is often
applied interchangeably with the term "setback".
SHOPPING CENTER: A classification of retail stores, characterized by a cluster of stores and off street parking, which are planned and developed as an
operating unit.
Community Shopping Center: A shopping center that provides an extensive variety of goods comparable to those found in a central business district,
including a wide selection of general merchandise, apparel, and home furnishing, as well as a variety of services and recreational facilities. The
major occupants of a regional shopping center include at least one, but no more than two (2), full line department stores, and include several
specialty stores, restaurants and entertainment venues. Might include outlot shopping sites. The total center size typically exceeds three hundred
thousand (300,000) square feet.
Local Shopping Center: A shopping center that provides for the sale of daily living needs and convenience goods like food, pharmacy, hardware and
personal services. Does not include any outlot shopping sites. The total center size typically does not exceed one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet.
Neighborhood Shopping Center: A shopping center that provides many of the convenience tenants found in local shopping centers, while offering a
wider range of apparel, hardware, home furnishings, home improvement, and specialty stores. Might include outlot shopping sites. The total center
size typically ranges from one hundred thousand (100,000) to three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, message or illustration, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is affixed to, or represented directly or
indirectly upon, a building, structure, or piece of land and is directed at and visible from the public right of way and which directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise, or any emblem painting,
flag, banner, pennant, or placard designed to advertise, identify or convey information. However, a "sign" shall not include any display of official court or
public notices, nor shall it include the flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, political unit, school or religious group. All definitions related to the requirements
for signs are contained in chapter 12, article E of this title.
SITE PLAN: The graphical depiction of the location and arrangement of existing and proposed buildings and structures, parking lots and drives, roadways
and rights of way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, and other freestanding structural features on a lot.
SMOKING SHELTER: An attached or detached accessory structure, enclosed or semienclosed on not more than three (3) sides, and is designated solely
for the purpose of smoking legal tobacco products.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain steered by skis or runners, and supported in part by skis, belts
or cleats.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun at wave lengths suitable for heat transfer, photosynthetic use, or photovoltaic use.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A system that uses the power of the sun to capture and store energy and reduce on site consumption of utility power.
Solar Energy System, Building Mounted: A solar energy system that is mounted on either the principal or accessory structure or facade.
Solar Energy System, Freestanding: A solar energy system that is not attached to another structure and is ground mounted.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY: Any establishment operated for the purpose of recycling, reclaiming, storing, treating, transporting or disposing of solid waste.
Solid waste facilities include balefills, incinerators, landfills, and transfer stations.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit granted by the village board under the provisions of this title for a use that has been determined to be more intense or to
have a potentially greater impact than a permitted use within the same zoning district, subject to compliance with the requirements of this title as well as
any additional requirements imposed by the board of trustees.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration, hire
or sale.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 383/702
STABLES AND/OR RIDING ACADEMIES, COMMERCIAL: The grounds and buildings where horses are bred, raised, boarded or kept for remuneration,
hire or sale.
STABLES AND/OR RIDING ACADEMIES, NONCOMMERCIAL: The grounds and buildings designed, arranged, used or intended to be used for the
boarding, keeping or housing of horses for the private use of the owner. Such use may be located on a lot occupied by residential uses or may be located
on a lot occupied by the equestrian facilities of a private riding club subject to the provisions of this title. All such uses shall be operated as not for profit
facilities.
STREAM: Any natural, artificial or channelized watercourse that transports continuous or periodic flowing water.
STREET: A public or private right of way which affords a means of access to adjoining property, but not including driveways to buildings.
Street, Collector: A street which has substantial continuity within an area or neighborhood, and which is used primarily to access arterial streets from
local streets, and which affords a primary means of access for intersecting streets and for adjoining lots of record. Collector streets shall include Main
Street, Mayflower Lane, Newport Boulevard, E. North Avenue, Oak Avenue (north of Railroad Avenue), Prospect Avenue, Sayer Road, Spaulding
Road, Struckman Boulevard, and other collector streets, as may be designated by the village board.
Street, Local: A street which affords a primary means of access for adjoining lots of record, adjacent land uses and intersecting streets.
Street, Minor Arterial: A street of substantial continuity which serves or is intended to serve a large volume of traffic for the immediate area in which it
is located, and which affords a primary means of access for intersecting streets and for adjoining lots of record at a limited number of locations. Minor
arterial streets shall include Army Trail Road, S. Bartlett Road, W. Bartlett Road, Devon Avenue, Munger Road, Naperville Road, W. Railroad
Avenue, Schick Road, Stearns Road, and other minor arterial streets, as may be designated by the village board.
Street, Principal Arterial: A street of continuity between municipalities or other urban centers which serves or is intended to serve a large volume of
traffic for both the immediate area and the region, and which affords a primary means of access for intersecting streets and for adjoining lots of
record at a limited number of locations. Principal arterial streets shall include County Farm Road, U.S. Route 20, State Route 25, State Route 59,
and other principal arterial streets, as may be designated by the village board.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the
addition, removal or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: An improvement upon land, other than the land itself, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attached
to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, fences, freestanding signs, patios and parking areas.
SWIMMING POOL OR WADING POOL: Whether indoors or outdoors and whether above or below the surface of the ground or both, intended to contain
water for swimming, having an inside wall depth at any point of more than two feet (2') or a surface area exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
This includes inground, aboveground, and onground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
TATTOO PARLOR: An establishment whose principal business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of placing
designs, letters, figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances, which result in the permanent
coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin.
TAVERN OR BAR: An establishment primarily engaged in serving alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. This use may also include accessory
sale of prepared food. Live entertainment is permitted as a special use in completely enclosed areas. This use does not include outdoor dining, unless
permitted as a special use.
TEAR DOWN: The act of demolishing an existing house on a previously platted lot in order to provide a building site for immediate construction of a new
house, or the act of demolishing a house in order to let the lot sit vacant for any period of time in order to build a new house at any time in the future.
TENT: Any structure or enclosure, the roof and/or one-half (1/2) or more of the sides of which are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, fabric or a similar light
material.
THEATER: An indoor or outdoor establishment where live performances, motion pictures, or other recorded media are offered for public viewing. This use
does not include any "adult use", as defined herein.
TITLE: The Bartlett zoning ordinance.
TOWNHOUSE: An attached single-family residential housing design which typically contains three (3) or more dwelling units having one (1) or more walls
adjoining with another dwelling and designed to have all exits open directly to the outside.
TRACT: An area, parcel, site, piece of land or property which is the subject of a development application.
TRAILER: Any vehicle without motive power in operation designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN: A plan indicating the location of and methodology by which existing plant material is to be preserved during the
development of a lot or parcel of land.
TREE SURVEY: A scaled drawing accurately locating and indicating the size, condition and species (common and botanical names) of all mature trees
and the location of any buildings, parking areas, sidewalks and streets on a parcel of property. For all requirements relating to tree surveys see chapter 10,
article B of this title.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall
include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance of standards of this title.
Use, Accessory: A use which is subordinate or incidental to the principal use of the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 384/702
Use, Change In: A change in the use of a "zoning lot" from one (1) "land use" specifically enumerated in the lists of "permitted uses" and "special
uses" to another land use specifically enumerated in the lists of "permitted uses" and "special uses". For "multiple-family dwellings", an increase or
decrease in the number of dwelling units shall be considered a change in use.
Use, Incompatible: A use or service which is unsuitable for direct association with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous or
discordant.
Use, Nonconforming: Any use of land, buildings or structures which use is not permitted in the zoning district in which such use is located.
Use, Permitted: A use, which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and performance standards (if any) of such district.
Use, Principal: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A "principal use" may either be "permitted" or
"special".
Use, Special: A use of land or buildings, or both, which has been determined to have a potentially greater impact than a permitted use within the
same zoning district and is, therefore, subject to special provisions and restrictions.
UTILITY, PRIVATE OR PUBLIC: A. Any agency which, under public franchise or ownership, or under certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the
public with electricity, gas, heat, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection or other similar service;
B. A closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for providing a public service.
VARIANCE: A modification granting relief from one (1) or more provisions of this title where particular hardships, not intended or common to other property
owners in the district, would result from following the strict letter of this title.
VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon public streets.
A. Commercial Motor Vehicle: Any motor vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or
industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used
for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.
B. Inoperable Vehicle: A vehicle which cannot be legally driven upon public streets for reasons including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.
VEHICLE STACKING AREA: An area of pavement designed to allow for the queuing of vehicles at drive-throughs, or other similar facilities, assuming a
twenty two foot (22') front bumper to front bumper spacing ratio between vehicles. The vehicle stacking area shall be calculated to include the vehicle
stationed at the service window as the first vehicle in the queue, and include each vehicle which queues behind the first vehicle.
VEHICLE STORAGE, PERMANENT: The outdoor storage of motor vehicles, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, trailers, or other similar motorized
transportation vehicles.
VEHICLE STORAGE, TEMPORARY: The temporary outdoor storage of motor vehicles, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, trailers, or other similar
motorized transportation vehicles.
VILLAGE: The Village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage, and Kane Counties, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett.
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE: The triangular area determined by a diagonal line connecting two (2) points measured thirty five feet (35') equidistant
from the lot corner of the two (2) intersecting lot lines adjacent to the public rights-of-way.
FIGURE 2-12
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 385/702
WAREHOUSE: A structure, part thereof, or area used principally for the storage of goods and merchandise.
WAREHOUSE DISTRIBUTION: This use includes structures or areas, or a portion thereof, used principally for the storage or distribution of goods and
merchandise. This use shall not include "manufacturing, light" as defined herein.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC: Collectively all property involved in a water utility including land, water sources, collection systems dams and
hydraulic structures, distribution systems and other appurtenances, pumping stations, treatment works and general properties, or any parts thereof.
WATERCRAFT: Any vessel used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.
WELL, PRIVATE: A private underground source of water made accessible by drilling or digging to the level of the water table.
WETLANDS: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include
swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers rather than consumers.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower or mounting, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption
of utility power.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 386/702
Wind Energy System, Small Building Mounted: A small wind energy system that is mounted on either the principal or accessory structure's roof or
facade.
Wind Energy System, Small Freestanding: A small wind energy system that is not attached to another structure and is ground mounted.
YARD: An open space measured from the nearest property line to the closest point of a principal building.
Yard, Corner Side: The area extending across a lot bounded by the corner side lot line, front yard, rear lot line, and the closest point of a principal
building.
Yard, Front: The area extending across a lot bounded by the front lot line, the side lot lines and the closest point of a principal building.
Yard, Rear: The area extending across a lot bounded by the rear lot line, the side lot lines or corner side yard and the closest point of a principal
building.
Yard, Required: The required area between any line of a principal building and any property line as prescribed by each zoning district. The term
"setback" is often applied interchangeably with the term "required yard". (See figures 2-13 and 2-14 of this section.)
Yard, Side: The area extending across a lot bounded by the front yard, rear yard, side lot line and the closest point of a principal building.
FIGURE 2-13
REQUIRED YARDS FOR STANDARD LOTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 387/702
FIGURE 2-14
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 388/702
REQUIRED REAR YARDS FOR ATYPICAL LOTS
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: A person appointed by the President and Board of Trustees who is vested with administrative responsibilities regarding this
title.
ZONING BOARD: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Bartlett.
ZONING DISTRICT: A section or sections of the territory of Bartlett for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of buildings and
premises are uniform.
ZONING MAP: The map(s) and any amendments thereto designating zoning districts and incorporated into this title by reference. (Ord. 2011-70, 10-18-
2011; amd. Ord. 2013-81, 11-5-2013; Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017; Ord. 2017-136, 10-17-2017)
Chapter 3
ACCESSORY USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 389/702
10-3-1: PURPOSE:
Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a use allowed as a permitted or special use within a
particular zoning district may be allowed to occupy the same zoning lot as the permitted or special use. To qualify as an accessory building, structure or
use, the building, structure or use shall be operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same zoning lot as the principal building,
structure or use, shall not include structures or structural features inconsistent with the principal building, structure or use, and shall not involve the conduct
of any business, profession, or trade unless expressly authorized hereinafter. (Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012)
10-3-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
The following accessory uses and structures are allowed and may be regulated by additional requirements in this chapter:
A. Allowable accessory uses and structures in residential districts:
Agricultural building, in accordance with chapter 5 of this title.
Antennas, communication, and structures.
Clothesline.
Composters and compost bins in accordance with section 10-3-4 of this chapter.
Daycare homes in accordance with state regulations and licensed by the state of Illinois.
Decks, patios, terraces and outdoor fireplaces in accordance with sections 10-3-4 and 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Detention and retention areas.
Dog runs and doghouses in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Driveways in accordance with the Bartlett building code.
Dumpster and trash enclosures, in the SR-5 and SR-6 zoning districts only, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Fences, arbors, pergolas and trellises in accordance with sections 10-3-4 and 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Flagpoles, freestanding, in accordance with section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
Garages and carports in accordance with section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
Gardens.
Gazebos in accordance with section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
Greenhouses.
Home occupations in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Horse stables, in the ER-1 district only, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Lawn furniture, such as benches, sundials, birdbaths, and similar architectural features.
Light standards and fixtures, ornamental.
Parking spaces, off street, for lawful occupants or users of permitted or special uses on the same premises, in accordance with chapter 10 of this title.
Playgrounds.
Playhouses in accordance with section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
Ponds, landscaped and water features.
Portable storage units, temporary, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Rain barrels.
Sheds and/or storage buildings for garden equipment or the storage of household items in accordance with section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
Sidewalks and other walkways.
Signs, in accordance with chapter 10 of this title.
Solar collectors in accordance with section 10-3-4 of this chapter.
Sport courts, private in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs (including decks, mechanical systems, and any other associated structures) when conforming with other codes or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 390/702
ordinance of the village.
Tents in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Trailers, temporary construction, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Vehicles, servicing of, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Wind energy systems, small, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
B. Allowable accessory uses and structures in office, business and industrial districts:
Antennas, communication, and structures.
Cafeterias, daycare and health facilities for employees of the company or companies on the premises provided no exterior advertising of such facilities
is provided, in the O-R and I-2 EDA districts only.
Central heating and air conditioning units, in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts only.
Daycare homes, in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts only, in accordance with state regulations and licensed by the state of Illinois.
Decks, patios, terraces and outdoor fireplaces in accordance with sections 10-3-4 and 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Detention and retention areas.
Driveways in accordance with the Bartlett building code.
Dumpster and trash enclosures in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Fences in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Flagpoles, freestanding, in accordance with section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
Garages and carports in accordance with section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
Generators.
Home occupations, in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 districts only, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Loading areas, off street, in accordance with chapter 10 of this title. Truck parking shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons'
capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district boundary line.
Offices, incidental to a permitted or special use, in the I-1 and I-2 EDA districts only.
Outlet stores, retail, accessory to a manufacturing or wholesale establishment, in the I-1 and I-2 EDA districts only.
Parking spaces, off street, for lawful occupants or users of permitted or special uses on the same premises, in accordance with chapter 10 of this title.
Truck parking shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a
residential district boundary line.
Ponds, landscaped and water features.
Portable storage units, temporary, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Railroad spur tracks, in the I-1 and I-2 EDA districts only.
Rain barrels.
Sheds and/or storage buildings for the storage of supplies in accordance with section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
Sidewalks and other walkways.
Signs, in accordance with chapter 10 of this title.
Solar collectors in accordance with section 10-3-4 of this chapter.
Tents in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Trailers, temporary construction, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
Wind energy systems, small, in accordance with section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
C. Allowable accessory uses and structures in special districts:
For allowable accessory uses and structures in the public lands district, West Bartlett Road corridor overlay district and planned development district
see chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012)
10-3-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 391/702
Accessory buildings and structures are permitted in any zoning district.
A. Accessory Buildings And Structures:
1. Attached Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings which are attached to principal buildings shall comply with the yard requirements of the
principal buildings.
2. Building And Structure Location:
a. No part of an accessory building shall be located closer than five feet (5') to any lot line except in the SR-4 district where an accessory building
may be located within three feet (3') of a lot line.
b. In a residential zoning district, no detached accessory building shall be closer than ten feet (10') to the principal building. However for any
accessory building over twenty feet (20') in length the required distance between the structures shall be increased by an additional one foot (1') for
each foot over twenty feet (20').
c. No part of an accessory building or structure, excluding fences and driveways (upon approval of the village engineer), is permitted on or over any
public utility or public drainage easement.
3. Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the construction of the principal building to which it
is an accessory.
4. Area: The square footage of any accessory building or structure on a lot may not exceed the aggregate total square footage of all principal structures
on a lot.
5. Percentage Of Required Yard Occupied: No detached accessory building or buildings shall occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of a
required yard.
B. Accessory Building And Structure Height:
1. Height: No detached accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of the principal building or structure. However, in no case shall such
accessory building or structure exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
2. Building Appurtenances: Chimneys, parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flagpoles, smokestacks, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
monuments, water towers, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, ornamental towers and spires, roof gardens, recreational facilities, wireless
towers, antennas, solar panels, necessary mechanical appurtenances, penthouses to house mechanical appurtenances and the like may be erected
above the height limits herein prescribed and shall not be included in calculation of building height. Such items erected more than ten feet (10') in
excess of the height limits of the zoning district in which they are located or the height of the structure to which they are attached, shall be required to
be reviewed and approved by the village board prior to being erected.
3. Freestanding Flagpoles: Freestanding flagpoles shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height as measured from existing grade and shall not be
closer than twenty feet (20') to a front property line. (Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012)
10-3-4: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN YARDS:
Subject to all other requirements of this chapter, accessory buildings, accessory structures and/or accessory uses shall be permitted in designated yards
of a zoning lot as follows in table 3-1 of this section:
F: Denotes permitted obstruction in front yards.
C: Denotes permitted obstruction in corner side yards.
S: Denotes permitted obstruction in side yards.
R: Denotes permitted obstruction in rear yards.
Note that all types of obstructions listed below shall meet either the setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located, the provisions of
this chapter, or any specific setbacks listed with the type of obstruction. This provision is intended to designate which yards a specific type of obstruction
may be located within.
TABLE 3-1
PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN YARDS
Type Of Obstruction
Yards
Front
Corner
Side
Side
Rear
Air conditioning equipment and shelters, generators and miscellaneous mechanicals, in nonresidential districts S R
Air conditioning equipment and shelters, generators and miscellaneous mechanicals, in residential districts,
projecting a maximum of 5 feet into a yard
S R
Antennas and structures, communication (i.e., television, radio, amateur ham radio) R
Arbors or trellises and trellises attached to principal building F C S R
Awnings, marquees or canopies which may project a maximum of 3 feet into a yard F C S R
Balconies projecting a maximum of 5 feet into a yard F C R
Bay windows projecting a maximum of 3 feet into a yard F C R
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 392/702
Chimneys, attached, projecting a maximum of 24 inches into a yard F C S R
Clotheslines R
Clotheslines, on corner lots, only when the rear yard is not opposite the front entrance, and shall be set back a
minimum of 5 feet from the side property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it shall be set back a minimum of 3
feet from the side property line
S
Composters and compost bins, and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4
district, where it shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line
R
Decks 18 inches or less in height and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the
SR-4 district, where it shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line or when a side property line
coincides with a common wall between dwelling units, then no setback shall be required. A dividing wall shall be
required between immediately adjacent decks1
R
Decks 18 inches or less in height, on corner lots, only when the rear yard is not opposite the front entrance, and
shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it shall be set back a
minimum of 3 feet from any property line1
S
Decks greater than 18 inches in height, are permitted to extend 10 feet into the required rear yard and shall be set
back a minimum of 5 feet from a side property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it shall be set back a minimum
of 3 feet from the side property line or when a side property line coincides with a common wall between dwelling
units, then no setback shall be required. A dividing wall shall be required between immediately adjacent decks1
R
Dog runs and doghouses, and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4
district, where it shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line1
R
Driveways and other access drives F C S R
Dumpster and trash enclosures, and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line1 S R
Eaves and gutters on principal buildings or attached accessory buildings projecting a maximum of 4 feet into a front
and rear yard and a maximum of 24 inches into a side yard
F C S R
Entrance structures, architectural, on a lot 2 acres or greater in area or at entrance roadways into subdivisions F C S R
Farms and garden crops and shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the front of the house and a minimum of 5
feet from a side property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from the
side property line
S R
Fences, a maximum of 4 feet in height1 F C S R
Fences, a maximum of 6 feet in height in residential districts, a maximum of 8 feet in height in nonresidential
districts, and a maximum of 8 feet in height on property in any district used for schools or other public or quasi-public
uses1
S R
Fire escapes, open or enclosed, or fire towers may project into a front yard or corner side yard a maximum of 5 feet
and into a side yard a maximum of 31/2 feet
F C S R
Fireplaces, outdoor and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4 district,
where it shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line
R
Flagpoles, freestanding, and shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from a front property line and shall not exceed
25 feet in height2
F C S R
Garages or carports, detached, and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4
district, where it shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line
R
Gazebos, and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it shall
be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line2
R
Geothermal energy systems, and shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any property line, but shall not be
placed in any public utility or public drainage easement
F C S R
Lawn furniture, such as benches, sundials, birdbaths, and similar architectural features F C S R
Light standards and fixtures, ornamental F C S R
Loading spaces, off street, except as hereinafter further regulated in chapter 10 of this title S R
Parking spaces, off street except as hereinafter further regulated in chapter 10 of this title F C S R
Patios and terraces, and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4 district,
where it shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line1
F C S R
Pergolas, and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it shall
be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line
F C S R
Playgrounds R
Playhouses and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it
shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line
R
Rain barrels S R
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 393/702
Sheds, greenhouses and storage buildings, and shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from any property line, except
in the SR-4 district, where it shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any property line
R
Sidewalks and other walkways F C S R
Signs (as regulated in chapter 10 of this title) F C S R
Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features of the principal buildings, projecting a maximum of 18 inches
into a yard
F C S R
Solar collectors and associated equipment a maximum of 15 feet in height and shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from any property line
S R
Sports courts, private, and shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any property line1 R
Steps, open, necessary for access to and from the dwelling or an accessory building, steps as access to the lot from
the street and in gardens or terraces
F C S R
Swimming pools, private, and associated pool equipment in accordance with the pool ordinance of the village (title 9,
chapter 21 of the Bartlett municipal code)
R
Tents1 R
Trees, shrubs and flowers (subject to vision clearance regulations) F C S R
Wind energy systems, small1 R
Notes:
1. See section 10-3-5 of this chapter.
2. See section 10-3-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2015-97, 12-1-2015)
10-3-5: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Decks: Decks as defined in this title may be erected in all zoning districts subject to the following:
1. Permits: Prior to the construction of any deck, the property owner shall obtain a building permit from the building department in accordance with the
Bartlett building code (title 9 of the Bartlett municipal code).
2. Height Measurement: The height of all decks shall be measured from the immediately adjacent ground level to the floor of the deck. Any deck
greater than thirty inches (30") in height shall provide a guardrail in accordance with the Bartlett building code (title 9 of the Bartlett municipal code).
3. Location:
a. General: Decks are only permitted in the rear yard and the interior side yard of a corner lot.
b. Easements: Decks shall not be located on or over any public utility or public drainage easements.
c. Rear Yard: Decks are permitted within the rear yard as follows:
(1) Decks eighteen inches (18") or less in height above the average ground elevation, are permitted within the rear yard, and shall be set back a
minimum of five feet (5') from any property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it shall be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from any
property line or in the case of attached single-family dwelling units (see figures 3-1 and 3-2 of this section).
(A) Decks associated with attached single-family dwelling units may be constructed up to a side property line only if that side property line
coincides with a shared common wall between the dwelling units.
(B) If a deck is immediately adjacent to another deck along a common side property line, a dividing wall shall be provided between the adjacent
decks.
d. Interior Side Yards: Decks are only permitted in an interior side yard of a corner lot when the deck will be located opposite the front entrance, then
a deck eighteen inches (18") or less in height shall be permitted and shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any property line, except in
the SR-4 district, where it shall be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from any property line (see figure 3-1 of this section).
(1) Decks more than eighteen inches (18") in height above the average ground elevation, are permitted to extend a maximum of ten feet (10') into
the required rear yard, however they shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any side property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it
shall be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from any side property line or in the case of attached single-family dwelling units (see figures 3-1
and 3-3 of this section).
(A) Decks associated with attached single-family dwelling units may be constructed up to a side property line only if that side property line
coincides with a shared common wall between the dwelling units.
(B) If a deck is immediately adjacent to another deck along a common side property line, a dividing wall shall be provided between the adjacent
decks.
4. Construction: The Bartlett building code shall regulate proper construction standards for decks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 394/702
5. Balcony: Structures attached to a building without poles or ground access shall be considered balconies.
6. Decks With Roofs: All overhead coverings or structures shall be considered roofs. Decks with roofs that are attached to a principal structure are
considered an attached accessory building and must meet all required yard setbacks.
FIGURE 3-1
DECKS
(Detached Dwelling Units)
FIGURE 3-2
DECKS 18" OR LESS IN HEIGHT
(Attached Dwelling Units)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 395/702
FIGURE 3-3
DECKS MORE THAN 18" IN HEIGHT
(Attached Dwelling Units)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 396/702
B. Dog Runs And Doghouses: Dog runs as defined in this title and doghouses may be erected in residential areas, subject to the following:
1. Permits: Prior to the construction of any dog run or doghouse, the property owner shall obtain a building permit from the building department in
accordance with the Bartlett building code (title 9 of the Bartlett municipal code).
2. Location:
a. General: Dog runs and doghouses shall only be permitted in the rear yard.
b. Easements: Dog runs and doghouses shall not be located on or over any public utility or public drainage easement.
c. Setbacks: Dog runs and doghouses shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any property line, except in the SR-4 district, where it shall
be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from any property line.
3. Height: Dog runs and doghouses shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
4. Construction: The Bartlett building code shall regulate proper construction standards for dog runs and doghouses.
C. Dumpster And Trash Enclosures:
1. Permits: Prior to the construction of any dumpster or trash enclosure, the property owner shall obtain a building permit from the building department
in accordance with the Bartlett building code (title 9 of the Bartlett municipal code).
2. Location:
a. General: Dumpster and trash enclosures shall be permitted in the side or rear yard only.
b. Easements: Dumpster or trash enclosures shall not be located on or over any public utility or public drainage easement.
c. Setbacks: Dumpster or trash enclosures shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any property line.
d. Vision Clearance: Dumpster or trash enclosures shall not be located so as to obstruct the vision of vehicles or pedestrians on the site or
intersections or roadways located adjacent to the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 397/702
3. Construction:
a. Dumpster and trash enclosures shall be built with a solid gate.
b. Dumpster and trash enclosures are further regulated by the landscape ordinance (chapter 10 of this title).
c. The Bartlett building code shall regulate proper construction standards for dumpster and trash enclosures.
D. Fences:
1. Permits: Prior to the construction of any fence, the property owner shall submit to the building department an application for a fence permit including
a sketch drawn to scale indicating the precise location and dimensions of such fence. The building department shall review the sketch and may issue
a permit after a fee is paid.
2. Location:
a. General: No portion of a fence, including posts and post footings, shall extend past the property line. No fence shall be installed directly on the
property line. When fences are adjacent to a public sidewalk they must be set back a minimum of one foot (1') from said sidewalk in accordance
with the Bartlett building code.
b. Easements: Fences may be constructed on or over a public utility or public drainage easement, however fences shall not be placed closer than
eighteen inches (18") from any telephone, ComEd, cable or gas line or utility pedestals nor shall fences be placed on any storm manholes, catch
basins or pipes.
c. Drainage Swales: The bottom board of fences shall be placed three inches (3") above grade (i.e., ground level) to assure that drainage swales will
function properly.
d. Vision Clearance: Fences greater than three feet (3') in height or those deemed a vision obstruction by the zoning administrator shall not be
permitted within the "vision clearance triangle" as defined in chapter 2 of this title.
3. Finished Side: All fences shall be constructed with the finished side facing the adjacent lots.
4. Construction: The Bartlett building code shall regulate proper construction standards for fences including, but not limited to, post materials and
installation, however wood fences located in nonresidential zoning districts shall have metal posts which are covered (see figure 3-4 of this section).
FIGURE 3-4
METAL FENCE POST COVER
5. Gates: All fences that completely enclose a lot shall have at least one gate access as a means of ingress and egress to the principal building.
6. Natural Fences:
a. May be allowed anywhere on a lot;
b. Must be located wholly within the property lines; and
c. Shall not exceed three feet (3') in height when located within the vision clearance triangle.
7. Screening: Any fence required for screening by the landscape ordinance (chapter 11A of this title) shall be further regulated by the landscape
ordinance.
8. Height Measurement: Height of fences are exclusive of any posts or ornamental post caps or caps that do not exceed six inches (6"). Barbed wire
shall not be included in the determination of fence height. For sloping grades, effort shall be made to follow the contour of the grades.
9. Height: A fence is a permitted obstruction in any yard in any zoning district with the following limitations: (Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 398/702
a. Front Yards: Fences shall not exceed a height of four feet (4') except as follows:
(1) Front Yards Behind Setback Line: Fences shall not exceed a height of six feet (6') in residential districts or eight feet (8') in nonresidential
districts, when placed on or behind the front setback line as established by the zoning district in which the lot is located (see figure 3-5 of this
section).
(2) Through Lots: In front yards located behind the principal structure, adjacent to a public right of way and not adjacent to the front yard of a
corner lot, fences shall not exceed a height of six feet (6') in residential districts or eight feet (8') in nonresidential districts (see figure 3-5 of this
section).
FIGURE 3-5
FENCES IN FRONT YARDS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 399/702
(Ord. 2015-97, 12-1-2015)
b. Side Yards: Fences shall not exceed a height of six feet (6') in residential districts or eight feet (8') in nonresidential districts (see figure 3-6 of this
section) except as follows:
(1) Side yards on residentially zoned lots adjacent to a nonresidentially zoned lot: Fences shall not exceed a height of eight feet (8').
(2) Side yards on lots used for schools or other public or quasi-public uses: Fences shall not exceed a height of eight feet (8').
FIGURE 3-6
FENCES IN SIDE YARDS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 400/702
(Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012)
c. Corner Side Yards: Fences shall not exceed a height of four feet (4') except when placed on or behind the corner side setback line as established
by the zoning district in which the lot is located, then fences shall not exceed a height of six feet (6') in residential districts or eight feet (8') in
nonresidential districts (see figure 3-7 of this section).
FIGURE 3-7
FENCES IN CORNER SIDE YARDS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 401/702
(Ord. 2015-97, 12-1-2015)
d. Rear Yards: Fences shall not exceed a height of six feet (6') in residential districts or eight feet (8') in nonresidential districts (see figure 3-8 of this
section) except as follows:
(1) Rear yards on residentially zoned lots adjacent to a nonresidentially zoned lot: Fences shall not exceed a height of eight feet (8').
(2) Rear yards on lots used for schools or other public or quasi-public uses: Fences shall not exceed a height of eight feet (8').
FIGURE 3-8
FENCES IN REAR YARDS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 402/702
10. Prohibited Materials Or Styles: The following materials are prohibited:
a. Barbed wire except when used on top of fences enclosing public service and government uses or in the industrial zoning districts. Then the barbed
wire shall be limited to a maximum of one foot (1') in height and shall not be allowed on a fence less than seven feet (7') in height.
b. Chicken wire.
c. Stockade fences.
d. Chainlink with a gauge less than 11 or with slats, however all permitted chainlink fences must have a top rail and all permitted chainlink fences in
nonresidential districts must be vinyl clad.
11. Variations: Variations to fence regulations may be applied for in accordance with the process and standards of this title.
E. Home Occupation: Home occupations are permitted as accessory uses in residential districts provided that:
1. A permit is obtained from the community development department. The fee for the permit is found in the Bartlett building code (title 9 of the Bartlett
municipal code).
2. The use does not change the exterior character of the building and does not create noise, glare, odors, dust, vibration, noxious fumes or smoke
readily discernible at the property lines of the zoning lot on which the use is situated that exceeds what is normally produced by a single-family
dwelling.
3. The use does not impact the existing character of the neighborhood, including traffic, light, and noise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 403/702
4. The use complies with section 4-3-4, "Excessive Noise", of the Bartlett municipal code.
5. Except for deliveries, all activities for a home occupation must be located within the principal structure. No outdoor storage is allowed.
6. No mechanical equipment is used except such as is normally used for purely domestic or household purposes.
7. The use of the dwelling unit for a home occupation (including the office, workspace, storage and inventory) does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the total floor area of the principal structure (which includes the basement and attached garage) or four hundred (400) square feet whichever is less.
8. Any storage or inventory maintained on the premises in conjunction with a home occupation shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
9. There are no commodities sold on or from the premises associated with the home occupation except those transactions made through telephone,
mail communication or electronic or wireless communication for offices of a salesperson, sales representative or manufacturer's representative.
10. Any production on the premises shall not involve the conduct of a manufacturing business typically only permitted in the industrial zoning districts.
11. There are no hazardous materials used or stored on the site other than those commonly found within a single-family dwelling. Such materials shall
be limited to quantities that do not constitute a fire, health or safety hazard.
12. No more than one person is employed, other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises.
13. No more than three (3) pupils, clients, or customers can be present at the same time. (Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012)
14. Any commercial vehicle in connection with the home occupation which is stored or parked on the lot must be in accordance with the regulations in
chapter 4A of this title. (Ord. 2017-137, 10-17-2017)
15. The only signage is limited to a nameplate not more than two (2) square feet in area.
16. No separate entrance is provided in connection with the operation of any home occupation.
17. If a basement is utilized for pupils, clients or customers in connection with the home occupation an escape window must be provided if there is no
other direct egress to the outside from the basement.
F. Horse Stables, Private: Private horse stables as defined in this title may be erected in the ER-1 Zoning District, subject to the following:
1. Permits: Prior to the construction of any stable, the property owner shall:
a. Obtain a building permit from the Building Department in accordance with the Bartlett Building Code (title 9 of the Bartlett Municipal Code).
b. Provide adequate utility service and drainage facilities approved by the Village Engineer.
2. Size Of Lots: Lots must be a minimum of two (2) acres in area, with a maximum of two (2) horses allowed. One additional horse is permitted for each
acre over two (2).
3. Location:
a. General: Private horse stables are only permitted in the side or rear yard.
b. Setbacks: No structure used for shelter shall be nearer than ninety feet (90') to any side or rear lot line and one hundred fifty feet (150') to any front
lot line, or any street.
c. Easements: Private horse stables shall not be located on or over any public utility or public drainage easement.
4. Public Health Or Safety: The stable must not be detrimental to or endanger public health or safety.
5. Property Values: The stable must not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the property in its immediate vicinity nor diminish or impair property
values in the neighborhood.
6. Storage Area: The storage area for manure must meet the same setback requirements as the stable building location.
7. Manure Removal: Manure removal must meet the requirements of the appropriate County Health Department and must be so scheduled in
frequency as to avoid accumulations offensive or injurious to public health.
8. Pest Control Program: A Pest Control Program must be instituted to meet the requirements of the appropriate County Health Department.
9. Construction: The Bartlett Building Code shall regulate proper construction standards for stables.
G. Patios:
1. Permits: Prior to the construction of any patio, the property owner shall obtain a building permit from the Building Department in accordance with the
Bartlett Building Code (title 9 of the Bartlett Municipal Code).
2. Location:
a. General: Patios are permitted within all yards.
b. Setbacks: Patios shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any property line, except in the SR-4 District, where it shall be set back a
minimum of three feet (3') from any property line.
c. Easements: Patios shall not be located on or over any public utility or public drainage easements.
3. Construction: The Bartlett Building Code shall regulate proper construction standards for patios.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 404/702
H. Portable Storage Unit, Temporary: Shall only be allowed on a paved surface for a maximum of ten (10) days per calendar year.
I. Sports Courts, Private:
1. Permits: Prior to the construction of any sports court, the property owner shall obtain a building permit from the Building Department in accordance
with the Bartlett Building Code (title 9 of the Bartlett Municipal Code).
2. Location:
a. General: Private sports courts are only permitted in the rear yard.
b. Setbacks: Sports courts shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any property line.
c. Easements: Sports courts shall not be located on or over any public utility or public drainage easements.
3. Lights: Any lights installed to illuminate the sports court shall be directed towards the court to avoid light spillage onto adjacent properties.
4. Construction: The Bartlett Building Code shall regulate proper construction standards for sports courts.
J. Tents:
1. Permits: Prior to the installation of any tent, the property owner shall obtain a building permit from the Building Department in accordance with the
Bartlett Building Code (title 9 of the Bartlett Municipal Code).
2. Location: Tents are only permitted in the rear yard.
3. Not Permanent Residence: Tents shall not be used as a place of permanent residence.
4. Time Limit: Tents shall not be erected, used or maintained on any lot for a period exceeding three (3) days.
5. Not Used For Permanent Storage: Tents shall not be used for the permanent storage of vehicles or other equipment.
K. Temporary Construction Trailers: A mobile trailer may be used as a temporary office or shelter incidental to the construction or development of the
premises on which the trailer is located only during the time construction or development is actively underway. (Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012)
L. Vehicles, Commercial: (Rep. by Ord. 2017-137, 10-17-2017)
M. Vehicles (Servicing Of) In Residential Districts: The following regulations shall apply to servicing and maintenance of vehicles:
1. Servicing Of Vehicles:
a. Major automotive repair including engine rebuilding, major reconditioning of damaged vehicles, bodywork and painting is prohibited on any zoning
lot in a residential district;
b. Minor automotive repair, including service of small engines, is permitted only inside a fully enclosed garage.
2. Maintenance: Motor vehicle maintenance including oil changes, replacing parts and rotating tires, may be performed inside a fully enclosed garage
or for no more than three (3) consecutive days, on the driveway in a residential district.
N. Wind Energy Systems, Small:
1. Permits: Prior to the construction of any small wind energy system, the property owner shall obtain a permit from the building department in
accordance with the Bartlett building code (title 9 of the Bartlett municipal code).
2. Construction: The Bartlett building code and federal aviation administration regulations shall regulate proper construction standards for small wind
energy systems.
3. Building Mounted Systems:
a. Height Measurement: Height shall be measured from the roof surface on which the system is mounted to the highest edge of the wind turbine (see
figure 3-9 of this section).
b. Height Limit: The maximum height of a building mounted system shall not exceed ten feet (10') above the maximum height restriction of the zoning
district in which it is located; however in no instance shall the system extend more than ten feet (10') above the highest peak of a pitched roof (see
figure 3-9 of this section).
c. Location: A building mounted system is permitted on any roof face of a principal or accessory building.
FIGURE 3-9
BUILDING MOUNTED WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
HEIGHT MEASUREMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 405/702
4. Freestanding Systems:
a. Special Use Permit: A special use permit granted by the village board in accordance with chapter 11 of this title shall be required for any
freestanding system.
b. Height Measurement: Height shall be measured from the average grade at the base of the tower to the highest edge of the wind turbine (see
figure 3-10 of this section).
c. Height Limit: The total height of a freestanding system shall not exceed the maximum height restriction of the zoning district in which it is located
unless a special use permit for structure height is granted by the village board.
d. Blade Clearance: There shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') between the lowest point of the rotor blade and the ground (see figure 3-10 of this
section).
e. Location:
(1) General:
(A) A freestanding system shall be permitted in all zoning districts except on lots containing attached residential dwelling units.
(B) A freestanding system shall only be permitted in the rear yard, except in nonresidential districts they shall also be permitted in the side yard.
(2) Easements: A freestanding system shall not be located on any public utility or public drainage easement.
(3) Setbacks: All parts of the freestanding system (tower, rotor blades, etc.) shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any property line
(see figure 3-11 of this section).
(4) Distance Between Systems: Freestanding systems on adjacent lots shall be at least five (5) rotor lengths apart, unless written proof of no
interference can be provided at the time a building permit is requested.
f. Quantity: One freestanding system per lot is permitted; a special use permit may be requested for additional systems in nonresidential zoning
districts.
g. Tower Access: Climbing access (rungs or foot pegs) to the tower shall not start until twelve feet (12') above grade to prevent unauthorized access.
h. Lighting: Freestanding systems shall not be illuminated, except as required by the FAA.
FIGURE 3-10
FREESTANDING WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
HEIGHT MEASUREMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 406/702
FIGURE 3-11
FREESTANDING WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
SETBACK MEASUREMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 407/702
5. Noise: In no event shall the level of noise from a wind energy system exceed fifty five (55) dBA, as measured at the property line, in a residential
zoning district, or sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the property line, in a nonresidential zoning district.
6. Signage: No signs shall be attached except for a manufacturer and/or installer identification and those required for safety provided that they do not
measure more than two (2) square feet.
7. Abandonment: If a small wind energy system is inoperable or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months; the owner may be notified
by the village that the energy system must either be repaired or removed within ninety (90) days.
8. Wind Access: The village makes no assurance of wind access other than the provisions of this chapter. The applicant may provide evidence of
covenants, easements or similar documentation from abutting property owners providing access to wind for the operation of a wind energy system.
(Ord. 2012-05, 1-17-2012)
Chapter 4
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
10-4-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this comprehensive amendment, the Village is hereby divided into the following districts:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 408/702
A. Residential Districts:
ER-1 Estate Residence (80,000 square feet and above)
ER-2 Estate Residence (40,000 square feet to 79,999 square feet)
ER-3 Estate Residence (20,000 square feet to 39,999 square feet)
SR-2 Suburban Residence (10,800 square feet to 19,999 square feet)
SR-3 Suburban Residence (8,100 square feet to 10,799 square feet)
SR-4 Suburban Residence (6,000 square feet to 8,099 square feet)
SR-5 Low Density Multiple-Family Residence
SR-6 Medium Density Multiple-Family Residence
MH-1 Restricted Mobile Home
B. Office, Commercial, And Industrial Districts:
OR Office/Research
B-1 Village Center
B-2 Local Convenience Shopping
B-3 Neighborhood Shopping
B-4 Community Shopping
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 EDA Economic Development Area
C. Special Districts:
P-1 Public Land
W-B West Bartlett Road Corridor Overlay
PD Planned Development
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-4-2: ZONING DISTRICTS DESCRIBED:
A. Residential Districts, Purpose: The residential district regulations are intended to govern the location, intensity and method of development of the
residential areas of the Village. The residential districts are intended to provide for and encourage the construction of a variety of housing types to meet
the varying needs of different individuals and families within the Village. The regulations of each district are designed to provide protection to existing
developments while allowing new growth in accordance with current design standards and density objectives.
For purposes of determining the restrictiveness of the residential zoning classifications, ER-1 shall be considered the most restrictive residential district
and SR-6 shall be considered the least restrictive residential district.
Residential uses have been grouped into the following residential districts:
1. ER-1 Estate Residence District: The ER-1 Estate Residence District is intended for single-family residential development on estate type lots. These
lots would also allow for individual private wells and septic disposal systems, if needed or required. This district is intended to create an environment
that allows a mixture of agricultural uses and homes on lots larger than typical for urban type residential areas. The permitted uses, lot area,
setbacks and other requirements are designed to encourage a quality residential area in a rural setting. The district is located where similar rural
development presently exists and where similar residential development appears likely to occur in the future. Land annexed to the Village is
automatically zoned ER-1 until otherwise rezoned by an ordinance approved by the Village Board. This district is not intended for commercial, office
or industrial uses; however, certain facilities required to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational and other needs of the area may be
permitted within the district as special uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect its residential character.
2. ER-2 Estate Residence District: The ER-2 estate residence district is intended for single-family residential development on estate type lots. These
lots would also allow for individual private wells and septic disposal systems, if needed or required. This district is intended to create an environment
that allows a mixture of agricultural uses and homes on lots larger than typical for urban type residential areas. The permitted uses, lot area,
setbacks and other requirements are designed to encourage a quality residential area in a rural setting. The district is located where similar rural
development presently exists and where similar residential development appears likely to occur in the future. This district is not intended for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 409/702
commercial, office or industrial uses; however, certain facilities required to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational and other needs
of the area may be permitted within the district as special uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect its residential character.
3. ER-3 Estate Residence District: The ER-3 estate residence district is intended for larger lot single-family residential development on lots served by
public sewer and water systems. This district is intended to create a low density environment that allows a home on lots larger than typical for
residential subdivision areas. The permitted uses, lot area, setbacks and other requirements are designed to encourage a quality residential area.
This district is located either where low density development presently exists or appears likely to occur. This district is not intended for commercial,
office or industrial uses; however, certain facilities required to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational and other needs of the area
may be permitted within the district as special uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect its residential character.
4. SR-2 Suburban Residence District: The SR-2 suburban residence district is intended to create a medium density, suburban environment of singlefamily
homes served by public sewer and water systems. The district provides for the orderly expansion of existing single-family neighborhoods and
provides for new growth in areas appropriate for suburbanized growth. This district is not intended for commercial, office or industrial uses; however,
certain facilities required to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational and other needs of the area may be permitted within the district
as special uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect its residential character.
5. SR-3 Suburban Residence District: The SR-3 suburban residence district is intended to create a medium to higher density, suburban environment of
single-family homes served by public sewer and water systems and other urban services. The district provides for the orderly development of
existing single-family neighborhoods and provides appropriate areas of suburbanized growth. This district is not intended for commercial, office or
industrial uses; however, certain facilities required to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational and other needs of the area may be
permitted within the district as special uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect its residential character.
6. SR-4 Suburban Residence District: The SR-4 suburban residence district is intended to preserve existing platted lots of higher density single-family
residential uses. It is not intended to permit the creation of any additional SR-4 districts in the village, nor permit the expansion of existing districts so
zoned. It is also not intended to permit commercial, industrial or like uses in this district; however, certain facilities required to serve governmental,
educational, religious, recreational and other needs of the area may be permitted within the district as special uses subject to restrictions intended to
preserve and protect its residential character.
7. SR-5 Low Density Multiple-Family Residence District: The SR-5 low density multiple-family residence district is intended to provide for attached
single-family and multiple-family residential developments that can utilize a variety of building and development techniques. Various building types
can be employed to achieve the permitted density; these include duplex, townhomes and/or low rise apartments/condominiums. It is intended that
the resulting development will be compatible with neighboring homogenous single-family developments and that this district be located so as to
provide a transition between single-family and more intensive multiple-family and/or commercial zoning districts. Thus, the intensity and low profile of
the development, along with the design and composition of the structures allowed in this district are intended to complement adjacent residential
developments. This district is not intended for commercial, office or industrial uses; however, certain facilities required to serve governmental,
educational, religious, recreational and other needs of the area may be permitted within the district as special uses subject to restrictions intended to
preserve and protect its residential character. Public water and sewer are required to provide services to this district.
8. SR-6 Medium Density Multiple-Family Residence District: The SR-6 medium density multiple-family residence district is intended to provide for
attached single-family and multiple-family residential developments that can utilize a variety of modern building and design, planning and
development techniques. Various building types can be employed in achieving the permitted density; these include townhomes, condominiums
and/or apartments. It is intended that the resulting development will complement adjacent developments. This district is not intended for commercial,
office or industrial uses; however, certain facilities required to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational and other needs of the area
may be permitted within the district as special uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect its residential character. Public water and
sewer are required to service uses in this district.
9. MH-1 Restricted Mobile Home District: The MH-1 Restricted Mobile Home District is intended to provide affordable housing opportunities in the form
of mobile homes within planned mobile home parks, along with the supporting services necessary to create quality residential neighborhoods. This
district provides regulations for mobile home parks in order to foster their development as an integral and stable part of the community and to
promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents.
B. Office, Commercial, And Industrial Districts, Purpose: The Office, Commercial, and Industrial Districts are intended to govern the location, intensity and
method of development of nonresidential uses needed to provide goods and services to the citizens of Bartlett and its environs. The regulations in each
district provide for groupings of office, commercial, industrial and other uses that are compatible in the type of commodity sold, the scope of services
provided, and/or the method of operation.
For purposes of determining the restrictiveness of the commercial zoning classifications, B-1 shall be considered the most restrictive commercial
district and B-4 shall be considered the least restrictive.
For purposes of determining the restrictiveness of the industrial zoning classifications, I-1 shall be considered the most restrictive industrial district and
the I-2 EDA Overlay District shall be considered less restrictive than I-1, but is intended to encourage a mix of industrial, office/research and
commercial development.
1. OR Office/Research District: The OR Office/Research District is intended to provide areas for business offices and scientific research development
and training. This district is designed to promote a parklike atmosphere for the conduct of research oriented activities in structures of good design on
well landscaped sites protected by high performance standards.
2. B-1 Village Center District: The B-1 Village Center District is intended to provide the focal point of community life through the maintenance and
development of an activity center of retail shopping, personal services, restaurants, offices, entertainment and public facilities. Current investment
and the provision of a wide variety of employment opportunities is encouraged in the district for the maintenance of the community's tax base and the
strengthening of the local economy. The district is intended to enhance the community's image and utility through high quality services and facilities,
visual amenities, and a compatible relationship with surrounding neighborhoods. The district is also intended to create a mixed use commercial area
and pedestrian friendly environment.
3. B-2 Local Convenience Shopping District: The B-2 Local Convenience Shopping District is intended to provide for the convenient shopping needs of
persons residing in adjacent residential areas. Also allowed are compatible uses that, while not visited frequently, would be desirable if located in
close proximity to potential users.
4. B-3 Neighborhood Shopping District: The B-3 Neighborhood Shopping District is intended to provide for the more diverse shopping needs of persons
residing in adjacent neighborhood areas. Also allowed are compatible uses that, while not visited frequently, would be desirable if located in close
proximity to potential users. Such a district would be typically located at the intersection of two (2) arterials or one arterial and one collector street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 410/702
5. B-4 Community Shopping District: The B-4 Community Shopping District is intended to provide for community shopping needs of persons residing in
residential areas throughout the Village and surrounding municipalities. This type of shopping center should be located at the intersection of two (2)
arterials or one arterial and one collector street.
6. I-1 Light Industrial District: The I-1 Light Industrial District is intended to control the development of lands to be used by industrial firms that have high
standards of performance and that can locate in close proximity to residential and business uses without creating nuisances. The district regulations
are designed to permit the operations of most manufacturing and warehousing activities with adequate protection to adjacent district uses and
sufficient control of external effects to protect one industry from another. In this district, outdoor storage must be completely screened and all
industrial operations must be in an enclosed building.
7. I-2 EDA District: The purpose of the I-2 Economic Development Area District is to foster the development of a mixed use business park on large
contiguous tracts of property, and tracts of property adjacent thereto which are greater than forty (40) acres in size, to include a mix of industrial,
office/research and commercial uses, including, without limitation, office campuses, research and development facilities, and most manufacturing,
wholesaling and warehousing operations and related retail and service uses. Due to the scale of development and the size of the district,
construction of the infrastructure, phased subdivisions and individual development sites is expected to occur over a multiyear period. The I-2 EDA
district is intended to control the development of land to be used by industrial firms that will operate in a clean and quiet manner and have high
standards and can locate in close proximity to office/research and business uses without creating nuisances.
C. Special Districts: The special districts are intended to either: 1) govern the location, intensity and method of development for uses other than residential,
commercial, office, or industrial, 2) govern development in overlay zones, which impose development restrictions in specific locations in addition to
standard zoning requirements, or 3) allow for flexibility of the zoning regulations for development of land in compliance with an approved site plan or
planned unit development plan.
1. P-1 Public Land District: The public land district is intended to protect and maintain properties owned by the village, the park district, the school
district, the forest preserve district and other public agencies. The development standards are intended to provide flexibility to the governmental and
public entities in the use of their land.
2. W-B West Bartlett Road Corridor Overlay District: The West Bartlett Road corridor overlay district is intended to create a well designed and
aesthetically pleasing corridor, to integrate existing and future developments in the corridor with the remainder of the village, and to foster a vibrant
mix of high quality developments in the corridor in compliance with the adopted West Bartlett Road overlay corridor plan.
3. PD Planned Development District: The PD planned development district is intended and established to provide for greater freedom of design and
flexibility in the development of land while assuring substantial compliance to the intent of this title. To this extent it allows diversification and variation
in the relationship of uses, structures, and open spaces in developments planned as comprehensive, cohesive projects which are unified by a shared
concept. It is further intended to encourage the beneficial integration of compatible land uses at a proper scale, and to encourage better design,
provision of amenities, preservation of open space and the efficient use of public services through the use of planned unit development procedures.
The intensity and profile of the development within this district is intended to be compatible with adjacent land uses and an approved planned unit
development plan. (Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-4-3: ZONING MAPS:
A. Authorization: The location and boundaries of the districts established by this title are indicated on the map entitled "official zoning map, village of
Bartlett, Illinois", dated March 12, 2013, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this title. The said zoning map, together with everything shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this title as if fully set
forth and described herein.
B. Location And Availability Of Map: The official zoning map shall be located and available for viewing in the village's main office and on the village's
webpage. Certified copies of the zoning map are also available for sale at the village's main office. The official zoning map shall be the final authority as
to the current zoning status of land and buildings, subject to such authorized amendments which may be in effect.
C. Interpretation Of Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall
apply:
1. Boundaries are the centerlines of highways, toll roads, expressways, streets or alleys unless otherwise indicated.
2. Boundaries are section lines, division of sections, tracts and platted lot lines, unless otherwise indicated.
3. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of
such strips shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the maps measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway, and the
length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the map from section, quarter section, division lines, centerlines of streets and
highways, or railroad rights of way, unless otherwise indicated.
4. Boundaries indicated as approximately following village boundary limits shall be construed to follow village boundary limits.
5. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
6. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
7. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections C1 through C6 of this section shall be so construed. Distances
not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by dimensions shown on the map, or in the absence of dimensions, by the
scale of the map.
8. All streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same district as the
property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways and railroad rights of way. If the land abutting each side of the street, alley,
public way or railroad right of way is located in different districts, the center of such street, alley, public way or railroad right of way shall be deemed
to be the district boundary, unless otherwise specifically designated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 411/702
9. Streets or alleys which are shown on the zoning map and which have heretofore been vacated, or which may be vacated hereafter, shall be in the
same district as the land abutting both sides of the street or alley involved. If the land abutting each side of the street or alley was located in different
districts before the said street or alley was vacated, the centerline of such vacated street or alley shall be the district boundary line of the respective
zoning districts.
10. Where physical features existing on the ground are different than those shown on the official zoning map or in other circumstances not covered by
subsections C1 through C9 of this section, the zoning administrator shall interpret the district boundaries.
D. Changes: If, by amendment to this title, any change is made in any district boundary or in any other matter shown on the official zoning map, such
change shall be indicated on the map as part of the yearly update. The date of the latest updating of the official zoning map shall be shown on the face
of the map.
E. Entire Area Zoned: It is the intent that the entire area of the village's zoning jurisdiction, including all land and water areas, rivers, streets, alleys and
railroads and other rights of way, be included in the districts established by this title. If any area is not shown on the official zoning map as being
included in any district or covered by subsections C1 through C9 of this section, it shall be deemed to be in the ER-1 estate residence district. (Ord.
2013-45, 6-4-2013)
Chapter 4A
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
10-4A-1: USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Permitted Uses: Uses identified with a "P" in table 4A-1 of this section are permitted as of right in each respective district, provided that uses comply
with all other applicable standards of this chapter. No building or premises improved or unimproved shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter
erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered, except for a purpose permitted in the district in which the building or land use is
located as shown in table 4A-1 of this section, except for: Uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter or in accordance with
chapter 10, "Nonconforming Lots, Buildings And Uses", of this title.
B. Special Uses: Uses identified with an "S" in table 4A-1 of this section are considered special uses and may be permitted in the subject district only after
review and approval in accordance with chapter 13, "Administration And Enforcement", of this title.
C. Prohibited Uses: Uses listed in table 4A-1 of this section and not identified with a "P" or "S" are expressly prohibited in the subject district. Uses not
listed in table 4A-1 of this section are also prohibited; however the Village Board, upon recommendation from the Plan Commission, may permit a use
that is not listed in accordance with subsection 10-1-3F of this title.
D. Accessory Uses: Accessory uses are permitted in residential districts as regulated in chapter 3, "Accessory Uses, Buildings And Structures", of this title.
TABLE 4A-1
USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Use
ER-
1
ER-
2
ER-
3
SR-
2
SR-
3
SR-
4
SR-
5
SR-
6
MH-
1
Additional
Standards
Residential uses:
Household living:
Mobile homes P See note 1
Multi-family P P See note 1
Single-family, attached P P See note 1
Single-family, detached P P P P P P P P
Group living:
Community residence S S S S S S S S 10-5-21
Senior housing S S Minimum 1
acre1
Nonresidential uses:
Day care and educational facilities:
Day care, center (adult or child) S S See note 1
Day care, group home (adult or child) S S S S S S S S See note 1
School P P P P P P P P See note 1
School, with boarding S S S S S S S S Minimum 5
acres1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 412/702
Community facilities:
Club/recreation buildings (private) P P P P P P P P P
Parks/open space P P P P P P P P P See note 1
Places of assembly, religious institutions, lodge (fraternal and civic)
equal or less than 10,000 sq. ft.
P P S S S S S S S See note 1
Places of assembly, religious institutions, lodge (fraternal and civic)
greater than 10,000 sq. ft.
S S S S S S S S S 10-5-21
Public/government facility P P P P P P P P P See note 1
Miscellaneous uses:
Accessory uses/structures P P P P P P P P P 10-3-2
Agriculture P P P P P P P P 10-5-2
Planned unit development (plan) S S S S S S S S S 10-9
Utilities (private), cellular tower S S S See note 1
Note:
1. Site plan review and approval required.
(Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017)
10-4A-2: ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Community Residence:
1. A community residence shall have a maximum of eight (8) unrelated persons residing in it, with a minimum of one but not more than three (3) paid
professional support staff provided by the sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a twenty four (24) hour basis, or present whenever
residents are present at the dwelling to provide supervision and support.
2. The community residence is located at least one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'), measured in all directions, from any other building used as a
community residence pursuant to this title, or a "community residence" as defined pursuant to any adjacent jurisdiction's zoning ordinance.
3. Services, including, but not limited to, counseling and other treatment, shall be provided for only persons residing at the community residence.
B. Places Of Assembly, Religious Institutions And Lodges (Fraternal And Civic): A traffic impact study shall be required for all places of assembly, religious
institutions and lodges (fraternal and civic) greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
C. Agriculture:
1. Distances: Land used for the shelter, feeding, keeping, propagating and culture of livestock and farm animals shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in
area and all accessory structures associated with the above keeping of livestock and farm animals shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
from the nearest lot line. Any other structure used in the pursuit of agriculture not associated with animals shall be a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from the nearest front lot line, and a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the nearest interior and rear lot lines. (Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017)
2. Chickens (Poultry):
a. The raising/keeping of chickens shall be permitted on residential zoning lots containing a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet. (Ord.
2018-58, 5-15-2018)
b. A maximum of four (4) chickens shall be permitted on properties zoned and occupied for single family residential uses.
c. All chickens shall be kept within a covered enclosure/structure with an attached covered/enclosed outdoor area to prevent chickens from
encroaching onto neighboring properties.
d. An outdoor area a minimum of six (6) square feet per chicken will be required and a maximum of one hundred (100) total square feet will be
permitted for both the covered enclosure/structure and outdoor area.
e. All enclosures/structures shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from all lot lines.
f. The structure shall contain insulated walls and/or an insulated blanket shall cover the structure during the winter months.
g. All chickens and enclosures/structures shall be kept/located in the rear yard only.
h. All areas where chickens are kept shall be clean and well maintained with little to no accumulation of waste. In addition, all areas where chickens
are kept shall not produce or cause odors that are detectable on adjacent properties.
i. Roosters are prohibited.
j. No slaughtering.
k. No other poultry, including but not limited to geese, ducks and turkeys shall be kept on the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 413/702
l. An initial building permit shall be required for all enclosures/structures associated with the raising of chickens. A building inspection/approval is
required prior to obtaining a chicken license.
m. A chicken license issued by the Village with a one-time fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be required prior to purchasing the chickens. A
renewal license shall be required each year thereafter, with no additional fee or building inspection required. (Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017)
n. A maximum of twenty five (25) residential zoning lots will be licensed to have chickens in the Village at one time.
o. The provisions of this subsection C2 shall sunset and be automatically repealed on March 21, 2022, unless on or before said date, the Corporate
Authorities pass an ordinance extending the provisions of this section and repeal the sunset clause. (Ord. 2018-58, 5-15-2018)
3. Beekeeping:
a. Bees and bee hives shall be permitted on residential zoning lots containing a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. A maximum of two (2) hives/colonies shall be permitted on properties zoned and occupied for single family residential uses.
c. The hive(s) shall be located only in the rear yard and a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from all lot lines.
d. A flyway barrier at least five feet (5') in height, consisting of either a solid fence with a secure gate, or dense vegetation/landscaping shall be
required for the perimeter of the rear yard in which the hive is located. Those lots exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area shall
only be required to screen the hive(s) with either dense landscaping or solid fencing at least five feet (5') in height to create a flyway barrier for the
bees and to minimize the impact to adjoining properties.
e. Prominent signage warning of the presence of bees shall be required on the property (i.e., gate).
f. Each hive shall not exceed five feet (5') in height, nor shall the land area designated for the hives exceed thirty (30) square feet in total.
g. A source of water shall be available at all times on the property during the beehive's active months (March - November).
h. All areas where beehives are kept shall be clean and well maintained with no accumulation of bee combs, wax, etc., around the site.
i. An initial building permit shall be required for all hives and an inspection/approval is required prior to obtaining a beekeeping license.
j. A beekeeping license issued by the Village with a one-time fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be required prior to obtaining the bees. A
renewal license shall be required each year thereafter, with no additional fee or building inspection required.
k. Proof of registration with the Illinois Department of Agriculture will be required with the annual license.
l. A maximum of twenty five (25) residential zoning lots will be licensed to have bees in the Village at one time. (Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017)
10-4A-3: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Commercial Motor Vehicles: Commercial motor vehicles, including those that have signage and/or lettering on any surface of the vehicle, may be
parked or stored on a residential zoning lot if located within a garage or fully enclosed building; or, if visible from adjacent rights-of-way or properties,
shall meet all of the following requirements:
1. The commercial motor vehicle shall display a passenger plate, a B truck plate, a D plate, a taxi plate or a livery plate. The gross motor vehicle
weight, including the vehicle and cargo, shall not exceed a maximum weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds.
2. A commercial motor vehicle including all racks, equipment and materials stored thereon, shall not exceed an overall height of nine feet (9') measured
from the existing grade.
3. The commercial motor vehicle must be parked on asphalt, concrete or pavers a minimum of ten feet (10') from the side and/or rear property line of
the zoning lot.
4. The equipment and materials stored in the bed of a pick-up or flatbed truck must be securely covered by a commercially manufactured bed cap,
cover or tarp.
5. The commercial motor vehicle must be owned or legally controlled by one of the owners or occupants of the principal use.
B. Inoperable Vehicles: No inoperable or unlicensed vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any zoning lot in a residential district except in a garage or
fully enclosed building.
C. Recreational Vehicles, Trailers, All-Terrain Vehicles, Watercraft And Snowmobiles:
1. Recreational vehicles, trailers, recreational units, all-terrain vehicles, watercraft, and snowmobiles, as defined in chapter 2 of this title shall only be
parked or stored on asphalt, concrete or pavers located in the front or corner side yard on a residential or PD zoning lot containing a detached single
family dwelling unit or a duplex dwelling unit: a) between May 1 and October 31 (except snowmobiles on snowmobile trailers), or b) between
November 15 and April 15 for snowmobiles on a trailer.
2. A recreational vehicle or trailer parked or stored in a residential or PD Zoning District containing a detached single family or duplex dwelling unit shall
only be occupied for living or sleeping purposes for a maximum of seven (7) consecutive days or a total of fifteen (15) days per calendar year.
3. A maximum of one recreational vehicle, trailer, or recreational unit (including all-terrain vehicles, watercraft, and snowmobiles on a trailer) may be
located in a rear yard or that portion of an interior side yard which is located behind the front elevation of the principal residence, a minimum of five
feet (5') from the side and/or rear lot line.
4. Recreational vehicles, trailers, all-terrain vehicles, watercraft, and snowmobiles, which are in a state of visible disrepair, partial construction or being
utilized for a purpose other than what it was originally designed, shall only be stored or parked within a garage or fully enclosed building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 414/702
5. Recreational vehicles, trailers, all-terrain vehicles, watercraft and snowmobiles, shall be located only within a garage or fully enclosed building on a
zoning lot containing a townhome, attached residential unit or a mobile home in an SR-5, SR-6, MH-1 or PD Zoning District.
6. Recreational vehicles, trailers, all-terrain vehicles, watercraft and snowmobiles may be parked or stored in a designated common area within a
mobile home park provided the area is fenced and/or screened from view from adjacent properties.
D. Semi-Trailers: Semi-trailers shall not be permitted in any residential zoning district or the residential area of a PD Zoning District.
E. Domestic Animals: No person, group or firm shall keep more than three (3) adult domestic animals unless they are kept on a property specifically zoned
to allow a veterinary clinic, animal hospital, kennel, animal training facility, pet store or zoo. For purposes of this title, when an animal reaches six (6)
months of age, it shall be considered an adult animal.
F. Site Plan: Site plan review and approval, in accordance with the regulations in chapter 13 of this title, shall be required prior to the approval of a building
permit for any multi-family or non-residential use in the following zoning districts: ER-1, ER-2, ER-3, SR-2, SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-6 or MH-1 District, or
prior to the rezoning of property to an SR-5, SR-6 and MH-1 District.
G. Sewer And Water: All uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by a municipal sewer and water system, however, in the ER-1 or ER-2 Districts a
private individual sewage disposal system and water supply system approved by the appropriate County Health Department, the Illinois Department of
Public Health, and the Village Engineer may be permitted.
H. Uses: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements set forth in this title. (Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017)
10-4A-4: AREA, BULK, DENSITY, AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Scope And Applicability Of Requirements: Except as may be provided elsewhere in this title, the provisions of this chapter shall establish the minimum
and maximum requirements of area, bulk, density, and setbacks for all residential districts. No building or structures shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered in violation of the requirements of this chapter. TABLE 4A-2
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK REGULATIONS
ER-1 ER-2 ER-3 SR-2 SR-3 SR-4
Minimum lot size 80,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 10,800 sq. ft. 8,100 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width 200 ft .1 140 ft .1 100 ft .1 80 ft .1 60 ft . 60 ft .
Required yards:
Front 50 ft . 50 ft . 40 ft . 35 ft . 35 ft . 25 ft .2
Rear 100 ft . 80 ft . 70 ft . 55 ft . 35 ft . 45 ft .
Side, interior 30 ft . 25 ft . 15 ft . 10 ft . 7.5 ft. 5 ft .
Side, corner 50 ft . 50 ft . 40 ft . 35 ft . 35 ft . 25 ft .
Maximum building height 30 ft .4 30 ft .4 30 ft .4 30 ft .4 30 ft .4 30 ft .4
Maximum impervious
surface
See section 10-5-
6 of this title
See section 10-5-
6 of this title
See section 10-5-
6 of this title
See section 10-5-
6 of this title
See section 10-5-
6 of this title
See section 10-5-
6 of this title
Maximum floor area ratio
(non-residential uses)3
0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
Notes:
1. For cul-de-sac lots or lots on a curvilinear portion of the street, the lot width requirement may be reduced by 25 percent in ER-1, 15 percent in
ER-3 and 10 percent in SR-2 Zoning Districts, and the lot width shall be measured at the front setback line.
2. In the SR-4 Zoning District, where the average setback on existing structures on a block face is less than 25 feet, that average shall be the
depth of the required front yard for new structures or additions on that block face.
3. The maximum floor area ratio does not apply to single-family detached or duplex dwellings.
4. Any structure exceeding the height of the district shall require a special use permit.
TABLE 4A-3
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BULK REGULATIONS
SR-5 SR-6
Minimum contiguous area 1 acre 1 acre
Minimum lot width Sufficient width to accommodate the use and/or building separations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 415/702
Accessory structures setback See section 10-3-2 of this title
Maximum building height:
Principal building 35 ft.1 50 ft.1
Maximum floor area ratio:
Townhome and multiple family dwelling units1 0.30 0.50
All other uses 0.20 0.20
Residential uses:
Density 8 du/acre2 14 du/acre2
Required front yard 25 ft. 25 ft.
Building separations:
Front to front 60 ft. 60 ft.
Front to side 40 ft. 40 ft.
Side to side 30 ft. 30 ft.
Rear to side 40 ft. 40 ft.
Rear to rear 60 ft. 60 ft.
Minimum lot area:
Senior housing 1 acre (see section 10-5-2 of this title) 1 acre (see section 10-5-2 of this title)
All other residential uses Sufficient area to accommodate the use and/or building separations
Required guest parking space ratio (units/guest space) 4:1 3:1
Perimeter setbacks 50 ft. adjacent to an arterial/railroad R-O-W
40 ft. adjacent to all other uses
Open space requirement 15% 20%
Non-residential uses:
Required front yard 40 ft. 40 ft.
Required side yard 20 ft. 20 ft.
Required corner side yard 40 ft. 40 ft.
Required rear yard 50 ft. 50 ft.
Minimum lot area:
School with boarding 5 acres 5 acres
Places of assembly and religious institutions 1 acre 1 acre
Park No minimum
All other non-residential uses 20,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft.
Notes:
1. Any structure exceeding the height of the district shall require a special use permit.
2. Excluding two-family detached dwellings (e.g., duplexes).
(Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017)
10-4A-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS:
A. Minimum Contiguous Area: Each mobile home park must be at least seventy five (75) acres in size.
B. Permitted Location: Mobile homes shall not be permitted except on a lot in a mobile home park.
C. Not Accessory: A mobile home shall not be permitted as an accessory building.
D. Building Height: The maximum building height shall be twenty feet (20').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 416/702
E. Special Conditions: All mobile home parks shall be governed solely by and shall comply with the minimum site size per unit, perimeter property setback
lines, spacing between units and other bulk, development and operational regulations as set forth in the Illinois Mobile Home Park Act, 210 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 115 et seq., and other State of Illinois statutes and regulations governing mobile homes or mobile home parks or mobile homes as
defined in said Act. (Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017)
10-4A-6: IMPERVIOUS SURFACE STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. The maximum impervious surface percentage for all buildings and structures (principal and accessory uses, excluding pools) including paved,
impervious, or traveled surfaces on a lot shall not exceed the following:
TABLE 4A-4
MAXIMUM IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Maximum
Impervious Surface
Single family, detached lots:
Equal to or greater than 20,000 sq. ft. 30%
Equal to or greater than 10,800 sq. ft. but less than 20,000 sq. ft. 35%
Less than 10,800 sq. ft. 40%
Duplex lots 45%
Townhome and other multi-family lots n/a
B. If the Building Department determines that a material is pervious, the area covered by such material shall not count toward the total area of impervious
surface. (Ord. 2017-24, 3-21-2017)
Chapter 5
OR OFFICE/RESEARCH DISTRICT
10-5-1: USES IN THE OR OFFICE/RESEARCH DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses: Uses identified with a "P" in table 5-1 of this section are permitted as of right in the OR Office/Research District, provided that uses
comply with all other applicable standards of this chapter. No building or premises improved or unimproved shall be used, and no building shall be
hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered, except for a purpose permitted in the district in which the building or land
use is located as shown in table 5-1 of this section, except for: uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter or in accordance with
chapter 10, "Nonconforming Lots, Buildings And Uses", of this title.
B. Special Uses: Uses identified with an "S" in table 5-1 of this section are considered special uses and may be permitted in the subject district only after
review and approval in accordance with chapter 13, "Administration And Enforcement", of this title.
C. Prohibited Uses: Uses listed in table 5-1 of this section and not identified with a "P" or "S" are expressly prohibited in the subject district. Uses not listed
in table 5-1 of this section are also prohibited; however, the Village Board, upon recommendation from the Plan Commission, may permit a use that is
not listed in accordance with subsection 10-1-3F of this title.
D. Accessory Uses: Accessory uses are permitted in the OR Office/Research District as regulated in chapter 3, "Accessory Uses, Buildings And
Structures", of this title.
TABLE 5-1
USES IN THE OR OFFICE/RESEARCH DISTRICT
Use OR
Additional Standards
Residential uses:
Community residence S Section 10-5-2 of this chapter
Residential rehab/personal care facility S
Residential uses on the second floor and above P
Senior housing S
Nonresidential uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 417/702
Day care, center (adult or child) S
Financial institutions P
Fitness/recreation facilities S
Hospitals S
Medical and dental clinics P
Motor vehicle service stations S Section 10-5-2 of this chapter
Offices, business and professional, including research facilities and tech centers or laboratories P
Places of assembly, religious institutions, lodge (fraternal and civic) equal or less than 10,000 square feet
P
Places of assembly, religious institutions, lodge (fraternal and civic) greater than 10,000 square feet S Section 10-5-2 of this chapter
Public/government facility P
Restaurants (including outdoor seating) P
Restaurants with liquor S
Schools (professional, colleges or universities) private or public (nonboarding) P
Urgent care facilities P
Miscellaneous uses:
Accessory uses/structures P Section 10-5-2 of this chapter
Planned unit development (plan) S Chapter 9 of this title
Utilities (private), cellular tower S
(Ord. 2017-137, 10-17-2017)
10-5-2: ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
A. Community Residence:
1. A community residence shall have a maximum of eight (8) unrelated persons residing in it, with a minimum of one but not more than three (3) paid
professional support staff provided by the sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a twenty four (24) hour basis, or present whenever
residents are present at the dwelling to provide supervision and support.
2. The community residence is located at least one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'), measured in all directions, from any other building used as a
community residence pursuant to this title, or a "community residence" as defined pursuant to any adjacent jurisdiction's zoning ordinance.
3. Services, including, but not limited to, counseling and other treatment shall be provided for only persons residing at the community residence.
B. Motor Vehicle Service Stations:
1. No major repair, body and fender work.
2. No painting of vehicles.
3. No storage of vehicles.
4. No rental of cars, trucks or trailers.
5. All work shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
C. Places Of Assembly, Religious Institutions And Lodges (Fraternal And Civic): A Traffic Impact Study shall be required for all places of assembly,
religious institutions, lodges (fraternal and civic) greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 2017-137, 10-17-2017)
10-5-3: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS IN THE OR OFFICE/RESEARCH DISTRICT:
A. Office/Research Uses: All uses, including storage, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise stated in this title.
B. Underground Utilities: All utilities shall be located underground.
C. Traffic Analysis: If required, the traffic analysis shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and subject to review and approval by the Village Board.
D. Site Plan Review: A site plan review or administrative site plan review and approval in accordance with the regulations in chapter 13 of this title shall be
required prior to the approval of a building permit for any property in the OR District, or prior to the rezoning of property to an OR District.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 418/702
E. Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements set forth in this title. (Ord. 2017-137, 10-17-2017)
10-5-4: AREA, BULK, DENSITY AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Scope And Applicability Of Requirements: Except as may be provided elsewhere in this title, the provisions of this chapter shall establish the minimum
and maximum requirements of area, bulk, density, and setbacks for the OR Office/Research District. No building or structures shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered in violation of the requirements of this chapter.
TABLE 5-2
OR OFFICE/RESEARCH DISTRICT BULK REGULATIONS
Minimum contiguous area 2 acres
Minimum lot area Sufficient area to accommodate the use
Minimum lot width 60'
Maximum building height 50'1
Maximum lot coverage (including accessory buildings) 30%
Maximum floor area ratio 0.5
Required yards:
Front yard 30'
Side yard 15'
Corner side yard 30'
Side yard adjacent to a residential district 30'
Rear yard 30'
Parking setbacks:
Front yard 20'
Side yard 10'
Corner side yard 20'
Rear yard 15'
Open space requirement 20%
Note:
1. Any structure exceeding the height shall require a special use permit.
(Ord. 2017-137, 10-17-2017)
Chapter 6
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
10-6-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
ARTICLE A. B-1 VILLAGE CENTER DISTRICT
10-6A-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-6A-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the B-1 village center district are set forth in the sections which follow. Also applying to the B-1 village
center district are regulations set forth in other chapters in this title as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 419/702
Chapter 1 - General zoning provisions
Chapter 2 - Rules and definitions
Chapter 9 - Planned unit developments
Chapter 10 - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses
Chapter 11 - Off street parking and loading
Chapter 11A - Landscaping, screening and tree preservation
Chapter 12 - Signs
Chapter 13 - Administration and enforcement
(Ord. 82-73, 11-16-1982; amd. Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
10-6A-3: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted within the B-1 village center district, in accordance with the conditions specified, and subject to site plan review as set
forth in this title. Unless otherwise specifically set forth, wherever a permitted use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those
itemized uses listed under the said category. No building or zoning lot in the B-1 Village Center District shall be devoted to any use other than a use
permitted in the B-1 Village Center District and no building or structure in the B-1 Village Center District shall be erected, altered, enlarged, or occupied
except for a permitted use in the B-1 Village Center District unless otherwise specifically allowed in this Title.
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Title and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of
Chapter 10.
The following uses are permitted in the B-1 Village Center District:
A. Retail Uses:
Antique shops.
Art and school supply stores. (Ord. 82-73, 11-16-82)
Bakeries in which the baking of goods is limited to goods retailed on the premises only. (Ord. 88-51, 6-7-88)
Book stores.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
China, glassware and metalware stores.
Clothing stores.
Coin and stamp stores.
Drapery, curtain and window coverings stores.
Dry goods stores.
Drug stores.
Electrical appliance stores.
Fabrics and sewing accessory stores.
Floor covering stores.
Flower shops.
Food stores.
Furniture stores.
Furriers and fur apparel stores.
Gift, novelty and souvenir shops.
Hardware stores.
Home decorating stores. (Ord. 82-73, 11-16-82)
Indoor sales and service of lawnmowers and garden implements and supplies. (Ord. 89-99, 11-21-89)
Jewelry stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 420/702
Kitchen and bathroom stores.
Leather shops.
Luggage and suitcase stores.
Liquor stores.
Musical instrument stores.
Newspaper and magazine stores.
Paint and wallcovering stores.
Pharmacies.
Record shops.
Shoe stores.
Specialty shops.
Sporting goods stores.
Stationery stores.
Tobacco shops.
Tool and appliance shops, retail sales only, not repair.
Toy stores.
B. Personal Services:
Art studios and galleries.
Barber shops.
Beauty parlors.
Dance studios.
Hobby shops.
Key and lock shops.
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments, under 5,000 square feet but not a central plant serving other than the premises upon which it is located.
Music studios.
Photographic studios.
Shoe repair shops.
Tailoring and dressmaking shops, retail for customers of the premises only.
Travel bureaus.
C. Food Service and Leisure:
Indoor, sitdown restaurants without liquor, for consumption of food on the premises only.
D. Financial Uses:
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping uses.
Banks, without drive-in facilities.
Commodity brokers.
Credit union offices.
Currency exchanges.
Financial counseling offices.
Income tax service.
Savings and loan institutions, without drive-in facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 421/702
Security brokers.
E. Business Service Uses:
Advertising agency offices.
Photocopying stores.
Data processing centers.
Employment agency offices.
Office supply stores.
Printing shops, under 5,000 sq. ft.
F. Administrative and Professional Offices:
Architects.
Attorneys.
Business and management consulting.
Consultant offices.
Designers.
General business offices.
Government offices.
Insurance.
Publishing offices.
Real estate.
G. Medical and Related Uses:
Dental offices and laboratories.
Medical offices and laboratories.
Optometrist offices and laboratories.
H. Communication and Private Utility Uses:
Newspaper offices.
News syndication services.
Radio and television broadcasting stations and studios.
Recording studios.
Telegraph offices.
Telephone answering services.
Telephone business offices.
I. Education Uses:
Barber and beauty schools.
Business schools.
Dancing and music academies.
Daycare nurseries.
Personnel training centers.
Studios for art, drama, reading or speech.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 422/702
J. Cultural And Recreational Uses:
Art galleries.
Health clubs.
Libraries.
Museums.
K. Residential Uses:
Multi-family apartments and condominiums, second floor and above.
L. Governmental Uses:
Office and meeting facilities.
Public parks or plazas. (Ord. 82-73, 11-16-1982)
10-6A-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be located in the B-1 village center district, subject to the issuance of a special use permit in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 13 of this title.
The following uses are special uses in the B-1 district:
Auditoriums or conference centers.
Automobile service stations.
Banquet facility.
Bed and breakfast establishments:
A. Two (2) guests shall be allowed per guestroom with the length of stay a maximum of one week;
B. Installation of smoke detectors;
C. Installation of emergency exit lighting;
D. Proper egress from guest area in case of emergency;
E. A food handling permit for the serving of breakfast;
F. A business license shall be obtained from the village;
G. A sign shall be permitted in accordance with the sign ordinance;
H. One parking space shall be provided per guestroom in addition to any other parking requirements within the applicable zoning district; and
I. All of the requirements outlined in Illinois state statutes regarding a bed and breakfast shall be met.
Churches.
Convenience store.
Drive-in financial institutions.
Game rooms, as defined in and subject to the additional regulations imposed by the Bartlett game room licensing in title 3, chapter 4 of the Bartlett
municipal code.
Newspaper and magazine stands, freestanding.
Parking facilities, in excess of required accessory parking.
Planned unit developments.
Police or fire stations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 423/702
Post offices and postal distribution centers.
Public utilities.
Public works facilities.
Restaurants, carryout.
Restaurants, indoor, sit down, serving liquor, including carryouts.
Senior citizen housing.
Social or fraternal association meeting places.
Tavern or cocktail lounges, with or without entertainment.
Theaters, live or movie, indoor. (Ord. 82-73, 11-16-1982; amd. Res. 88-25, 4-5-1988; Ord. 93-11, 2-2-1993; Ord. 2012-41, 5-15-2012)
10-6A-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with permitted or special uses may be permitted in the B-
1 village center district, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted or special use, and do
not include structures or structural features inconsistent with the permitted or special use.
Accessory uses may include the following:
Central heating and air conditioning plants.
Garages, carports, or other parking spaces for the exclusive use of residents, occupants and customers on the premises.
Home occupations.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 12 of this title.
Tool houses, sheds, and other similar buildings for the storage of supplies and equipment.
Water retention or detention areas. (Ord. 82-73, 11-16-1982)
10-6A-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized under "permitted, special or accessory uses" are expressly prohibited.
The following, and uses similar to the following, illustrate prohibited uses: (Ord. 82-73, 11-16-1982)
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult mini-motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
Automobile racetracks.
Car washes.
Drive-in uses, except for financial institutions.
Hotels and motels.
Incinerators.
Junk yards. (Ord. 82-73, 11-16-82)
Monoash landfills, transfer stations, balefills, hazardous waste landfills, incinerators, garbage dumps, sanitary and solid waste landfills and uses accessory
to or related to said uses. (Ord. 88-67, 7-19-88)
Wholesale uses.
10-6A-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE PROVISIONS:
A. Minimum Lot Area: Excluding senior citizen housing authorized as a special use, three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area shall be provided and
maintained for each dwelling unit on or above the second floor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 424/702
B. Required Yards: Required yards shall be provided and maintained in the B-1 Village Center District as described below:
1. Required Front Yard: A required front yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided and maintained, unless fifty percent (50%) or more of the lots on any
given block face have previously been lawfully developed with buildings having setbacks less than twenty feet (20') (a block face being defined as
one side of a public street between two intersecting streets on that same side). In the case of the above-described previous development, the
average setback of existing buildings may then be considered the required front yard depth for that block face.
2. Required Side Yards: No interior side yard shall be required. On a corner side yard, a required side yard shall be provided and maintained of twenty
feet (20') or the average front yard setback along the same block face, whichever is lesser. Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line
in an adjacent residential district, a transitional yard shall be required along such side lot line. Such transitional yard shall be equal in dimension to
the required side yard for a residential use on the adjacent residential lot.
3. Required Rear Yard: A required rear yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided and maintained.
C. Building Height: The maximum height of any structure shall be forty-eight feet (48') or four (4) stories, whichever is lower. However, no part of a
structure within fifty feet (50') of a residential district line shall exceed twenty-five feet (25') or two (2) stories, whichever is lower.
D. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.6.
E. Minimum Size of Dwelling: Every structure occupied in whole or in part for residential purposes shall contain at least seven hundred fifty (750) square
feet of livable floor area per dwelling unit exclusive of basement or garage space.
F. Special Requirements: Uses in the B-1 Village Center District shall conform to the requirements set forth hereafter:
1. Parking and Loading Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for off-street parking and loading set forth in Chapter 11.
However, because uses in this District may be located on small parcels, compliance with the strict requirements for off-street parking and loading
may be impractical. In such cases, the owner may, at the discretion of the Village Board, contribute to the Bartlett Public Parking Fund an amount
equal to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) multiplied by the required number of parking spaces not provided. Such fund is established to provide
public off-street parking within close proximity to the B-1 Village Center District which meets the needs of adjacent uses and yet preserves the
traditional flavor of the area and encourages beautification efforts. The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a
permitted or special use listed in the B-1 Village Center District, shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one half (11/2) tons capacity. (Ord. 82-
73, 11-16-82)
2. Required Landscaping and Screening: All development in the Village Center District shall provide screening and landscaping in accordance with
provisions in Chapter 10-11A. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-91)
3. Sign Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for signs set forth in Chapter 12.
4. Business Use Requirements:
a. Office/service business uses and residential uses are not allowed on the same floor of the same building.
b. Business uses are not allowed above the second floor in buildings containing residential dwelling units.
c. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers.
d. All business, servicing, or processing except for off street parking, loading and the sale of gasoline and petroleum products by automobile service
stations shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
e. All activities involving the production, processing, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products shall conform to the performance
standards established for the I-1 industrial district.
G. Special Criteria For Site Plan Review: The following special criteria shall apply to the review of site plans within the village center district:
1. Any new development or redevelopment shall be consistent with the official Bartlett downtown plan.
2. New and remodeled buildings shall be of a scale and design which is compatible with the traditional character of the village center and which is
compatible with a pedestrian environment.
3. The use of property in the immediate vicinity of the railroad tracks shall enhance the focal points of vistas from Main Street northward and from Oak
Street southward.
4. Unity of development shall be strongly encouraged in the area between Oneida Avenue and Bartlett Avenue, from Western Avenue to Eastern
Avenue, emphasizing retail shopping and pedestrian systems at the ground level along Bartlett Avenue.
5. Low density office uses and senior citizen housing shall be encouraged on the south side of Railroad Avenue west of Oak Avenue in a well
landscaped environment.
6. The number of curb cuts and vehicular access points shall be minimized throughout the district.
7. Off street parking facilities shall be located and buffered by landscaping so as not to interrupt business continuity or adversely affect residential
areas. (Ord. 82-73, 11-16-1982)
ARTICLE B. B-2 LOCAL CONVENIENCE SHOPPING DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 425/702
10-6B-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-6B-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the B-2 local convenience shopping district are set forth in the sections which follow. Also applying to
the B-2 local convenience shopping district are regulations set forth in other chapters in this title as follows:
Chapter 1 - General zoning provisions
Chapter 2 - Rules and definitions
Chapter 9 - Planned unit developments
Chapter 10 - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses
Chapter 11 - Off street parking and loading
Chapter 11A - Landscaping, screening and tree preservation
Chapter 12 - Signs
Chapter 13 - Administration and enforcement
(Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
10-6B-3: PERMITTED USES:
Uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions specified. Unless otherwise specifically set forth,
wherever a permitted use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those itemized uses listed under the said category. No building
or zoning lot in the B-2 district shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the B-2 district, and no building or structure shall be erected,
altered, enlarged or occupied in the B-2 district except for a permitted use in the B-2 district unless otherwise specifically allowed by this title.
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of
chapter 10 of this title.
The following uses are permitted in the B-2 district:
A. Retail uses:
Bakeries, in which the baking of goods is limited to goods retailed on the premises only.
Bicycle stores.
Book and stationery stores.
Camera and photography supply stores.
Candy and confectionery stores.
China and glassware stores.
Coin and stamp stores.
Convenience stores.
Delicatessens.
Drugstores and pharmacies.
Florist shops and conservatories.
Food stores and grocery stores.
Gift shops.
Haberdasheries.
Hardware stores.
Hobby shops.
Ice cream stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 426/702
Indoor sales and service of lawnmowers and garden implements and supplies.
Jewelry stores.
Newspaper and magazine stores.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Variety stores.
Wearing apparel shops.
B. Personal services:
Barbershops.
Beauty parlors.
Key and lock shops.
Launderettes, self-service only.
Laundries and dry cleaners, but not a central plant serving other than the premises upon which it is located.
Shoe, clothing and hat repair stores.
Tailor and dressmaking shops, employing not more than five (5) persons on the premises.
Travel agencies.
C. Food service and leisure:
Restaurants, but not including dancing, the serving of alcoholic beverages, or drive-in restaurants.
D. Financial uses:
Currency exchanges.
E. Uses permitted in the B-1 district. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Res. 88-25, 4-5-1988; Ord. 89-99, 11-21-1989)
10-6B-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of this
title.
The following uses are special uses in the B-2 district:
Automobile service stations.
Banks, not including drive-in facilities.
Car washes.
Electric or telephone substations and other governmental and utility service uses.
Fix-it shops, for general, minor repair.
Funeral parlors and undertaking establishments.
Game rooms, as defined in and subject to the additional regulations imposed by the Bartlett game room licensing in title 3, chapter 4 of the Bartlett
municipal code.
Ice and milk machines.
Meat markets.
Newsstands, freestanding.
Package liquor sales.
Pet shops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 427/702
Planned unit developments.
Savings and loans, not including drive-in facilities.
Structures with building heights in excess of twenty five feet (25') used for a permitted or special use. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 82-73, 11-16-
1982; Ord. 91-21, 4-16-1991)
10-6B-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special use may be permitted,
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural
features inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any separate business, profession, trade or industry.
Accessory uses may include the following:
Garages, carports or other off street parking spaces. Truck parking shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when
located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 12 of this title.
Tool houses, sheds, and other similar buildings for the storage of supplies and equipment.
Water retention or detention areas. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-6B-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized under "permitted, special or accessory uses" are expressly prohibited.
The following, and uses similar to the following, illustrate prohibited uses: (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult mini-motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters.
Automobile racetracks, raceways, speedways.
Hotels and motels.
Incinerators.
Junkyards.
Monoash landfills, transfer stations, balefills, hazardous waste landfills, incinerators, garbage dumps, sanitary and solid waste landfills and uses accessory
to or related to said uses.
Restaurants, drive-in.
Taverns, cocktail lounges and package liquor stores.
Wholesale uses. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 88-67, 7-19-1988; Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-6B-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE PROVISIONS:
Uses in the B-2 local convenience shopping district shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Minimum Contiguous Area: The minimum contiguous area for any land zoned in accordance with the B-2 local convenience shopping district shall be
one acre.
B. Minimum Lot Area: A ground area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall be designated, provided and continuously
maintained for each principal structure, except as approved in a planned unit development.
C. Required Yards: Required yards shall be provided and maintained in the B-2 local convenience shopping district as described below:
1. Required Front Yard: A required front yard of forty feet (40') shall be provided and maintained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 428/702
2. Required Side Yards: Required side yards of fifteen feet (15') shall be provided and maintained.
On a corner side yard, a required side yard of forty feet (40') shall be provided and maintained.
3. Required Rear Yard: A required rear yard of twenty feet (20') shall be provided and maintained.
D. Building Height: The maximum height of all structures shall be twenty five feet (25'). However, taller structures may be permitted as special uses by the
village board.
E. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.4.
F. Special Requirements: Uses in the B-2 local convenience shopping district shall conform to the requirements set forth hereinafter:
1. Parking And Loading Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for off street parking and loading set forth in chapter 11 of
this title.
2. Sign Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for signs set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
3. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business listed in the B-2 district, shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line. (Ord.
78-40, 5-16-1978)
4. Refuse Areas: All refuse areas shall be screened in accordance with provisions in subsection 10-11A-4E1a of this title.
5. Required Landscaping And Screening: All development in the B-2 local convenience shopping district shall provide screening and landscaping in
accordance with provisions in chapter 11A of this title. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
6. Business Use Requirements:
a. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
b. All permitted or special uses shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except for off street parking and loading, or automobile
service stations, substations and utility services, ice and milk machines and newsstands when established as a special use.
c. Establishments of the "drive-in" type offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are not permitted, except in
the case of automobile service stations as a special use.
d. All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products shall conform with the
performance standards established for the I-1 industrial district, provided that performance standards shall in every case be applied at the
boundaries of the zoning lot in which such activities take place.
G. Site Plan Review: A site plan approved according to the regulations in chapter 13 of this title shall be required prior to the approval of a building permit
for any property in the B-2 district, or prior to the rezoning of property to a B-2 district. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
ARTICLE C. B-3 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
10-6C-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-6C-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the B-3 neighborhood shopping district are set forth in the sections which follow. Also applying to the
B-3 neighborhood shopping district are regulations set forth in other chapters in this title as follows:
Chapter 1 - General zoning provisions
Chapter 2 - Rules and definitions
Chapter 9 - Planned unit developments
Chapter 10 - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses
Chapter 11 - Off street parking and loading
Chapter 11A - Landscaping, screening and tree preservation
Chapter 12 - Signs
Chapter 13 - Administration and enforcement
(Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 429/702
10-6C-3: PERMITTED USES:
Uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions specified. Unless otherwise specifically set forth,
wherever a permitted use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those itemized uses listed under the said category. No building
or zoning lot in the B-3 district shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the B-3 district, and no building or structure shall be erected,
altered, enlarged or occupied in the B-3 district except for a permitted use in the B-3 district unless otherwise specifically allowed by this title.
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of
chapter 10 of this title.
The following uses are permitted in the B-3 district:
Uses permitted in the B-1 and B-2 districts.
Convenience store.
Garden supply and feed stores.
Meat markets.
Physical culture and health service, gymnasia and reducing salons, masseurs and public baths.
Postal distribution centers.
Supermarkets. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Res. 88-25, 4-5-1988)
10-6C-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of this
title.
The following uses are special uses in the B-3 district:
Animal hospitals, animal clinics and kennels.
Automobile and truck sales.
Automobile repair shops, including major repair.
Automobile service stations.
Automobile, truck and trailer rentals.
Banks and savings and loans, drive-in.
Banquet halls.
Car washes.
Electric or telephone substations and other governmental and utility service uses.
Film processing centers.
Fix-it shops, for general minor repair.
Funeral parlors and undertaking establishments.
Game rooms, as defined in and subject to the additional regulations imposed by the Bartlett game room licensing in title 3, chapter 4 of the Bartlett
municipal code.
Motorcycle sales.
Outdoor sales, storage and testing of lawn mowers and garden implements and sales of supplies within a screened or enclosed area.
Pet shops.
Planned unit developments.
Recreation and amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, skating rinks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses and
mechanical rides.
Restaurants and cocktail lounges with dancing and the serving of alcoholic beverages, including the outdoor service and consumption of food and
alcoholic beverages on the property.
Restaurants, drive-in or those serving alcoholic beverages.
Structures with building heights in excess of twenty five feet (25') used for a permitted or special use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 430/702
Taverns, cocktail lounges and package liquor stores.
Trailer and boat sales. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 82-73, 11-16-1982; Ord. 86-9, 2-18-1987; Ord. 89-99, 11-21-1989; Ord. 90-80, 9-4-1990)
10-6C-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, building or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special use may be permitted, provided
they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any separate business, profession, trade or industry.
Accessory uses may include the following:
Central heating and air conditioning plants.
Garages, carports or other off street parking spaces. Truck parking shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when
located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 12 of this title.
Tool houses, sheds, and other similar buildings for the storage of supplies and equipment.
Water retention or detention areas.
10-6C-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized under "Permitted, Special and Accessory Uses" are expressly prohibited.
The following, and uses similar to the following, illustrate prohibited uses: (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult mini motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
Automobile racetracks, raceways, speedways.
Hotels and motels.
Incinerators.
Junk yards. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Monoash landfills, transfer stations, balefills, hazardous waste landfills, incinerators, garbage dumps, sanitary and solid waste landfills and uses accessory
to or related to said uses. (Ord. 88-67, 7-19-1988)
Wholesale uses. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-6C-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE PROVISIONS:
Uses in the B-3 Neighborhood Shopping District shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Minimum Contiguous Area: The minimum contiguous area for any land zoned in accordance with the B-3 Neighborhood Shopping District shall be
seven (7) acres.
B. Minimum Lot Area: A ground area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall be designated, provided and continuously
maintained for each principal structure, except as approved in a planned unit development.
C. Required Yards: Required yards shall be provided and maintained in the B-3 Neighborhood Shopping District as described below:
1. Required Front Yard: A required front yard of fifty feet (50') shall be provided and maintained.
2. Required Side Yards: Required side yards of twenty feet (20') shall be provided and maintained.
On a corner side yard, a required side yard of fifty feet (50') shall be provided and maintained.
3. Required Rear Yard: A required rear yard of thirty feet (30') shall be provided and maintained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 431/702
D. Building Height: The maximum height of all structures shall be twenty five feet (25'). However, taller structures may be permitted as special uses by the
Village Board.
E. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.4. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
F. Special Requirements: Uses in the B-3 Neighborhood Shopping District shall conform to the requirements set forth hereinafter:
1. Parking And Loading Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for off-street parking and loading set forth in Chapter 11 of
this Title.
2. Sign Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for signs set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title.
3. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business listed in the B-3 District, shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line. (Ord.
78-40, 5-16-1978)
4. Refuse Areas: All refuse areas shall be screened in accordance with provisions in subsection 10-11A-4E1a of this Title.
5. Required Landscaping And Screening: All development in the B-3 Neighborhood Shopping District shall provide screening and landscaping in
accordance with provisions in Chapter 10-11A of this Title. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
6. Business Use Requirements:
a. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
b. All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products shall conform with the
performance standards established for the I-1 Industrial District, provided that performance standards shall in every case be applied at the
boundaries of the zoning lot in which such activities take place.
G. Site Plan Review: A site plan approved according to the regulations in Chapter 13 of this Title shall be required prior to the approval of a building permit
for any property in the B-3 District, or prior to the rezoning of property to a B-3 District. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
ARTICLE D. B-4 COMMUNITY SHOPPING DISTRICT
10-6D-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-6D-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the B-4 community shopping district are set forth in the sections which follow. Also applying to the B-4
community shopping district are regulations set forth in other chapters in this title as follows:
Chapter 1 - General zoning provisions
Chapter 2 - Rules and definitions
Chapter 9 - Planned unit developments
Chapter 10 - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses
Chapter 11 - Off street parking and loading
Chapter 11A - Landscaping, screening and tree preservation
Chapter 12 - Signs
Chapter 13 - Administration and enforcement
(Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
10-6D-3: PERMITTED USES:
Uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions specified. Unless otherwise specifically set forth,
wherever a permitted use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those itemized uses listed under the said category. No building
or zoning lot in the B-4 district shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the B-4 district, and no building or structure shall be erected,
altered, enlarged or occupied in the B-4 district except for a permitted use in the B-4 district unless otherwise specifically allowed by this title.
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of
chapter 10 of this title.
The following uses are permitted in the B-4 district:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 432/702
Uses permitted in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts.
Convenience stores.
Discount stores.
Theaters, indoor only. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Res. 88-25, 4-5-1988)
10-6D-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of this
title.
The following uses are special uses in the B-4 district:
Animal hospitals, animal clinics and kennels.
Auditoriums or conference centers.
Automobile and truck sales.
Automobile repair shops, including major repair.
Automobile service stations.
Automobile, truck and trailer rentals.
Banks and savings and loans, drive-in.
Boat sales.
Car washes.
Churches.
Electric or telephone substations and other governmental and utility service uses.
Film processing centers.
Fix-it shops, for general, minor repair.
Funeral parlors and undertaking establishments.
Game rooms, as defined in and subject to the additional regulations imposed by the Bartlett game room licensing in title 3, chapter 4 of the Bartlett
municipal code.
Hotels and motels.
Ice and milk machines.
Motorcycle sales.
Newspaper and magazine stands, freestanding. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Outdoor sales, storage and testing of lawnmowers and garden implements and sales of supplies within a screened or enclosed area. (Ord. 89-99, 11-21-
1989)
Parking facilities, in excess of required parking.
Pet shops.
Planned unit developments.
Police or fire stations.
Post offices.
Public utilities.
Public works facilities.
Recreation and amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, skating rinks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses and
mechanical rides.
Restaurants, drive-in.
Restaurants, indoor, sit-down serving liquor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 433/702
Senior citizen housing.
Social or fraternal association meeting places.
Structures with building heights in excess of twenty five feet (25') used for a permitted or special use.
Taverns or cocktail lounges.
Theaters, open air, automobile, drive-in.
Trailer sales. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-6D-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, building or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special use may be permitted, provided
they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any separate business, profession, trade or industry.
Accessory uses may include the following:
Central heating and air-conditioning plants.
Garages, carports or other off-street parking spaces. Truck parking shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when
located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line.
Signs, as regulated in Chapter 12 of this Title.
Tool houses, sheds, and other similar buildings for the storage of supplies and equipment.
Water retention or detention areas. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-6D-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized under "Permitted, Special or Accessory Uses" are expressly prohibited.
The following, and uses similar to the following, illustrate prohibited uses: (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult mini motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
Automobile racetracks, raceways, speedways.
Incinerators.
Junk yards. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Monoash landfills, transfer stations, balefills, hazardous waste landfills, incinerators, garbage dumps, sanitary and solid waste landfills and uses accessory
to or related to said uses. (Ord. 88-67, 7-19-1988)
Wholesale uses. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-6D-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE PROVISIONS:
Uses in the B-4 Community Shopping District shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Minimum Contiguous Area: The minimum contiguous area for any land zoned in accordance with the B-4 Neighborhood Shopping District shall be ten
(10) acres.
B. Minimum Lot Area: A ground area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall be designated, provided and continuously
maintained for each principal structure, except as approved in a planned unit development.
C. Required Yards: Required yards shall be provided and maintained in the B-4 Community Shopping District as described below:
1. Required Front Yard: A required front yard of sixty feet (60') shall be provided and maintained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 434/702
2. Required Side Yards: Required side yards of thirty feet (30') shall be provided and maintained.
On a corner side yard, a required side yard of sixty feet (60') shall be provided and maintained.
3. Required Rear Yard: A required rear yard of forty feet (40') shall be provided and maintained.
D. Building Height: The maximum height of all structures shall be twenty five feet (25'). However, taller structures may be permitted as special uses by the
Village Board.
E. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.5.
F. Special Requirements: Uses in the B-4 Community Shopping District shall conform to the requirements set forth hereinafter:
1. Parking And Loading Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for off-street parking and loading set forth in Chapter 11 of
this Title.
2. Sign Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for signs set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title.
3. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted business listed in the B-3 District, shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line. (Ord.
78-40, 5-16-1978)
4. Refuse Areas: All refuse areas shall be screened in accordance with provisions in subsection 10-11A-4E1a of this Title.
5. Required Landscaping And Screening: All development in the B-4 Community Shopping District shall provide screening and landscaping in
accordance with provisions in Chapter 10-11A of this Title. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
6. Business Use Requirements:
a. All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
b. All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or products shall conform with the
performance standards established for the I-1 Industrial District, provided that performance standards shall in every case be applied at the
boundaries of the zoning lot in which such activities take place.
G. Site Plan Review: A site plan approved according to the regulations in Chapter 13 of this Title shall be required prior to the approval of a building permit
for any property in the B-4 District, or prior to the rezoning of property to a B-4 District. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Chapter 7
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
10-7-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
ARTICLE A. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
10-7A-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-7A-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the I-1 light industrial district are set forth in the sections which follow. Also applying to the I-1 district
are regulations set forth in other chapters in this title as follows:
Chapter 1 - General zoning provisions
Chapter 2 - Rules and definitions
Chapter 9 - Planned unit developments
Chapter 10 - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses
Chapter 11 - Off street parking and loading
Chapter 11A - Landscaping, screening and tree preservation
Chapter 12 - Signs
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 435/702
Chapter 13 - Administration and enforcement
(Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
10-7A-3: PERMITTED USES:
Uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions specified. Unless otherwise specifically set forth,
wherever a permitted use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those itemized uses listed under the said category. No building
or zoning lot in the I-1 District shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the I-1 District, and no building or structure shall be erected,
altered, enlarged or occupied in the I-1 District except for a permitted use in the I-1 District unless otherwise specifically allowed by this Title.
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Title and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of
Chapter 10 of this Title.
The following uses are permitted in the I-1 District: (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Adult bookstores1.
Adult cabarets2.
Adult entertainment establishments3.
Adult mini motion picture theaters4.
Adult motion picture theaters5. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
Animal clinics and hospitals.
Assembly firms, without fabrication of parts.
Automobile sales and rental.
Automotive services, including painting and undercoating, repair shops, service stations, storage facilities, and tire retreading and repair shops.
Bakeries.
Beverage distributors.
Bottled gas dealers.
Bottling works.
Building material supplies, sales and service, including lumber yards.
Cartage and express facilities with trucks not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
Contractors' offices, shops, yards and showrooms, including cement, building, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, electrical, masonry, painting, plumbing,
roofing, glazing and ornamental and structural steel and iron.
Dairy products manufacturing.
Driving schools, automobile.
Equipment rental and leasing services.
Frozen food stores, including locker rental.
Furniture cleaning, refinishing, repair and upholstering.
Garage display and sales.
Highway maintenance shops and yards.
Landscape maintenance firms and contractors.
Laundries, industrial.
Laundry and dry-cleaning plants, servicing more than one retail outlet.
Lawnmower sales and service.
Linen, towel, diaper and other similar supply services.
Machine shops.
Medical and dental laboratories and research facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 436/702
Motor vehicle sales and service, including that of automobiles, campers and recreational vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles, trailers, trucks and mobile
homes.
Newspaper distribution agencies.
Nurseries and greenhouses.
Off street parking and loading as a principal use, subject to all the regulations governing a principal use in the district, and subject to all the applicable
requirements of chapter 11 of this title.
Packaging and crating plants.
Parcel delivery services.
Personnel training centers.
Pharmaceutical industries.
Post office substations.
Printing, photostating, blueprinting, publishing, photography or lithography establishments.
Sewer and septic tank cleaning and rodding services.
Sign contractors.
Studios and stations for radio or television.
Swimming pool sales and service.
Taxidermists.
Tennis, racquetball or handball courts and clubs.
Tombstone and monument sales and production.
Towing services.
Trade and vocational schools.
Tree removal services.
Warehouses and storage facilities.
Water softener services.
Welding shops.
Wholesale establishments.
Window cleaning firms. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-7A-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of this
title.
The following uses are special uses in the I-1 district: (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Airports and heliports, commercial or private, including aircraft landing fields, runways, flight strips and flying schools, together with hangars, terminal
buildings and other auxiliary facilities.
Cannabis cultivation centers as defined herein and in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois.
Car washes and motor vehicle laundries.
Chemical processing and production.
Electroplating establishments.
Garages, public.
Medical cannabis dispensing centers as defined herein and in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois.
One permanent dwelling unit, not exceeding seven hundred fifty (750) square feet per zoning lot, justified by a need for on site security and occupied by an
employee of the business located on the property whose responsibility includes security. Under no circumstances shall more than two (2) people, or any
person under the age of eighteen (18) be permitted to reside in such a residence.
Paper products manufacturing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 437/702
Penal and correctional institutions.
Planned unit developments.
Plastics manufacturing.
Racetracks.
Radio, television and microwave towers.
Recreation centers, such as polo fields, fishing ponds, hunt and gun clubs in accordance with National Rifle Association regulations, conservation clubs,
archery ranges, picnic and camping grounds, par 3 golf courses, golf driving ranges and miniature golf courses.
Sewage treatment plants.
Stadia, auditoriums, arenas and armories.
Structures with building heights in excess of forty five feet (45') used for a permitted or special use.
Theaters, automobile drive-in only.
Truck/trailer rental facilities.
Utility installations, including electric and telephone substations.
Water filtration plant, water pumping stations and reservoirs.
Woodworking and wood products production. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 86-59, 11-4-1986; Ord. 88-67, 7-19-1988; Ord. 91-67, 9-17-1991; Ord.
2013-81, 11-5-2013; Ord. 2015-72, 9-15-2015)
10-7A-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, building or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special use may be permitted, provided
they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural features
inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any separate business, profession, trade or industry.
Accessory uses may include the following:
Garages, carports or other off street parking spaces. Truck parking shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when
located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line.
Offices, incidental to a permitted or special use.
Outlet stores, retail, accessory to a manufacturing or wholesale establishment.
Railroad spur tracks.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 12 of this title.
Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings for the storage of supplies and equipment.
Water retention and detention areas.
Water systems, individual. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-7A-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized under "permitted, special or accessory uses" are expressly prohibited.
The following, and uses similar to the following, illustrate prohibited uses:
Air, motor and railroad freight terminals.
Asphalt plants.
Automotive salvage yards.
Concrete batching plants.
Creosote treatment or manufacturing.
Fertilizer manufacturing.
Incinerators.
Junkyards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 438/702
Landfills, dumps.
Manufacturing and industrial activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by deterioration.
Mining and/or the extraction of minerals, sand, gravel, topsoil or other aggregates, including equipment, buildings or structures for screening, crushing,
mixing, washing or storage.
Monoash landfills, transfer stations, balefills, hazardous waste landfills, incinerators, garbage dumps, sanitary and solid waste landfills, and uses
accessory to or related to said uses.
Ore reduction.
Paint factories.
Petroleum processing or refining.
Railroad switching and holiday yards.
Residential uses.
Rubber manufacturing or treatment.
Salvage material yards.
Soap manufacturing.
Stockyards or slaughterhouses.
Storage of uncontained bulk materials outdoors.
Tanning operations, including storage of rawhides or skins.
Truck terminals. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 88-67, 7-19-1988)
10-7A-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE PROVISIONS:
Uses in the I-1 light industrial district shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Minimum Contiguous Area: The minimum contiguous area for any land zoned in accordance with the I-1 district shall be ten (10) acres.
B. Minimum Lot Area: A ground area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for
each permitted or special use.
C. Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100') shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-
1978)
D. Required Yards: Required yards shall be provided and maintained in the I-1 light industrial district as described below. Special uses may require yards
greater in depth than described when specified by the village board.
1. Required Front Yard: A required front yard shall be provided and maintained with a depth of thirty five feet (35').
2. Required Side Yards: Required side yards of thirty five feet (35') shall be provided and maintained.
On a corner side yard, a required side yard shall be provided and maintained with a depth of thirty five feet (35').
Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent office/research, commercial or residence district, a required side yard shall
be provided along such side lot line not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
3. Required Rear Yard: A required rear yard of thirty feet (30') shall be provided and maintained.
Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent office/research, commercial or residence district, a yard shall be required along such
rear lot line of not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent office/research, commercial or residence district, a yard shall be required along such
rear lot line of not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
E. Maximum Building Height: No structure or portion thereof, excluding mechanical penthouse structure, shall exceed a height of forty five feet (45').
However, taller structures may be permitted as special uses by the village board. (Ord. 2015-72, 9-15-2015)
F. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio for structures in this district shall be 0.5.
G. Special Requirements: Uses in the I-1 light industrial district shall conform to the requirements set forth hereinafter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 439/702
1. Parking And Loading Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for off street parking and loading set forth in chapter 11 of
this title.
Further, parking or loading spaces shall not be located nearer than twenty feet (20') from a front or corner side lot line, ten feet (10') from an interior
side lot line or fifteen feet (15') from a rear lot line.
2. Signs: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for signs set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
3. Sewer And Water: All uses requiring a potable water supply or sanitary sewer facilities shall be served by either or both of the village water and
sewer systems.
4. Refuse Areas: All refuse areas shall be screened in accordance with provisions in subsection 10-11A-4E1a of this title.
5. Required Screening And Landscaped Open Space: The minimum area on each lot to be devoted to green open space and landscaping shall be not
less than twenty percent (20%) of the gross area of the lot. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
All industrial developments shall provide screening and landscaping in accordance with provisions in chapter 11, article A of this title. (Ord. 91-26, 4-
16-1991)
6. Industrial Use Requirements:
a. Enclosure Of Uses: All manufacturing and industrial activities including fabrication, processing, assembly, disassembly, repairing, cleaning,
servicing, testing and packaging of products and goods shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
All outdoor storage facilities shall be screened in accordance with the provisions in subsection 10-11A-4D2 of this title. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
b. Underground Utility Systems: All utility lines, including electric power and telephone lines, shall be located underground.
c. Lighting: All exterior lighting, building and parking lot lights and landscape lighting shall be directed away from adjacent highways, streets and
properties. A lighting plan shall be prepared and be reviewed and approved by the village engineer prior to the issuance of building permits.
d. Ingress And Egress: All streets which provide access to and from the I-1 district shall intersect a major thoroughfare as defined and designated in
the Bartlett land use plan or intersect a street within an industrial district.
e. Surfacing: All outdoor sales and storage space shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained
as to dispose of all surface water.
H. Site Plan Review: A site plan approved according to the regulations in chapter 13 of this title shall be required prior to the approval of a building permit
for any property in the I-1 district, or prior to the rezoning of property to an I-1 district. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-7A-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All permitted and all special uses in the I-1 light industrial district shall comply with the performance standards set forth hereinafter:
A. Noise Emissions: No permitted use or special use or other use shall cause or allow the emission of sound beyond the boundaries of its property, as
property is defined in section 25 of the Illinois environmental protection act, so as to cause noise pollution, or so as to violate any provision of the
Bartlett municipal code (which adopts the standards in 35 Illinois administrative code, subtitle H, parts 900, 901 and 951). (Ord. 2001-128, 10-2-2001)
Sound levels from any permitted or special use or uses in the I-1 light industrial district shall not exceed the maximum sound levels allowed under
adopted sections 901.101, 901.102, 901.103, 901.104, 901.105 and 901.106 in section 4-3-4 of the Bartlett municipal code. (Ord. 2001-129, 10-2-
2001)
B. Visible And Particulate Matter Emissions: The emission of visible and particulate matter in such manner or concentration as to endanger or to be
detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is a public nuisance and shall not be permitted. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by
the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like within lot boundaries, shall be kept at a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
paving, application of dust suppressant, fencing or other acceptable means.
Visible emissions from fuel combustion and other emission sources shall conform with 35 Illinois administrative code 212, subpart B, visible emissions,
sections 212.122 and 212.123.
The measurements of visible emissions shall be performed according to EPA method 9, in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A "Visual Determination of
Opacity of Emissions from Stationary Sources". Method 22 shall be used to determine the presence or absence of visible emissions from emission
units.
Combustion sources greater than two hundred fifty millimeters (250 mm) BTU/hour are restricted to not greater than twenty percent (20%) opacity. All
other emission units are restricted to not greater than thirty percent (30%) opacity. Visible emissions may exceed these limits for short periods of time
under specific conditions, as allowed under 35 Illinois administrative code 212, subpart B.
Particulate matter emissions from various sources shall comply with 35 Illinois administrative code 212 for the following source categories:
Subpart D Incinerators
Subpart E Fuel combustion units
Subpart K Fugitive particulate matter
Subpart L Process units
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 440/702
Subpart N Food manufacturing
Subpart O Petroleum refining, petrochemical and chemical manufacturing
Subpart Q Stone, clay, glass and concrete manufacturing
Subpart R Primary and fabricated metals products and machinery manufacturing
Subpart S Agriculture
Subpart T Construction and wood products
C. Use, Storage And Management Of Hazardous Substances And Petroleum Products: The use, storage and management of hazardous substances and
petroleum products shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal environmental statutes, codes and regulations and
shall meet the performance standards specified herein.
1. No use shall, for any period time, discharge across the boundaries of the lot, or to environmental pathways (ground water, air, soil, surface water)
wherein it is located in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or pose risk to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury,
diminution, damage, or risk to the environment, natural resources, property, or business.
2. The use, storage and management of such substances shall be conducted at all times with engineering controls that provide primary and secondary
containment systems designed to preclude accidental release of such substances to ground water, air, soil and surface water pathways, to the extent
necessary to protect human health and the environment.
D. Odors: The emission of odorous matter in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along a lot line or as to produce a public nuisance or
hazard beyond a lot line is prohibited.
E. Fire And Explosion Hazard:
1. The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning (as determined for liquids by a
closed cup flash point of less than 187 degrees Fahrenheit, but not less than 105 degrees Fahrenheit), is permitted, providing the following
conditions are met:
a. Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having exterior walls of fire
resistive construction, in accordance with the building code of the village.
b. Unless otherwise provided herein, all such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty feet (40') from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such
buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with the installation standards prescribed by the
national fire protection association, or if the materials, goods or products are liquids, the protection thereof shall be in conformity with standards
prescribed by the national fire protection association.
2. The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning (as determined for liquids by a
closed cup flash point of not less than 187 degrees Fahrenheit) is permitted.
3. The utilization in manufacturing processes of materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases (as determined for liquids by a closed
cup flash point of less than 105 degrees Fahrenheit) shall be permitted in this district, provided that:
a. The final manufactured product does not itself have a closed cup flash point of less than one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F).
b. The use and storage of such materials shall be in conformity with standards prescribed by the national fire protection association and with
requirements of other ordinances of the village.
c. The storage of said materials shall be prohibited aboveground.
4. Detonable materials shall not be stored within two hundred feet (200') of a lot line.
F. Glare Or Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to
create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
G. Vibration: No industrial operation or activity shall cause at any time ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibration (the
periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth) shall be measured at any point along a lot in with a three (3) component measuring instrument
and shall be expressed in inches as follows:
Frequency
(Cycles Per Second)
Maximum Permitted Displacement
Along Lot Lines (In Inches)
0 to 10 0.0008
10 to 20 0.0005
20 to 30 0.0002
30 to 40 0.0002
40 and above 0.0001
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 441/702
H. Radiation Hazards; Release Outside Property Lines: The use and release of radioactive materials or emission of ionizing radiation shall be in
accordance with the permitting requirements, rules and regulations of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2001-128, 10-2-2001)
ARTICLE B. I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
ARTICLE C. I-2 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT
10-7C-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-7C-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the I-2 economic development area overlay district are set forth in the sections which follow. Also
applying to the I-2 EDA overlay district are regulations set forth in other chapters in this title, title 11, and in the Bartlett municipal code as follows:
Chapter 1 - General zoning provisions
Chapter 2 - Rules and definitions
Chapter 5 - Office/research district
Chapter 6 - Commercial districts
Chapter 7 - Industrial districts
Chapter 9 - Planned unit developments
Chapter 10 - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses
Chapter 11 - Off street parking and loading
Chapter 11A - Landscaping, screening and tree preservation
Chapter 12 - Signs
Chapter 13 - Administration and enforcement
Section 4-3-4 - Excessive noise (Bartlett municipal code)
Title 11 - Bartlett subdivision code
(Ord. 2001-27, 10-2-2001)
10-7C-3: PERMITTED USES:
Uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions specified. Unless otherwise specifically set forth,
wherever a permitted use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those itemized uses listed under the said category. No building
or zoning lot in the I-2 EDA overlay district shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the I-2 EDA overlay district, and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered, enlarged or occupied in the I-2 EDA overlay district except for a permitted use in the I-2 EDA overlay district unless
otherwise specifically allowed by this title.
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of
chapter 10 of this title.
A. The following uses are permitted in the I-2 EDA overlay district:
1. Any use permitted in the I-1 light industrial district, provided such permitted uses comply with the performance standards set forth hereinafter in
section 10-7C-8 of this article, and further provided such use is not listed as a prohibited use in section 10-7C-6 of this article, or a special use listed
in section 10-7C-4 of this article.
2. Any manufacturing, fabricating, processing, parking and storage uses provided such uses conform with the performance standards set forth
hereinafter in section 10-7C-8 of this article, and further provided such use is not listed as prohibited uses in section 10-7C-6 of this article, or a
special use in section 10-7C-4 of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 442/702
3. Any use, or combination of uses, permitted in the office/research district, provided that such use, or combination of uses, is not listed as a prohibited
use in section 10-7C-6 of this article, or a special use in section 10-7C-4 of this article, and further provided the number of off street parking spaces
required for the particular office and/or research use or uses shall be calculated in accordance with the applicable provisions for office uses set forth
in section 10-11-1-6 of this title.
4. Any use or combination of uses permitted in the B-4 community shopping district, provided that such use is not listed as a prohibited use in section
10-7C-6 of this article, or a special use in section 10-7C-4 of this article, and further provided that the number of off street parking spaces required for
the particular commercial use, or combination of commercial uses shall be calculated in accordance with the applicable provisions for similar
commercial uses set forth in section 10-11-1-6 of this title.
5. On tracts of land in excess of two hundred (200) contiguous acres lying in more than one county, and/or on tracts of land adjacent to said two
hundred (200) contiguous acre tracts of land (including parcels separated by a road) which are not less than forty (40) acres in size which were
previously or are presently being mined in whole or in part, which tract(s) are rezoned from I-2 general industry district and/or O-R office/research
district to the I-2 EDA overlay district ("Contiguous I-2/O-R Land") for that portion of said property located in DuPage County, any of the following
additional industrial and/or office/research use(s), or combination of additional industrial and/or office/research uses listed below, shall be additional
permitted uses, provided such uses comply with the performance standards hereinafter set forth in section 10-7C-8 of this article, as amended:
Additional Permitted Uses (DuPage)
Asphalt plants, existing and legally operating prior to the effective date of this article.
Biotech.
Boiler and tank manufacturing.
Boot and shoe manufacturing.
Computer manufacturing.
Concrete batch plants (existing and legally operating prior to the effective date of this article, but which shall be permitted to remain only until the
sooner of 2022, or when the tax increment financing for the Bartlett quarry redevelopment project area terminates).
Corporate headquarters.
Distribution facilities.
Electronic and scientific precision instruments manufacturing.
Furniture, bedding and carpet manufacturing.
Glass products, production and sales.
Heliports.
Ice rinks.
Incubator space.
Internet access center.
Mail order houses.
Packaging and crating plants (inside storage of material only).
Pottery and ceramics manufacturing.
Retail sales in a showroom of materials and equipment incidental to the manufacturing or warehouse use.
Sheet metal shops.
Studios and stations for radio and television and ancillary towers under thirty five feet (35') in height.
Warehouses, distribution or storage facilities.
Water filtration plant, water pumping stations and reservoirs.
Wearing apparel manufacturing.
Wholesale establishments.
B. On contiguous I-2/O-R land, for that portion of said property located in Cook County, any of the following additional industrial and/or office/research
use(s), or combination of additional industrial and/or office/research uses shall be additional permitted uses, provided each such uses comply with the
performance standards hereinafter set forth in section 10-7C-8 of this article, as amended:
Additional Permitted Uses (Cook County)
Biotech.
Boiler and tank manufacturing.
Boot and shoe manufacturing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 443/702
Computer manufacturing.
Corporate headquarters.
Distribution facilities.
Electronic and scientific precision instruments manufacturing.
Furniture, bedding and carpet manufacturing.
Glass products, production and sales.
Heliports.
Ice rinks.
Incubator space.
Internet access center.
Mail order houses.
Packaging and crating plants (inside storage of material only).
Plastics manufacturing.
Pottery and ceramics manufacturing.
Retail sales in a showroom of materials and equipment incidental to the manufacturing or warehouse use.
Sheet metal shops.
Studios and stations for radio and television and ancillary towers under thirty five feet (35') in height.
Warehouses, distribution or storage facilities.
Water filtration plant, water pumping stations and reservoirs.
Wearing apparel manufacturing.
Wholesale establishments. (Ord. 2001-127, 10-2-2001)
10-7C-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed, subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of this
title:
The following uses are special uses in the I-2 EDA overlay district:
Automotive services, including painting and undercoating, repair shops, service stations, storage facilities and retreading and repair shops (Cook County
property only).
Cannabis cultivation centers as defined herein and in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois.
Car washes and motor vehicle laundries.
Electroplating establishments.
Garages, public.
Medical cannabis dispensing centers as defined herein and in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois.
Pharmaceutical and medicine manufacturing.
Planned unit developments.
Plastics manufacturing.
Radio, television, cellular and microwave towers and/or dishes.
Recreation centers.
Restaurants, drive-in.
Restaurants, serving alcohol.
Sewage treatment plants.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 444/702
Stadia, auditoriums, arenas and armories.
Storage of uncontained bulk materials outdoors.
Structures with heights in excess of forty five feet (45'), excluding mechanical systems servicing a building.
Taverns, bars, cocktail lounges.
Theaters, open air automobile drive-in.
Truck terminals, provided they comply with the performance standards hereinafter set forth in section 10-7C-8 of this article, as amended, and a traffic
report acceptable to the corporate authorities is furnished.
Uses accessory to a permitted use that occupy in the aggregate less than fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor area square footage of a building for the
following vehicular services: a) the service and/or repair of add on equipment and bodies, not a component of the original chassis of vehicles, and b) spray
booths for the painting and coating of new vehicles and equipment mounted on vehicles (DuPage County property only). All painting and coating
operations shall conform to the Bartlett building code, all applicable environmental regulations and to the I-2 economic development area overlay district
performance standards.
Utility installations, but limited to, electric substations, natural gas distribution network and/or substations, fiber optic distribution network and/or
substations, and telephone substations.
Those uses listed as special uses in the O-R office/research district as set forth in section 10-5A-4 of this title, unless said uses are listed as permitted
uses in section 10-7C-3 of this article, and except for those prohibited uses as set forth in section 10-7C-6 of this article.
Those uses listed as special uses in the B-4 community shopping district as set forth in section 10-6D-4 of this title, unless said uses are listed as
permitted uses in section 10-7C-3 of this article, and except for those prohibited uses set forth in section 10-7C-6 of this article. (Ord. 2001-127, 10-2-
2001; amd. Ord. 2008-9, 2-5-2008; Ord. 2013-81, 11-5-2013; Ord. 2015-72, 9-15-2015)
10-7C-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special use may be permitted,
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural
features inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any separate business, professional, trade or industry.
Accessory uses may include the following:
Garages, carports or other off street parking spaces. Truck parking shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when
located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district boundary line.
Offices, incidental to a permitted or special use.
On site backup generators.
Outlet stores, retail accessory to a manufacturing or wholesale establishment.
Railroad spur tracks.
Signs as regulated in chapter 12 of this title.
Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings for the storage of supplies and equipment.
Water retention and detention areas.
Water systems, individual. (Ord. 2001-127, 10-2-2001)
10-7C-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized under "permitted, special or accessory uses" are expressly prohibited.
A. The following, and uses similar to the following, are prohibited uses:
Uses already prohibited in the I-2 general industrial district as follows:
Automotive salvage yards.
Creosote treatment or manufacturing.
Fertilizer manufacturing.
Incinerators.
Junkyards.
Landfills, dumps.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 445/702
Monoash landfills, transfer stations, balefills, hazardous waste landfills, incinerators, garbage dumps, sanitary and solid waste landfills, and uses
accessory to or related to said uses.
Ore reduction.
Paint factories.
Petroleum processing or refining.
Residential uses.
Rubber manufacturing or treatment.
Salvage material yards.
Soap manufacturing.
Stockyards or slaughterhouses.
Tanning operations, including storage of rawhides or skins.
B. The following uses shall also be prohibited on any "Contiguous I-2/O-R Land" which is located in DuPage County:
Additional Prohibited Uses (DuPage County)
Air and railroad freight terminals.
Airports, commercial or private, including aircraft landing fields, runways, flight strips and flying schools, together with hangars, terminal buildings and
other auxiliary facilities.
Asphalt plants (except plants existing prior to the effective date of this article).
Automotive services, including painting and undercoating, repair shops, service stations, storage facilities, and tire retreading and repair shops.
Chemical processing and production.
Combination simple cycle and combined cycle electric generating facilities, except for such use approved pursuant to ordinance 2000-96 for lot 4 in the
Brewster Creek business park (unit 1) subdivision.
Combined cycle electric generating facilities, except for such use approved pursuant to ordinance 2000-96 for lot 4 in the Brewster Creek business
park (unit 1) subdivision.
Concrete batch plants (except any plant existing prior to the effective date of this article which shall be permitted to remain until the sooner of the
termination of tax increment financing for the Bartlett quarry redevelopment project area, or the year 2021).
Manufacturing and industrial activities involving storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by deterioration.
Mining and/or extraction of minerals, sand, gravel, topsoil or other aggregates, including equipment, buildings or structures for screening, crushing,
mixing, washing or storage.
Paper products manufacturing.
Penal and correctional institutions.
Pollution control facilities.
Racetracks.
Railroad switching yards.
Sewer and septic tank cleaning and rodding services.
Simple cycle electric generating facilities, except for such use approved pursuant to ordinance 2000-96 for lot 4 on the Brewster Creek business park
(unit 1) subdivision, and except for on site back up generators.
Towing services.
Tree removal services.
Any prohibited use identified in sections 10-7A-6 and/or 10-7B-6 of this chapter.
C. The following uses shall also be prohibited on any contiguous I-2/O-R land which is located in Cook County:
Additional Prohibited Uses (Cook County)
Air and railroad freight terminals.
Airports, commercial or private, including aircraft landing fields, runways, flight strips and flying schools, together with hangars, terminal buildings and
other auxiliary facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 446/702
Asphalt plants.
Chemical processing and production.
Combination simple cycle and combined cycle electric generating facilities.
Combined cycle electric generating facilities.
Concrete batch plants (except any existing prior to the effective date of this article, which shall be permitted to remain until the sooner of the termination
of the tax increment financing for the Bartlett quarry redevelopment project area, or the year 2021).
Mining and/or extracting of minerals, sand, gravel, topsoil or other aggregates, including equipment, buildings or structures for screening, crushing,
mixing, washing or storage.
Paper products manufacturing.
Penal and correctional institutions.
Pollution control facilities.
Racetracks.
Railroad switching yards.
Simple cycle electric generating facilities.
Towing services.
Tree removal services. (Ord. 2001-127, 10-2-2001)
10-7C-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE PROVISIONS:
The following site and structure provisions shall apply to all property zoned I-2 EDA overlay district:
A. Minimum Lot Area: A ground area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for
each permitted or special use.
B. Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use. (Ord. 2001-
127, 10-2-2001)
C. Required Yards: Required yards shall be provided and maintained as described below:
1. Required Front Yard: A required front yard shall be provided and maintained with a depth of forty feet (40').
A corner side yard shall be provided and maintained with a depth of forty feet (40').
2. Required Side Yard: Required side yards of twenty feet (20') shall be provided and maintained. However, where a side lot line coincides with a side
or rear lot line in a residentially zoned district, a required side yard setback of sixty feet (60') shall be provided along the side lot line.
3. Required Rear Yard: A required rear yard of thirty feet (30') shall be provided and maintained. However, where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot
line of an adjacent residentially zoned district, a required rear lot setback of sixty feet (60') shall be provided along the rear lot line.
Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line of an adjacent residentially zoned district, a rear lot setback of fifty feet (50') shall be provided along
the rear lot line.
D. Maximum Building Height: No structure or portion thereof, excluding mechanical penthouse structures, shall exceed a height of forty five feet (45').
However, taller structures may be permitted as special uses by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 2015-72, 9-15-2015)
E. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio for structures shall be 0.5.
F. Special Requirements:
1. Parking Requirements: Parking requirements shall conform to the applicable requirements for off street parking as set forth in chapter 11 of this title,
except that the number of parking spaces required for any of the following uses shall be as hereinafter set forth:
Manufacturing uses, or any establishments engaged in production, processing, assembly, packaging, baking, cleaning, service, testing or repair of
materials, goods or products; public utility uses; warehouses and storage buildings; and wholesale establishments:
One space per one thousand (1/1,000) square feet of gross floor area of a building devoted to such uses, and one space per two hundred seventy
five (1/275) square feet of floor area devoted to office uses.
Further, parking spaces shall not be located nearer than twenty feet (20') from a front or corner side lot line, ten feet (10') from an interior side lot line
or fifteen feet (15') from a rear lot line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 447/702
2. Loading Requirements: Loading requirements shall conform to the applicable off street loading requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title.
However, if a loading area is located in a front or corner side yard, the loading area shall be fully enclosed and recessed an additional fifteen feet
(15') from the front building elevation. If a loading area is located in a rear yard, exterior loading areas may be permitted with proper screening and
landscaping approved by the village zoning administrator.
3. Signs: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for signs set forth in chapter 12 of this title.
4. Sewer And Water: All uses requiring a potable water supply or sanitary sewer facilities shall be served by either or both of the village water and
sewer systems.
5. Refuse Areas: All refuse areas shall be screened in accordance with provisions in subsection 10-11A-4E1a of this title.
6. Required Screening And Landscaping: All industrial developments shall provide screening and landscaping in accordance with the provisions in
chapter 11, article A of this title, except that the minimum interior parkway requirement shall be reduced to twenty feet (20').
7. Industrial Use Requirements:
a. Enclosure Of Uses: All businesses, servicing, processing or industrial operations shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
b. Outdoor Storage Facilities: All outdoor storage facilities shall be screened in accordance with the provisions in subsection 10-11A-4D2 of this title.
8. Underground Utility Systems: All utility lines, including electric power and telephone lines, shall be located underground.
9. Lighting: All exterior lighting, building and parking lot lights and landscape lighting shall not exceed one foot-candle at the property line of any
industrial, commercial or office zoned lot or two-tenths (0.2) foot-candle at the property line of any residential zoned lot. On site parking lot light
standards shall be limited to thirty feet (30') in height. For O-R uses and B-4 uses, parking lot light standards shall be limited to twenty five feet (25')
in height.
10. Ingress And Egress: All streets which provide access to and from any industrial use shall intersect a major thoroughfare as defined and designated
in the Bartlett land use plan or shall intersect a street within an industrial district.
11. Surfacing: All outdoor sales and storage space shall be provided with a permanent paved surface and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of
all surface water.
G. Site Plan Review: A site plan approved according to the regulations in chapter 13 of this title shall be required prior to the approval of a building permit
for any industrial, office/research or commercial permitted or special uses, and/or combination of any such uses.
H. Additional Authority: With respect to property lying in the Bartlett quarry redevelopment area which was previously zoned O-R office/research district,
upon which any industrial use building is proposed to be built, the corporate authorities of the village shall have the additional authority to approve of
the architecture, building elevations and outside building materials used for any improvements thereon. (Ord. 2001-127, 10-2-2001)
10-7C-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All permitted and/or special uses in the I-2 EDA overlay district shall comply with the performance standards set forth hereinafter:
A. Noise Emissions: No use or special use shall cause or allow the emission of sound beyond the boundaries of its property, as property is defined in
section 25 of the Illinois environmental protection act, so as to cause noise pollution, or so as to violate any provision of the Bartlett municipal code
(which adopts the standards in 35 Illinois administrative code, subtitle H, parts 900, 901 and 951).
Sound levels from any permitted or special use or uses in the district shall not exceed the maximum sound levels allowed under adopted sections
901.101, 901.102, 901.103, 901.104, 901.105 and 901.106 in section 4-3-4 of the Bartlett municipal code.
B. Visible And Particulate Matter Emissions: The emission of visible and particulate matter in such manner or concentration as to endanger or to be
detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is a public nuisance and shall not be permitted. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by
the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like within lot boundaries, shall be kept at a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
paving, application of dust suppressant, fencing or other acceptable means.
Visible emissions from fuel combustion and other emission sources shall conform with 35 Illinois administrative code 212, subpart B, visible emissions,
sections 212.122 and 212.123.
The measurements of visible emissions shall be performed according to EPA method 9, in 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, "Visual Determination of
Opacity of Emissions from Stationary Sources". Method 22 shall be used to determine the presence or absence of visible emissions from emission
units.
Combustion sources greater than two hundred fifty millimeters (250 mm) BTU/hour are restricted to not greater than twenty percent (20%) opacity. All
other emission units are restricted to not greater than thirty percent (30%) opacity. Visible emissions may exceed these limits for short periods of time
under specific conditions, as allowed under 35 Illinois administrative code 212, subpart B.
Particulate matter emissions from various sources shall comply with 35 Illinois administrative code 212 for the following source categories:
Subpart D Incinerators
Subpart E Fuel combustion units
Subpart K Fugitive particulate matter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 448/702
Subpart L Process units
Subpart N Food manufacturing
Subpart O Petroleum refining, petrochemical and chemical manufacturing
Subpart Q Stone, clay, glass and concrete manufacturing
Subpart R Primary and fabricated metals products and machinery manufacturing
Subpart S Agriculture
Subpart T Construction and wood products
C. Use, Storage And Management Of Hazardous Substances And Petroleum Products: The use, storage and management of hazardous substances and
petroleum products shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal environmental statutes, codes and regulations and
shall meet the performance standards specified herein.
1. No use shall, for any period time, discharge across the boundaries of the lot, or to environmental pathways (ground water, air, soil, surface water)
wherein it is located in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or pose risk to the public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury,
diminution, damage, or risk to the environment, natural resources, property, or business.
2. The use, storage and management of such substances shall be conducted at all times with engineering controls that provide primary and secondary
containment systems designed to preclude accidental release of such substances to ground water, air, soil and surface water pathways, to the extent
necessary to protect human health and the environment.
D. Odors: The emission of odorous matter in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along a lot line or as to produce a public nuisance or
hazard beyond a lot line is prohibited.
E. Fire And Explosion Hazard:
1. The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning (as determined for liquids by a
closed cup flash point of less than 187 degrees Fahrenheit, but not less than 105 degrees Fahrenheit), is permitted, providing the following
conditions are met:
a. Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having exterior walls of fire
resistive construction, in accordance with the building code of the village.
b. Unless otherwise provided herein, all such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty feet (40') from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such
buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with the installation standards prescribed by the
national fire protection association, or if the materials, goods or products are liquids, the protection thereof shall be in conformity with standards
prescribed by the national fire protection association.
2. The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning (as determined for liquids by a
closed cup flash point of not less than 187 degrees Fahrenheit) is permitted.
3. The utilization in manufacturing processes of materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases (as determined for liquids by a closed
cup flash point of less than 105 degrees Fahrenheit) shall be permitted in this district, provided that:
a. The final manufactured product does not itself have a closed cup flash point of less than one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F).
b. The use and storage of such materials shall be in conformity with standards prescribed by the national fire protection association and with
requirements of other ordinances of the village.
c. The storage of said materials shall be prohibited aboveground.
4. Detonable materials shall not be stored within two hundred feet (200') of a lot line.
F. Glare Or Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to
create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
G. Vibration: No industrial operation or activity shall cause at any time ground transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibration (the
periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth) shall be measured at any point along a lot in with a three (3) component measuring instrument
and shall be expressed in inches as follows:
Frequency
(Cycles Per Second)
Maximum Permitted Displacement
Along Lot Lines (In Inches)
0 to 10 0.0008
10 to 20 0.0005
20 to 30 0.0002
30 to 40 0.0002
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 449/702
40 and above 0.0001
H. Radiation Hazards; Release Outside Property Lines: The use and release of radioactive materials or emission of ionizing radiation shall be in
accordance with the permitting requirements, rules and regulations of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2001-127, 10-2-2001)
Chapter 8
PUBLIC LAND DISTRICT
10-8-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
ARTICLE A. P-1 PUBLIC LAND DISTRICT
10-8A-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-8A-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the P-1 public land district are set forth in the sections which follow. Also applying to the P-1 public
land district are regulations set forth in other chapters in this title as follows:
Chapter 1 - General zoning provisions
Chapter 2 - Rules and definitions
Chapter 9 - Planned unit developments
Chapter 10 - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses
Chapter 11 - Off street parking and loading
Chapter 11A - Landscaping, screening and tree preservation
Chapter 12 - Signs
Chapter 13 - Administration and enforcement
(Ord. 96-30, 4-16-1996)
10-8A-3: PERMITTED USES:
Uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions specified. Unless otherwise specifically set forth,
wherever a permitted use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those itemized uses listed under the said category. No building
or zoning lot in the P-1 district shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the P-1 district, and no building or structure shall be erected,
altered, enlarged or occupied in the P-1 district except for a permitted use in the P-1 district unless otherwise specifically allowed by this title.
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of
chapter 10 of this title.
The following uses are permitted in the P-1 district:
Public art galleries.
Public athletic fields.
Public basketball courts, no closer than one hundred feet (100') to the nearest residence.
Public bike paths.
Public concession stands.
Public conservatories and greenhouses.
Public fire stations.
Public forest preserves.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 450/702
Public golf course clubhouses.
Public historic landmarks.
Public libraries.
Public museums.
Public office buildings.
Public outdoor skating rinks.
Public parking lots.
Public parks, playgrounds, community centers, beaches and golf courses.
Public picnic shelters.
Public police stations.
Public post offices.
Public schools, including elementary, junior high, high schools, colleges and universities, boarding and nonboarding.
Public tennis courts.
Public wading or spray pools.
Public washrooms.
Public wildlife observation decks. (Ord. 96-30, 4-16-1996)
10-8A-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 10 of this
Title.
The following uses are special uses in the P-1 District:
Public airports and heliports.
Public animal shelters and pounds.
Public basketball courts closer than one hundred feet (100') to the nearest residence.
Public cemeteries.
Public convention halls.
Public halfway houses.
Public hospitals and sanitariums.
Public institutions for the care or treatment of insane, feebleminded, retarded, alcoholic or drug-addicted patients.
Public maintenance facilities or storage yards.
Public miniature golf courses.
Public outdoor amphitheaters with fixed seating.
Public outdoor driving ranges when not accessory to the public golf course.
Public prisons and correctional facilities.
Public radar installations and towers.
Public stadia with fixed seating.
Public wastewater treatment facilities.
Public water towers or underground water reservoirs.
Public youth camps.
Public zoos.
Structures with building heights greater than thirty five feet (35') used for a permitted or special use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 451/702
Structures with floor area ratios greater than 1.0.
Other publicly owned property and structures used for public purposes. (Ord. 96-30, 4-16-1996)
10-8A-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special use may be permitted,
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural
features inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any separate business, profession, trade or industry.
Accessory uses may include the following:
Public garages and parking lots, accessory to a permitted or special use.
Public outdoor driving ranges accessory to a public golf course.
Residence of groundskeeper for park or educational institutions.
Signs, as regulated in Chapter 12 of this Title.
Swimming pools incidental to public structures or facilities.
Water retention or detention areas. (Ord. 96-30, 4-16-1996)
10-8A-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized under "Permitted, Special or Accessory Uses" are expressly prohibited.
The following, and uses similar to the following, illustrate prohibited uses: (Ord. 96-30, 4-16-1996)
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult mini motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
Monoash landfills, transfer stations, balefills, hazardous waste landfills, incinerators, garbage dumps, sanitary and solid waste landfills and uses accessory
to or related to said uses.
Private commercial uses.
Private industrial uses.
Private office uses.
Private residential uses. (Ord. 96-30, 4-16-1996)
10-8A-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE PROVISIONS:
Uses in the P-1 Public Land District shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Minimum Lot Area: A minimum lot area is not required.
B. Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width is not required.
C. Required Yards: Required yards shall be provided and maintained in the P-1 Public Land District as described below. Special uses may require yards
greater in depth than described when specified by the Village Board.
1. Required Front Yard: A required front yard shall be provided and maintained with a depth equal to the greater of the required front yards on adjacent
properties.
2. Required Side Yards: Each required side yard shall be provided and maintained equal in depth to the required side yard on the adjacent property. If
the adjacent property is in a residential district, the required side yard shall be at least twenty five feet (25').
On a corner side yard, a required side yard shall be provided and maintained equal in depth to the required front yard.
3. Required Rear Yard: A required rear yard of thirty feet (30') shall be provided and maintained.
D. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio shall be 1.0. However, greater floor area ratios may be granted as a special use by the Village Board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 452/702
E. Building Height: The maximum height of all buildings or structures shall be thirty five feet (35'). However, taller structures may be permitted as special
uses by the Village Board.
F. Special Requirements: Uses in the P-1 Public Land District shall conform to the requirements set forth hereinafter:
1. Parking And Loading Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for off-street parking and loading set forth in Chapter 11 of
this Title.
2. Sign Requirements: All uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for signs set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title.
3. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted use listed in the P-1 District, shall be limited to vehicles
of not over two and one-half (21/2) tons' capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district.
4. Sewer And Water: All structures and uses requiring sanitary facilities shall be served by either a Municipal sewer and water system, a private
community sewer and water system, or a private individual sewage disposal system and water supply system approved by the respective county
health department and the Village engineer.
5. Refuse Areas: All refuse areas shall be screened in accordance with the provisions in subsection 10-11A-4E1a of this Title.
6. Required Landscaping And Screening: All development in the Public Land District shall provide screening and landscaping in accordance with
provisions in Chapter 10-11A of this Title.
7. Public Use Requirements: All exterior lighting, building and parking lot lights and landscape lighting shall be directed away from adjacent highways,
streets and properties. A lighting plan shall be prepared and be reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer prior to the issuance of building
permits. (Ord. 96-30, 4-16-1996)
Chapter 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
The unique and substantially different character of planned unit developments requires their administrative processing as a "special use" in this title.
Planned unit developments are more complex and of a different character than other special uses, requiring the establishment herein of specific and
additional procedures, standards and exceptions to govern the recommendations of the Village Board. The purpose of the planned unit development is to
encourage and allow more creative and imaginative design for land developments than is possible under conventional district zoning regulations. The
planned unit development also provides for more efficient use of the land, and thus results in more economical land development. Preservation of natural
site qualities, better amenities, more open space, and a higher quality project are the normal results of the planned unit development process.
The following objectives may be obtained through the use of the planned unit development procedure:
A. To permit a greater choice in types of environment available to the public by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the other sections of this title.
B. To promote a creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in better design and development, with the inclusion of
aesthetic amenities.
C. To combine and coordinate architectural styles, landscape design, building forms and building relationships with a possible mixing of different uses in an
innovative design.
D. To enhance the appearance of neighborhoods through the provision of underground utilities, and the preservation of natural vegetation, topographic
and geological features and environmentally appropriate features.
E. To provide for the prevention and/or control of soil erosion, surface flooding, and the preservation of subsurface water.
F. To create a method for the preservation of common open space for the continuous use and enjoyment of the residents and users of the development.
G. To provide for more usable and suitably located recreational facilities, schools and other public and private facilities.
H. To promote the more efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of utilities, circulation and other facilities.
I. To encourage land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare.
J. To create a method for the permanent preservation of architectural, natural and/or historic landmarks. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-9-2: LOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 453/702
Planned unit developments may be located in any zoning district or combination of zoning districts. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-9-3: MINIMUM AREA:
A minimum site of ten (10) acres shall be required for all residential planned unit developments. A minimum of one acre shall be required for all
nonresidential planned unit developments. The site must be under single ownership or unified control to ensure orderly development and maintenance.
(Ord. 86-30, 5-20-1986)
10-9-4: USES ALLOWED:
A. The uses which may be permitted under a planned unit development include those listed as permitted uses or special uses in the underlying district(s).
(Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
B. In residential districts attached dwelling units may be permitted, which may include townhouses, row houses, garden apartments, duplexes or multiplestory
apartments. Condominium, cooperative, individual, governmental or any other type of ownership may be permitted. (Ord. 83-75, 12-4-1983)
C. The following are permitted uses only within PD Planned Development Districts designated solely for industrial use and PUDs located entirely within an
industrially zoned area, subject to the special conditions set forth in subsection 10-14-5D of this Title:
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult mini motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-9-5: DENSITY:
The density of a planned unit development in floor area ratio and in dwelling units for residential uses shall not exceed the amount or number allowed
under the requirements of the underlying zoning district. If the development is in more than one zoning district, the floor area ratio and the number of
allowable dwelling units must be separately calculated for each portion of the development that is in a separate zoning district, and must then be combined
to determine the total floor area ratio and number of dwelling units allowable. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Except in the SR-6 District, density bonuses may be granted for the presence of exceptional design features in a planned unit development. The eligible
design features are listed below and their bonuses may be added together if more than one is present. However, the maximum permitted bonus shall be a
composite of thirty three percent (33%) increase of the density and floor area ratio allowed under the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).
A. Community Facilities: When an appropriate and adequate year-round community facility, such as a swimming pool, tennis courts, or gymnasium/health
club, is constructed and made available without an admission charge to the residents of the development, an increase of up to ten percent (10%) in the
base residential density may be granted.
B. Public Facilities: When an appropriate and adequate public facility, such as a library; community center, including health and day care facilities; school
or fire station; is constructed in a manner acceptable to the suitable operating agency, and the land and structure is dedicated to the public, an increase
of up to twenty percent (20%) in the base residential density may be granted. Where only the land for such a facility is dedicated to the public, an
increase of up to ten percent (10%) in the base residential density may be granted.
C. Covered Or Underground Parking: Where the required parking spaces are provided in covered, multi-level parking structures, or underground, an
increase in density or intensity may be granted for each increment of covered parking equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total parking
requirement. Where the bonus is granted in residential density, said increase may equal up to ten percent (10%) of the base residential density for
each such increment. Where the bonus is granted in nonresidential use intensity, said increase may equal up to 0.10 FAR for each such increment.
D. Excellence In Site Planning: Where the project site plan exhibits exceptional adherence to the purposes and objectives of this Chapter, an increase of
ten percent (10%) of the base residential density may be granted. Where the bonus is granted in nonresidential use intensity, said increase may equal
up to 0.20 FAR. In addition to the standards found in Section 10-9-8 of this Chapter, the following standards shall be used to measure site plans for
excellence:
1. The natural topographic and landscape features of the site shall be incorporated into the development wherever possible.
2. The site shall not be so overcrowded as to cause unbalanced relationships of buildings to open space. Additional landscaped areas beyond the
minimum required shall be encouraged.
3. Open space areas shall not be unduly isolated from one another by unrelated vehicle obstructions such as buildings and paved vehicular areas, but
rather, shall be linked by open space corridors of reasonable width.
4. Buildings shall be sited in an orderly nonrandom fashion in sympathy with the natural features of the site. Excessively long unbroken building
facades shall be avoided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 454/702
5. Habitable spaces shall be oriented with due regard to sun, prevailing wind, desirable vistas and nearby land uses.
6. The floor plans of residential units shall have proper orientation, access and view to adjacent private and public open space.
7. The intrusion of automobiles into the privacy of residential environments shall be minimized while maintaining the convenience of access between
the units and parking areas.
E. Adjacent Permanent Open Space: Where the development is adjacent directly to permanently reserved open areas of green space in contiguous tracts
exceeding five hundred (500) aggregate acres, an increase up to twenty percent (20%) of the base residential density may be granted.
The density bonuses granted herein are discretionary on the part of the Village. Bonuses less than the maximum for the design features specified
above may be granted. Although not limited by these factors, if the Village finds that any of the following conditions are likely to be created by an
increase of density as permitted above, it may either deny any application for such increase, or limit the same by an amount sufficient to avoid the
creation of any such conditions:
Inconvenient or unsafe access to the development.
Excessive traffic in streets adjoining the development.
An excessive burden imposed upon parks, recreational areas, schools, or other public facilities which serve or are proposed to serve the development.
(Ord. 83-75, 12-14-1983)
10-9-6: MODIFICATIONS:
A. Except as noted below, the yard, lot area, lot width, lot shape, lot coverage, height and dwelling size requirements and the limits on combinations of
principal structures and uses may be modified under a Planned Unit Development.
1. The required yards along the periphery of the Planned Unit Development shall be at least equal in width or depth to those of the directly adjacent
zoning district(s), not counting districts removed by the presence of an intervening publicly dedicated street right-of-way.
2. Buildings of more than twenty-four feet (24') in height shall provide a setback from any property line of not less than the height of such buildings.
B. Requirements regarding any improvements covered under the Bartlett Subdivision Ordinance, including sidewalks, streets, curbs, gutters, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, water, lighting, landscaping, parking and retention/detention facilities shall be modified only as specifically provided for in the
special use ordinance authorizing the Planned Unit Development. Private streets shall not be allowed under any circumstances.
C. Modifications in the requirements for the number of parking spaces, density, landscaped open space and performance standards shall not be allowed.
10-9-7: PROCEDURES:
A Planned Unit Development shall be reviewed as a special use in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Section, and shall be processed
in three stages as set forth below. Additional requirements regarding the processing of applications, including public hearing procedures and the
requirements for the recording of plats shall be set forth in various administrative procedure documents, as amended from time to time. Fees shall be set
annually by the Village Board, and a list of such shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
A. Pre-Application Conference.
1. A request for a pre-application conference shall be made in writing to the Village. At least two (2) weeks prior to the conference, the applicant shall
provide written or graphic information as to the location, size and uses in the proposed development, and a list of all requested modifications to the
Subdivision Code and Zoning Ordinance. Prior to the conference, the Technical Committee, which consists of the Village Administrator and selected
members of the staff and consultants, will review the proposal for its compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and the general planning policies
and precedents of the Village.
2. At the conference, the Technical Committee will inform the applicant of the results of the preliminary review and of the information, materials and
documentation that must be submitted for a formal application.
3. Within two (2) weeks after the conference, the Technical Committee will submit a written report to the Board of Trustees who will review the report
and either direct the applicant to proceed with his formal application or refer it back to the Technical Committee for further study and action. (Ord. 78-
40, 5-16-78)
B. Preliminary Site Plan:
1. Upon completion of the pre-application procedure, the applicant may then make formal application to the Village Board requesting a special use
permit for a planned unit development on forms provided by the Village, and including a preliminary site plan containing the information required in
Section 10-9-9. This preliminary site plan shall be the subject of a public hearing before the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals
(whichever body holds the public hearing), as regulated in Section 10-13-8, Special Uses.
2. Within a reasonable amount of time, usually within forty-five (45) days after the adjournment of the public hearing, the Plan Commission or the
Zoning Board of Appeals (whichever body holds the public hearing), shall submit in writing its finding and recommendations to the Village Board and
the applicant, based on the standards set forth in Section 10-9-8.
3. The Board of Trustees shall accept or reject the Preliminary Site Plan within a reasonable amount of time, usually within forty-five (45) days after its
next regular meeting following the receipt of the written recommendation of the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals (whichever body
holds the public hearing).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 455/702
a. If the Preliminary Site Plan is not approved, the Village Board may state in writing the reasons for the decision and such writing, if prepared, shall
be filed with the Village Clerk, and a copy shall be sent to the applicant.
b. If the Preliminary Site Plan is approved, the Village Board shall authorize the applicant to submit a Final Development Plan for the Planned Unit
Development.
C. Final Development Plan:
1. Within one (1) year following the approval of the Preliminary Site Plan, the applicant shall file with the Village a Final Development Plan containing in
final form the information required in the Preliminary Site Plan and additional information as required in Section 10-9-10.
2. The Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals (whichever body holds the public hearing), shall review the Final Development Plan with
regard to its conformance to the approved Preliminary Site Plan and to the Final Development Plan requirements, and shall submit its report and
recommendations to the Village Board, usually within thirty-five (35) days.
3. The Village Board, after receipt of the report and recommendations of the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals (whichever body holds
the public hearing), shall review the Final Development Plan, and if it is determined to be in conformance with the approved Preliminary Site Plan
and Final Development Plan requirements, will authorize by Ordinance the issuance of a special use permit.
If the Final Development Plan is held to be not in conformance with the Preliminary Site Plan or the Final Development Plan requirements, the
Village Board shall inform the applicant of the specific areas found deficient. The applicant may request from the Village Board an extension of time
to bring the Final Development Plan into conformance and to complete the requirements, or may request a new public hearing under the procedures
established for approval of a Preliminary Site Plan. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78; amd. Ord. 88-42, 5-17-88)
10-9-8: STANDARDS:
Modifications in conventional zoning and subdivision regulations are privileges and will be considered by the Village Board only in direct response
to the accrual of tangible benefits from the Planned Unit Development to the Village or the neighborhood in which it would be located. These benefits shall
be in the form of exceptional amenities, outstanding environmental, landscape, architectural or site design, or the conservation of special man-made or
natural features of the site. In reviewing an application for a Planned Unit Development the Village Board shall be required to make certain findings based
on the standards below:
A. Required Findings: No application for a Planned Unit Development shall be approved unless all of the following findings are made about the proposal:
1. Comprehensive Plan. It shall conform with the Comprehensive Plan and the general planning policies and precedents of the Village, particularly with
reference to the following:
a. Land use policies;
b. Land use intensity;
c. Housing goals;
d. Traffic impact and parking;
e. Impact on schools, public utilities and facilities;
f. The character of the Village and the specific neighborhood; and
g. The conservation and enhancement of the tax base and economic well-being of the Village.
2. Permitted Uses. Each of the proposed uses is a permitted or special use in the district or districts in which the Planned Unit Development would be
located.
3. Public Welfare. It shall be so designed, located and proposed to be operated and maintain ed that the public health, safety and welfare will not be
endangered or detrimentally affected.
4. Impact on Other Property. It shall not substantially lessen or impede the suitability for permitted use and development of, or be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of, or substantially diminish or impair the value of, or be incompatible with, other property in the immediate vicinity.
5. Impact on Public Facilities and Resources. The plan shall include impact donations in accordance with Ordinance 83-7.
6. Support Facilities. It shall have or make provision for adequate utilities, drainage and other necessary facilities.
7. Parking and Traffic. It shall have or make adequate provision for parking and ingress and egress and be so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion and hazards in the public streets.
8. Adequate Buffering. It shall have adequate site area, which area may be greater than the minimum in the district in which the proposed site is
located, and other buffering features to protect uses within the development and on surrounding properties.
9. Performance. There shall be reasonable assurance that, if authorized, it will be completed according to schedule and adequately maintained.
B. Modification Standards: In addition to the findings required above, the following standards shall be utilized by the Village in considering applications for
modifications of the conventional zoning and subdivision regulations for a Planned Unit Development. These standards shall not be regarded as
inflexible, but shall be used as a framework by the Village to test the quality of the amenities, design and desirability of the proposal.
1. Integrated Design. A Planned Unit Development shall be laid out and developed as a unit in accordance with an integrated overall design. This
design shall provide for safe, efficient, convenient and harmonious grouping of structures, uses and facilities, and for appropriate relation of space
inside and outside buildings to intended uses and structural features.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 456/702
2. Beneficial Common Open Space. Any common open space in the development shall be integrated into the overall design. Such spaces shall have a
direct functional or visual relationship to the main buildings and not be of isolated or leftover character. the following would not be considered usable
common open space:
a. Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual tenant or owner.
b. Dedicated streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way.
c. Vehicular drives, parking, loading and storage areas.
d. Irregular or unusable narrow strips of land less than fifteen feet (15') wide.
3. Location of Higher Buildings. Higher buildings shall be located within the site plan in such a way as to dissipate any adverse impact on adjoining
lower buildings within the development or on surrounding properties, and shall not invade the privacy of occupants of such lower buildings.
4. Functional and Mechanical Features. Exposed storage areas, trash and garbage retainers, exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck
loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas and structures shall be accounted for in the design of the project and
made as unobtrusive as possible. They shall be subject to such setbacks, special planting or other screening methods as shall reasonably be
required to prevent their being in congruous with the existing or contemplated environment and the surrounding properties.
5. Visual and Acoustical Privacy. The development shall provide reasonable visual, and acoustical privacy for each dwelling unit. Fences, insulations,
walks, barriers and landscaping shall be used as appropriate for the protection and aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its
occupants, screening of objectionable view or uses, and reduction of noises.
6. Ownership Plan: The development may consist of conventionally subdivided lots to be sold, unsubdivided single ownership, separate condominium
ownership of structures, or other ownership methods, provided that the ownership plan ensures the continued maintenance of the properties and of
the various amenities and conservation and design features of the Planned Unit Development as a whole.
7. Energy Efficient Design: A Planned Unit Development shall be designed with consideration given to various methods of site design and building
location, architectural design of individual structures, and landscaping design capable of reducing energy consumption within the development.
Design features or facilities which utilize solar or wind energy, or which effectively reduce consumption or use of water, motor vehicles, nonrenewable
energy sources or sewage treatment facilities will be encouraged to the extent to which they conform with the other objectives of this Title.
8. Landscape Conservation and Visual Enhancement: The landscape in a Planned Unit Development shall be conserved and enhanced, insofar as
practical, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and the conservation of special landscape features such as streams, ponds, groves and land forms.
The addition or use of trees, shrubs, flowers, fountains, ponds, special paving materials, benches and seating areas, special lighting fixtures and
other amenities will be encouraged to the extent of their appropriateness and usefulness to the development and the likelihood of their continued
maintenance.
9. Drives, Parking and Circulation. Principal vehicular access shall be from major streets, and access points shall be designed to encourage smooth
traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. With respect to vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking, special attention shall be given to location and number of access points to the public
streets, width of interior drives and access points, general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, adequate provision for
service by emergency vehicles, and arrangement of parking areas that are safe and convenient, and insofar as practicable, do not detract from the
design of proposed buildings and structures and the neighboring properties.
10. Relationship to Public Facilities and Utilities. The development shall be so designed as to have access to such facilities and utilities in the same
degree as would development under existing zoning, and shall be so located, designed, and scaled that access for public services is equivalent to,
and net costs for such services is not greater than, access and net costs for public services for development as permitted under existing zoning.
11. Surface Water Drainage. Special attention shall be given to proper site surface drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect
neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system. Surface water in all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
10-9-9: PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN:
A. Contents: The following items constitute the minimum requirements for the contents of a Preliminary Site Plan. The applicant should feel free to
supplement the list with whatever materials deemed appropriate to illustrate compliance with the regulations and intent of this section.
Maps which shall be included as part of the application shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100') or, if the area of the site is
more than two hundred (200) acres, two hundred feet to the inch (1" = 200'). All maps shall be dated and include a scale and north point.
1. A legal description of the site.
2. A boundary line survey of the site prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor, showing the dimensions of the property's boundaries and all
existing rights of way adjacent to the property.
3. Existing and proposed topography of the land with contours shown at intervals no greater than two feet (2'). Topographic data shall refer to the
U.S.G.S. North American Datum--Mean Sea Level Elevation.
4. Existing and proposed landscape features, including significant tree groupings, isolated preservable trees six inches (6") or more in diameter at one
foot (1') above ground level, scenic views, and other natural features such as streams, bogs, etc.
5. Existing zoning and land uses on and adjacent to the site.
6. Village, school district, and park district boundary lines on or adjacent to the site.
7. Locations and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, building heights, number of stories, gross floor areas, floor area ratios, and
entrances.
8. All proposed uses, including statistical tabulation of the acreage amounts of all uses, the number, size and the type of dwelling units in all structures,
and the dwelling unit density.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 457/702
9. Locations and dimensions of all existing and proposed streets, curb cuts, aisles, bicycle paths and walkways, the number and location of all parking
spaces and loading areas, and the names of all streets. If the exact use of the site is not known at the time of a site plan submittal, parking and
loading requirements shall be calculated for the general use having the greatest parking and loading requirements.
10. All areas to be dedicated as common open space and all sites to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, playgrounds, school sites, public
buildings and similar public and quasi-public uses, together with the proposed plan for the permanent maintenance of such common open space
areas.
11. A utility concept plan, including the location of all existing sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water lines on the site and on property immediately
adjacent to the site. Similar information shall be provided for gas, electric and telephone utilities. The utility concept plan shall be accompanied by a
statement from the Village Engineer attesting to the capability of existing systems to service the proposed development.
12. Portions of the site in the floodplain or in floodplain fringe areas, the existing and proposed flow and storm drainage, and the location of drainage
ditches, culverts and standing water.
13. Soil problem areas based on a soil survey of the site including a report from the Soil Conservation Service. Additional soil information may be
requested by the Plan Commission and/or the Village Engineer.
14. Location, height and material for all screening walls and fences, the location and direction of proposed lighting facilities, and the location and
dimensions of each outdoor trash storage area.
15. A detailed listing of all requested modifications to zoning and subdivision requirements, and the reasons why such modifications are deemed to be
in the public interest.
16. Other information requested by the Plan Commission or the Village Board necessary to reasonably clarify the proposal and its impact or economic
feasibility. Such information may include but not be limited to any of the following:
a. A traffic study by a qualified traffic engineer indicating the volume of traffic to be generated by the planned unit development and proposing any
special engineering design features and/or traffic regulation devices needed to ensure the proper safety of traffic circulation to, through and around
the planned unit development or any phase of it.
b. Tax and school impact study detailing the impact the planned unit development will have on all taxing bodies. In addition, the expected number of
students to be generated by any residential portion of the planned unit development shall also be quantified and estimates made as to the
projected revenues and expenditures by the Village attributable to the development.
c. A conceptual landscaping planting plan, indicating the height, size, location, quantities and variety of plant materials.
d. An analysis of the marketability of proposed sale or rental properties, or of the demand for proposed services or uses. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-9-10: FINAL PUD PLAN:
A. Contents: The final development shall include the following:
1. All of the information required for the approved preliminary site plan, updated and in final form.
2. A final planned unit development plat, suitable for recording with the respective County Recorder of Deeds. The purpose of the plat is to designate
the areas which are subdivided into lots as well as those areas not so divided into common open areas and building areas and to designate the
design controls and uses of each building or structure and of the land in general.
3. If subdivided lands are included in the planned development, a subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all
requirements of a normal subdivision plat, to the extent that compliance with the subdivision regulation of the Village shall be required.
4. An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use area, including common open space.
5. Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land and recording of the document.
6. A copy of the formal agreement with a public agency or private association for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space. (Ord. 78-
40, 5-16-1978)
7. A restrictive covenant in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney limiting development of and construction upon the tract as a whole to such
development and construction as shall comply with the final PUD plan and the special use permit granted by the Village Board, which document shall
include a provision granting the Village a right to enforce the same. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 2017-136, 10-17-2017)
8. Final landscape plan, indicating the height, size, location, quantity and variety of all plant materials.
9. Final engineering drawings, including the final utility plan.
10. Final architectural design development drawings, including plans, elevations and sections for all major structures.
11. Proof of all applicable approvals from State and County officials or from other agencies outside the Village having jurisdiction.
12. A schedule for construction of all phases of the development, including landscaping, utilities and site amenities, indicating when each phase can be
expected to begin and end. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
B. Permitted Changes: Minor changes from the approved preliminary site plan may be allowed in the final PUD plan without a public hearing, provided
such changes are determined to be minor by the Village Board after review and recommendation by the Plan Commission. A change shall not be
considered minor if it includes any of the following: (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 2017-136, 10-17-2017)
1. A change in the use or character of the development.
2. An increase by more than one percent (1%) in the overall coverage of structures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 458/702
3. An increase in the density or intensity of use.
4. A relocation of any street, curb cut or intersection of more than ten feet (10') in a manner which would increase the problems of traffic circulation or
public utilities, or which would cause a significant negative impact upon the buffer or open space scheme.
5. A reduction of more than one percent (1%) in approved open space.
6. A reduction in off-street parking and loading spaces.
7. A reduction in required pavement widths.
8. A change in the arrangement or location of principal structures or uses by more than ten feet (10').
Changes in addition to or in excess of the limits described above shall be considered major changes and require submission of a new application
which shall be processed and approved in the same manner as required for the original application. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-9-10-1: MINOR AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED FINAL PUD PLANS:
A minor amendment (as determined by the Zoning Administrator) to an approved final PUD plan may be submitted to the Building Department as part of a
building permit application if no rezoning, special use(s) and/or variation(s) is/are requested, and/or any such amendment or required modification to an
approved final PUD plan is of such size and scope that it would not require rezoning, a special use permit or variation if the subject property fell within a
traditional zoning classification, or varies less than ten percent (10%) from the dimensions on the approved final site plan. (Ord. 2017-136, 10-17-2017)
10-9-11: CONDITIONS OF DEVELOPMENT:
After the approval of the final PUD plan, the use of land and construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the planned unit
development will be governed by the approved final PUD plan and all applicable Village ordinances not specifically waived in the ordinance granting a
special use for the planned unit development. In addition, the following conditions apply to the construction of a planned unit development:
A. Construction in accordance with the final PUD plan shall commence within one year. Failure to commence within that period shall, unless an extension
has been granted by the Board of Trustees according to subsection B of this section, automatically render null and void the final plan approval of the
planned unit development plan, all prior plan approvals upon which final plan approval depends, including all permits based on such approvals, and the
special use permit for the planned unit development. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 2017-136, 10-17-2017)
B. The Village Board may extend the time limit for the commencement of construction as follows:
1. If a delay, or anticipated delay, is caused by governmental action without fault on the part of the developer an extension may be granted for a period
not longer than the period of the governmental delay.
2. For good cause shown, an extension may be granted for such periods of time as the Village Board deems appropriate but not exceeding twelve (12)
months exclusive of extensions authorized under subsection B1 of this section.
C. No permit shall be issued for any construction in a planned unit development nor shall any use of the properties commence until the developer posts
with the Village a sum in cash, negotiable securities, surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit running to the Village in an amount sufficient to cover
the full cost, including engineering and inspection fees and costs, plus ten percent (10%) of such total, to ensure the satisfactory installation of all
streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water, lighting, landscaping, parking, retention/detention areas, and all other public
improvements. The cost of the improvements shall be based on confirmed estimates approved by the Village Engineer, and all guarantees except cash
and negotiable securities shall be reviewed by the Village Attorney for conformance to Village ordinances. If a surety bond is submitted, it shall have
good and sufficient surety thereon and shall not be accepted until approved by the President and Board of Trustees. If the planned unit development is
to be constructed and developed in stages or phases, the deposit of cash or securities or the bond posted shall be in an amount based upon the
confirmed estimated cost of installation of improvements in the respective stage or phase as approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
D. No changes shall be made in the approved final PUD plan, except with the approval of the Village Board according to the same limitations and
procedure set forth in subsection 10-9-10B of this chapter. Any approved changes must be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final
PUD plan. If the approved change is related to any of the approved plans or drawings amended plans or drawings must be filed with the Village and
recorded. No changes may be made in the final PUD plan unless they are required for the continued successful functioning of the planned unit
development, or unless they are required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final PUD plan was approved or by changes in the
development policy in the Village.
E. The Village Board may at any time request written reports on the progress and development of the proposed planned unit development. If the Village
Board is satisfied that the permittee has abandoned the development of the planned unit development or failed to follow the final PUD plan, it shall hold
a public hearing for the purpose of considering the revocation of all permits issued and action taken herein. Written notice of said hearing shall be sent
by certified mail (return receipt) to the permittee at the business address stated in the application for the planned unit development. Publication of said
hearing shall also be given in accordance with the provisions of section 10-13-7 of this title. If the Village Board finds that the permittee has abandoned
the development of the proposed planned unit development or failed to follow the final PUD plan, it may then revoke all permits issued and action taken
herein.
F. Any building or structure within the planned unit development that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the
final PUD plan unless an amendment to the final PUD plan is approved following the procedures required for the original application. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-
1978; amd. Ord. 2017-136, 10-17-2017)
10-9-12: CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 459/702
Prior to granting a special use permit for a planned unit development, the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board stipulate by ordinance
such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the planned unit development as deemed
necessary for the protection and requirements specified herein or as may be from time to time required. In all cases in which planned unit developments
are approved, the Village Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in
connection therewith are being and will be complied with. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
ARTICLE A. PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
10-9A-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-45, 6-4-2013)
10-9A-2: USE, LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
Use, lot and bulk regulations applying specifically to the PD planned development district are set forth in the sections which follow. Also applying to the PD
district are regulations set forth in other chapters of this title as follows:
Chapter 1 - General zoning provisions
Chapter 2 - Rules and definitions
Chapter 9 - Planned unit developments
Chapter 10 - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses
Chapter 11 - Off street parking and loading
Chapter 11A - Landscaping, screening and tree preservation
Chapter 12 - Signs
Chapter 13 - Administration and enforcement
(Ord. 87-65, 12-1-1987; amd. Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
10-9A-3: PERMITTED USES:
Uses of land or buildings, as hereinafter listed, shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions specified. Unless otherwise specifically set forth,
wherever a permitted use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those itemized uses listed under the said category. No building
or zoning lot in the PD District shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in the PD District and no building or structure in the PD District shall
be erected, altered, enlarged or occupied except for a permitted use in the PD District unless otherwise specifically allowed by this Title.
Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Title and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of
Chapter 10 of this Title.
The following uses are permitted in the PD District:
A. Agricultural land and buildings, including greenhouses and nurseries without retail sales.
B. Recreation and social facilities, including country clubs, golf courses and nonilluminated Par 3 golf courses, but not including driving ranges,
miniature golf, polo or gun clubs.
C. Public and governmental land and buildings. (Ord. 87-65, 12-1-1987)
D. The following are permitted uses only within PD Planned Development Districts designated solely for industrial use and PUDs located entirely within
an industrially zoned area, subject to the conditions set forth in subsection 10-14-5D of this Title:
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult mini motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-9A-4: SPECIAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 460/702
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13 of this
Title. Unless otherwise specifically set forth, wherever a special use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include only those itemized uses
listed under the said major category.
The following uses are special uses in the PD District:
A. Planned unit developments in accordance with a plan for the entire area within the PD District.
1. Any use or combination of uses permitted or specially permitted in one or several of the districts under this Title, including the ER-1, ER-2, ER-3, SR-
1, SR-2, SR-3, SR-5, SR-6, O-R, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, I-2, and P-1 Districts, provided that the Plan Commission finds that:
a. The planned unit development will be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the Village;
b. That all uses, as arranged, are likely to be compatible with each other use within the planned unit development; and
c. The development is likely to be compatible with development permitted under this Title on substantially all land in the vicinity of the proposed
planned unit development.
2. Any temporary use of land which meets the requirements of the preceding paragraph, relating to the period during which said temporary uses are
permitted under the planned unit development. (Ord. 87-65, 12-1-1987)
10-9A-5: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses, buildings or other structures customarily incidental to, and commonly associated with, a permitted or special use may be permitted,
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted use, do not include structures or structural
features inconsistent with the permitted use, and do not involve the conduct of any separate business, profession, trade or industry.
Accessory uses may include the following:
Agricultural buildings and structures.
Boathouses, private.
Commercial sale of equipment, food or beverages, if incidental to the operation of a country club.
Conservatories, private.
Fallout shelters.
Garages, carports, and parking spaces for lawful occupants or users of permitted or special uses on the same premises.
Gardening.
Home occupations.
Household pets exclusively for the use or personal enjoyment of residents of the premises and not for commercial purposes, limited to not more than a
total of three (3) traditional domestic animals.
Living quarters, detached, for persons employed on the premises, if occupied only by such persons and their immediate family, and not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
Playhouses and summer houses.
Roadside stands, for the display and sale of agricultural products on zoning lots where the principal use is agriculture.
Signs, as regulated in Chapter 12 of this Title.
Swimming pools and tennis courts, exclusively for the use of the residents and their guests, and set back from every property line at least ten feet (10').
Tool houses, sheds and other similar buildings for the storage of domestic supplies.
Water retention and detention areas. (Ord. 87-65, 12-1-1987)
10-9A-6: PROHIBITED USES:
All uses not expressly authorized under "Permitted, Special or Accessory Uses" are expressly prohibited. (Ord. 87-65, 12-1-1987)
A. The following are prohibited uses in any area or areas within a PD Planned Development District where such area or areas have been designated for
residential, mobile home, office research, public land, commercial, and/or business use or uses:
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 461/702
Adult mini motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters.
B. The following are prohibited uses in any Planned Unit Development that is located within any area or areas zoned for residential, mobile home, office
research, public land, commercial and/or business use or uses:
Adult bookstores.
Adult cabarets.
Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult mini motion picture theaters.
Adult motion picture theaters. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-9A-7: SITE AND STRUCTURE PROVISIONS (BULK REGULATIONS):
Uses in the PD Planned Unit Development District shall conform to a plan for the District, as adopted by ordinance by the Village Board, and shall conform
to the following requirements:
A. The plan for the District, as adopted by ordinance, shall indicate, at a minimum, the uses to be permitted within each sub-area or planning unit of the
District, and shall specify for each sub-area or planning unit:
1. The maximum density, in dwelling units per acre, of all residential uses.
2. The minimum size of dwelling units, in square feet.
3. The mixture of dwelling units' sizes, in percentage of dwellings with one, two (2), three (3), four (4), five (5), or more bedrooms per dwelling.
4. The minimum distances between dwellings or structures.
5. Maximum building height.
6. Maximum floor area ratio of any nonresidential uses.
7. Minimum parking and loading requirements for all uses.
8. Minimum landscape and site open space standards.
9. The zoning district to which the sub-area or planning unit is most akin.
B. Uses within any sub-area shall not exceed the density or intensity permitted, or specially permitted under planned unit development provisions in
Chapter 9 of this Title, for uses in the zoning district to which the sub-area or planning unit is most akin. (Ord. 87-65, 12-1-1987)
Chapter 10
NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS AND USES
10-10-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures, lots and uses, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures, lots and uses, which adversely affect the maintenance, development or use, and
taxable value of other property in the district in which they are located, shall be permitted to continue.
This Title establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary
and consistent with the establishment of those districts that those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses which substantially and adversely affect
the orderly development and taxable value of other property in the district not be permitted to continue without restriction. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-10-2: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory
to the principal use of the land, may be continued subject to the following provisions:
A. Discontinuance Of A Nonconforming Use: If a nonconforming use of any land is discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days, it shall not thereafter be
renewed, and any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which such land is located.
B. Expansion of Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded, extended or enlarged in any way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 462/702
C. Change to a Conforming Use: Whenever a nonconforming use of land is changed to or replaced by a conforming use of land, such premises shall not
thereafter revert to the nonconforming use.
D. Elimination of Nonconforming Use: The nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued and cease three (3) years from the effective date of this Title in
each of the following cases:
1. Where no structures are employed in connection with such use.
2. When the only structures or other physical improvements are accessory or incidental to such use.
10-10-3: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
A legal nonconforming lot in a subdivision of record existing at the time of the adoption of this Title may be utilized for uses permitted in the zoning district
in which such lot is located, subject to the following provisions:
A. Site and Structure Provisions: The use of any nonconforming lot for a conforming use permitted in the zoning district in which the lot is located is subject
to the site and structure bulk regulations and other requirements of that zoning district except those specific requirements that directly resulted in the
lot's nonconforming status.
B. Contiguous Nonconforming Lots: Where two (2) or more contiguous lots, or a combination of contiguous lots and portions of lots, are under single
ownership or unified control at the time of the passage of this Title, and if all or part of such lots do not meet the required area, bulk or density
regulations for lots within the zoning district in which the lots are located, they shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this
Title. Such contiguous groups of nonconforming lots maybe resubdivided into new lots conforming to the standards of the district in which they are
located.
C. Nonconforming Lots and Annexation Agreements:
1. Certain subdivisions have been developed within the Village pursuant to annexation agreements which departed from the strict letter of the
standards of the zoning ordinance in effect in the Village at the time of such annexation agreement, and which may not meet all of the requirements
of this Title.
To render such areas nonconforming could render a large number of existing residential uses nonconforming. Consequently, the letter "C" has been
added as a suffix to the applicable zoning districts. The letter designates that the areas are subject to the applicable annexation agreement in effect
at the time such subdivisions were developed. In these cases, property owners may expand such uses or structures, provided they adhere to the
yard requirements contained in the original annexation agreement. In all cases, for property so zoned with a letter "C" suffix, the controlling criteria
defining the limits of the expansion shall be the original annexation agreement regardless of whether it is still in effect or has expired. The Building
Commissioner shall keep official copies of all applicable annexation agreements which shall be used to define the controlling requirements in terms
of lot area and yard requirements.
2. Certain existing annexation agreements allow the development of the real estate therein described according to standards less restrictive than the
standards imposed by this Title. Those areas have been designated with the letter "C" on the Zoning Map to indicate that the development of land
within such areas will be governed by the requirements of such annexation agreements (copies of which are available for public inspection during
normal business hours in the office of the Village Clerk) only to the extent that such agreements specifically and clearly permit such areas to be
developed according to standards that are less restrictive than are imposed by this Title.
10-10-4: NONCONFORMING USE OF CONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
The lawfully existing nonconforming use of part or all of a conforming building or structure (see Chapter 2, Definitions) may be continued subject to the
following provisions:
A. Repair and Alterations: Repairs, alterations and structural changes may be made to a conforming building occupied by a nonconforming use provided
said repairs, alterations or structural changes conform to the bulk regulations of the district in which said building or structure is located.
B. Restoration of Damaged Building or Structure: A conforming building or structure which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God,
to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence shall exceed fifty per cent (50%) of the cost of restoration
of the entire building, shall not be restored, unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all of the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
In the event such damage or destruction is less than fifty per cent (50%) of the cost of restoration of the entire building, no repairs or reconstruction
shall be made unless such restoration is started within one (1) year from the date of the partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
C. Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use: If a nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive
months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and any subsequent use of the building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in
which the premises are located.
D. Expansion of Nonconforming Use: The nonconforming use of a part of a conforming building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any
other portion of such building or structure.
E. Change of a Nonconforming Use: No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use if located in a conforming building or
structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 463/702
F. Change to a Conforming Use: Whenever all or any part of a conforming building or structure is occupied by a nonconforming use and is subsequently
changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of this Title, such premises shall not thereafter be reused or reoccupied by the
nonconforming use.
G. Elimination of Nonconforming Uses of Conforming Structures:
1. In all residential zoning districts, any use of a conforming structure for a use permitted only in a commercial or industrial zoning district, shall be
terminated within five (5) years of the effective date of this Title.
2. In all single-family residential zoning districts, any use of a conforming structure for a use permitted only in an SR-5 or SR-6 zoning district, shall be
terminated within ten (10) years of the effective date of this Title.
3. In all commercial zoning districts except B-1 Village Center District, any use of a conforming structure for a use permitted only in a residential or an
industrial zoning district shall be terminated within ten (10) years of the effective date of this Title.
4. In all industrial districts, any use of a conforming structure for a use permitted only in a residential or commercial district, shall be terminated within
fifteen (15) years of the effective date of this Title.
10-10-5: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USE THEREOF:
Any nonconforming building, structure or use thereof which existed lawfully at the adoption of this Title and which remains nonconforming, and any such
building, structure or use thereof which shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of this Title or of any subsequent amendment thereto, may be
continued only in accordance with the regulations which follow:
A. Repairs and Alterations: Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure (see Chapter 2, Definitions). No
structural alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure except those required by law, or except to make the building or structure, and use
thereof, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
In a residential district a non-conforming building containing nonconforming residential uses may be repaired or altered to improve livability and health
conditions, provided no changes are made that would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building.
B. Additions and Enlargements: A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming
building or structure, and use thereof, including all additions and enlargements thereto, is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
C. Relocation of Building or Structure: Any building or structure that does not conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located shall not
be moved in whole or in part to any other location unless every portion of such building or structure which is moved and the use thereof is made to
conform to all regulations of the district into which it is moved.
D. Restoration of Damaged Building or Structure: A nonconforming building or structure, or portion thereof, which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other
casualty or act of God, to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed fifty per cent (50%) of
the cost of restoration of the entire building or structure, shall not be restored, except as required by law, unless said building or structure, and the use
thereof, shall conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
In the event that such damage or destruction is less than fifty per cent (50%) of the cost of restoration of the entire building or structure, no repairs or
reconstruction shall be made unless such restoration is started within one (1) year from the date of the partial destruction and is diligently pursued to
completion.
E. Discontinuance of Use of Nonconforming Building or Structure: A nonconforming building, structure or portion thereof which is vacant, unoccupied and
not used on the effective date of this Title, or thereafter becomes vacant, and remains unoccupied or is not used for a continuous period of one (1)
year, shall not thereafter be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
F. Expansion of Use in Nonconforming Building or Structure:
1. The nonconforming use of part of a nonconforming building or structure may be extended throughout the building or structure in which said use is
presently located, but no changes or structural alterations which increase the bulk of the building or structure shall be made (except those required
by law) unless such changes or structural alterations and the use thereof conform to all the regulations of the district in which the building or structure
is located.
2. Accessory Uses: No accessory use shall be added to a lot which is nonconforming or to a lot containing a nonconforming building or structure.
G. Change of a Nonconforming Use in Nonconforming Building or Structure: The nonconforming use of a nonconforming building or structure may be
changed to any other use allowed within the zoning district; but no change shall extend or otherwise modify any provision made in this Title for
elimination of such nonconforming building or structure.
H. Change to a Conforming Use: Whenever all or any part of a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use
conforming to the provisions of this Title, such premise shall not thereafter be reused or reoccupied by the nonconforming use.
10-10-6: ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 464/702
It is the intent of this ordinance to cause nonconforming structures to be eliminated according to an amortization schedule which gives their owners a
reasonable opportunity to recapture their investment over the life of the amortization period. Any nonconforming structure (see Ch. 2, Definitions) shall be
removed and its use thereafter cease, or shall be converted to a structure designed or intended for a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located, in accordance with the following conditions and amortization schedules, after the owner has been given an opportunity to object to the
amortization schedule applicable to his structure at a public hearing held pursuant to the procedures hereinafter set forth:
A. In all residential zoning districts, any structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in a commercial or
industrial zoning district, shall be removed or shall be altered and converted to a structure designed for a use permitted in the residential zoning district
in which it is located within six (6) months after the termination of the applicable amortization period set forth below.
B. In all commercial zoning districts except the B-1 Village Center District, any structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use
permitted only in residential or industrial zoning districts, shall be removed or shall be altered, remodeled, or converted to a structure designed for a
use permitted in the commercial zoning district in which it is located within six (6) months after the termination of the applicable amortization period set
forth below.
C. In all industrial districts, any structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in residential or commercial
zoning districts shall be removed or shall be altered and converted to a structure designed for a use permitted in the industrial zoning district in which it
is located within six (6) months after the termination of the applicable amortization period set forth below.
D. The following amortization schedules shall apply.
1. Structures having an equalized assessed valuation of $15,000 (after application of any multiplier by the State of Illinois) or more shall be eliminated
according to the following schedule, based upon the type of construction of such structure:
a. Fire-restrictive or Mill Construction: Forty (40) years from date of building permit, or twenty (20) years from the effective date of the zoning
ordinance which first caused such structure to be nonconforming, whichever last occurs.
b. Ordinary or Noncombustible Frame Construction: Thirty-five (35) years from the date of building permit, or eighteen (18) years from the effective
date of the zoning ordinance which first caused such structure to be nonconforming, whichever last occurs.
c. Wood Frame Construction: Thirty (30) years from the date of the building permit, or fifteen (15) years from the effective date of the zoning
ordinance which first caused such structure to be nonconforming, whichever last occurs.
2. Structures having an assessed valuation of $5,000 or more (after application of any multiplier by the State of Illinois) but less than $15,000, shall be
eliminated not later than fifteen (15) years from the date of building permit, or ten (10) years from the effective date of the zoning ordinance which
first caused such structure to be nonconforming, whichever last occurs.
3. Structures having an equalized assessed valuation of less than $5,000 (after application of any multiplier by the State of Illinois) shall be eliminated
not later than five (5) years from the date of building permit, or three (3) years from the effective date of the zoning ordinance which first caused such
structure to be nonconforming, whichever last occurs.
Chapter 11
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
10-11-1: OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE:
The provisions of this Section shall apply and govern in all zoning districts.
10-11-1-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking space shall be the joint and/or separate responsibility of the operator and/or owner of the use and/or
land for which such off-street parking space is required to be provided and maintained.
B. An absence or deficiency of required parking facilities for any use that is otherwise in conformance with this Title at the effective date of its adoption
shall not be construed to render that use a Nonconforming Use; provided:
1. The use was in conformance with the parking requirements in effect at the time of the establishment of the use.
2. If the use is abandoned or is destroyed or damaged by any means out of the control of the owner to the extent that the cost of restoration to the
condition in which it was before the occurrence shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of restoration of the entire structure new, it shall not be
restored unless said structure and the use thereof shall conform to all the regulations of this Title.
3. If such land, structures or uses are enlarged, expanded or changed, there shall be provided and maintained, for the increment of expansion only, at
least the amount of off-street parking space that would be required hereunder if the increment were a separate land, structure or use established or
placed into operation after the effective date of this Title.
C. For all uses established or placed into operation after the effective date of this Title, there shall be constructed, provided, preserved and maintained the
amount of off-street parking space hereinafter set forth.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 465/702
D. All off-street parking space, whether provided in accordance with the provisions of this Title or in accordance with the provisions of any former
ordinance, shall be maintained as hereinafter required. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78)
E. Parking and loading spaces for all types of uses may be provided either in garages or open parking areas, except as required under Section 10-11-1-6
conforming with the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 90-105, 10-16-90)
F. Parking may be with or without charge.
10-11-1-2: LOCATION:
A. Same Lot: Off-street parking shall be located on the same lot as the use for which provided, except as otherwise set forth herein:
1. In the B-1 Village Center District, either part of all of the required off-street parking space may be located off the lot of the use for which the space is
provided, subject to the owner/tenant contributing to the Village Parking Fund funds to be used to provide public off-street parking to service the B-1
District as regulated in Chapter 6.
B. Structure: Enclosed buildings and carports containing off-street parking shall be subject to applicable yard requirements.
C. Setbacks: All parking areas shall conform to the applicable requirements for setbacks from lot lines contained in the zoning district in which such
parking areas are located.
D. Parkway: No parking areas be permitted between the property line and the curbline or edge of the pavement.
E. Trucks, Trailers, Boats and Recreational Vehicles: The parking of trucks, trailers, boats and recreational vehicles shall conform to any and all applicable
requirements of each zoning district.
10-11-1-3: SEPARATE OR COMBINED SPACE:
The parking space required for two (2) or more uses located on the same lot may be combined and used jointly, provided however:
A. Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two (2) or more uses having different standards for determining the amount of off-street
parking space required, the parking space shall be adequate in area to provide the sum total of off-street parking space requirements of all such uses.
B. Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two (2) or more uses having the same standard for determining the amount of off-street
parking space required, all such uses, for the purposes of this Section, shall be considered a single unit and the gross floor area of all such uses in all
structures on the same lot or the number of employees of all such uses in all structures on the same lot as fixed by the applicable standard, shall be
taken as a single total for the purpose of determining the amount of off-street parking space required.
10-11-1-4: DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot, and also automobile, vehicle or trailer sales lots,
shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
A. No parking area shall be used for the repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.
B. All parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and provided with an impervious surface maintained at all times in such a manner as to prevent
the release of dust and to be free of dust, trash and debris. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78)
C. Off-street parking areas shall be screened in accordance with the provisions in Section 10-11A-4D1a. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-91)
D. All parking areas shall be so designed that each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design
as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space.
E. All parking areas shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in such a manner as to minimize interference with
traffic movement.
F. All parking areas shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than twelve feet (12') in width and not more than twenty-five feet (25') in width.
G. All parking areas shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper guards so located that no parked vehicles will extend beyond the parking space.
H. Where hazards exist which can be eliminated or lessened by lighting, the Village Board may require lighting at such hours and in such manner as
deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and security. Such lighting facilities shall be arranged and operated so that they neither unreasonably
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 466/702
disturb occupants of adjacent properties nor interfere with traffic.
I. Each parking area may have not more than one attendant shelter building conforming to all setback requirements for structures in the district in which it
is located.
J. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be
of usable shape and condition. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7') and a minimum width of at least nine feet (9').
10-11-1-5: UNITS OF MEASUREMENT:
For purpose of this Section, the following units of measurement shall apply:
A. Floor Area: In the case of offices, commercial or service types of uses, "Floor Area" shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used by
tenants and/or owners or for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients and patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used
for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, processing or
packaging of merchandise incidental and accessory to a principal use, for show windows, for offices incidental to the management or maintenance of
stores or buildings, for toilet or restrooms, for utilities, or for dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms.
B. Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit shall mean one room, or a suite of two (2) or more rooms, designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping
purposes and having only one kitchen or kitchenette.
C. Seat or Bench: A seat shall be the space intended for one individual; in places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other seating
facilities, each twenty inches (20") of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat.
D. Employees: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty and residing on the
premises at any one time.
E. Fractions: When units of measurement result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking space.
10-11-1-6: SPACES REQUIRED:
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78)
RESIDENTIAL USES
One-family and
two-family
dwellings
and townhomes
2 parking spaces enclosed within a garage shall be provided for each dwelling unit. (Ord. 90-105, 10-16-90)
Multiple-family
dwellings
1.5 parking spaces shall be provided for every efficiency, studio or 1-bedroom dwelling unit and 2 parking spaces shall be
provided for every 2-bedroom dwelling unit, and 2.5 parking spaces for every 3 or more bedroom units.
Hotels, motels,
inns,
apartment hotels,
auto courts and
tourist homes
1 parking space shall be provided for each guest or sleeping room or suite, plus 1 additional space for each employee.
Mobile home
parks
1.5 parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home space. Parking required for the administrative office of a mobile
home park shall be calculated according to the uses contained therein.
Fraternities,
sororities
and dormitories
1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 active members, plus 1 parking space for the manager thereof.
Senior citizen
housing
1 parking space shall be provided for every 3 dwelling units.
COMMERCIAL USES
Airports, Heliports
1 parking space for each helicopter bay, hangar space or airplane parking space, plus 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees.
Agricultural land
and
buildings,
nurseries,
greenhouses
1 parking space shall be provided for each 500 square feet of public service area, plus 1 parking space for each 1.5
employees.
Amusement
Establishments
as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 467/702
Bowling Alleys
5 parking spaces shall be provided for each alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses,
such as bars, restaurants, etc.
Pool and
billiard halls,
amusement
parks and
establishments,
indoor
amusements
3 parking spaces shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of floor area plus 3 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross land area.
Dance halls,
skating rinks
10 parking spaces shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
Automobile
service stations
and repair
facilities
2 parking spaces shall be provided for each island of pumps and each service stall plus 1 parking space for
each 2 employees.
Automobile, truck,
trailer
and equipment
rental
1 parking space shall be provided for each 500 square feet of floor area, plus 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees.
Barber shop 2 parking spaces shall be provided for each barber chair, plus 1 for each employee.
Beauty parlors
and salons
1 parking space shall be provided for each 150 square feet of floor area.
Business machine
sales
and service
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Car washes Stacking spaces shall be provided to accommodate waiting automobiles equal in number to 5 times the maximum capacity of
the automobile laundry for each wash rack, plus 1 parking space for each 2 employees. Maximum capacity, in this instance,
shall mean the greatest number of automobiles undergoing some phase of laundering at the same time.
Cartage, express
and
distribution
facilities
1 parking space shall be provided for each vehicle maintained on the premises, plus 1 space for each 2 employees.
Furniture and
appliance
sales and service
1 parking space shall be provided for each 500 square feet of floor area plus 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees.
Golf courses,
driving
ranges
100 parking spaces shall be provided for each 9 holes of regular golf; 50 spaces for each 9 holes of par-3 or pitch and putt golf;
1 space for each 3/4 hole and 1.5 spaces for each employee in miniature golf; and 1 space for each tee and 1 space for each
1.5 employees at a driving range.
Launderettes 1 parking space shall be provided for each 3 washing or cleaning machines, plus 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees.
Leather goods
and
luggage stores
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Motor vehicle,
motorcycle,
bicycle and other
outdoor
recreational
vehicle sales,
rental and service
1 parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area, plus 1 parking space for each 3,000 square feet of
gross land area.
Newspaper
distribution
agency
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Outdoor rifle
range, trap
or skeet shooting
range
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2,000 square feet of gross land area.
Photostating,
blueprinting
establishments
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Plumbing and/or
electrical
equipment
showrooms and
shops
2 parking spaces shall be provided for each 1 employee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 468/702
Printing and
publishing
establishments
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees.
Radio, recording
and
television studios
and
stations
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Recreation and
health
clubs and
facilities,
gymnasia and
community
center buildings
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area
Restaurants or
establishments
dispensing food
and/or
beverages for
consumption on
the premises (not
including
drive-in
establishments)
1 parking space shall be provided for each 60 square feet of floor area, or 1 parking space for each 3 seats plus 1 parking
space for each 3 employees, whichever is greater.
Restaurants
(carry-out)
1 parking space shall be provided for each 50 square feet of floor area.
Restaurants
(drive-in)
and/or
refreshment stand
(where food
and/or
beverage is
consumed in
a vehicle)
1 parking space shall be provided for each 20 square feet of floor area, but not less than 10 spaces.
Retail stores and
service
establishments
(unless listed
separately)
1 parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area.
Stables and riding
academies
1 parking space for each three (3) horses, plus 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees.
Stadia,
fairgrounds,
rodeos,
grandstands and
race tracks,
commercial
1 parking space shall be provided for each 4 seats provided.
Tailor and dress
making shops
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Taverns cocktail
lounges, night
clubs
1 parking space shall be provided for each 100 square feet of floor area or parking spaces equal in number to 30 per cent
(30%) of the capacity in persons, whichever is greater.
Telephone
exchange and
equipment
buildings
1 parking space shall be provided for each person employed on the premises, plus one space for each 5,000 square feet of
floor area which is not devoted to electrical or transmission equipment.
Theaters (indoor)
1 parking space shall be provided for each 4 seats up to 400 seats, plus 1 for each 6 seats over 400 seats.
Theaters
(outdoors)
Reservoir parking spaces shall be provided equal to 10 per cent of the vehicle capacity of the theater.
Travel bureaus
and
transportation
ticket
agencies
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Undertaking
establishments,
funeral parlors
6 parking spaces shall be provided for each chapel or parlor, or 1 for each 50 square feet of floor area used for services,
whichever is greater, plus 1 parking space for each funeral vehicle kept on the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 469/702
OFFICE USES
Banks, savings
and loans,
financial
institutions
1 parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area. Drive-in establishments shall provide 6 stacking
spaces per teller or customer service area.
Business or
professional
offices
1 parking space shall be provided for each 275 square feet of floor area.
Laboratories,
research
and testing
1 parking space shall be provided for every 250 square feet of floor area.
Medical or dental
clinics
1 parking space shall be provided for each office, examination room, treatment room or dental chair, plus 1 parking space for
each 100 square feet of waiting room, plus 1 for each employee.
INDUSTRIAL USES
Building material
sales
1 parking space shall be provided for each 5,000 square feet of ground area plus 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees.
Contractors
offices,
landscape, sewer,
building
and highway
maintenance
firms
1 parking space shall be provided for each 500 square feet of floor space, plus 1 parking space for each 1.5 employees.
Excavations,
landfill or
mining operations
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees.
Manufacturing
uses, or any
establishments
engaged in
production,
processing,
assembly,
packaging,
baking,
cleaning,
servicing, testing
or repair of
materials,
goods or products
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees,
plus 1 parking space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise.
Public utility and
service uses
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees.
Railroad freight
terminals,
railroad switching
and
classification
yards, repair
shops and
roundhouses
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees.
Temporary
buildings for
construction and
temporary
real estate tract
offices
1 parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of floor area.
Truck terminals 1 parking space shall be provided for each employee, plus 1 for each truck.
Warehouses and
storage buildings
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees, plus 1 space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise.
Wholesale
establishments
(but not including
warehouses
and
storage
buildings other
1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 employees, plus 1 space for each 800 square feet of floor area in excess of 4,000
square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 470/702
than
accessory)
SCHOOLS, INSTITUTIONS AND
PLACES OF ASSEMBLY
Animal hospitals
and
veterinary clinics
6 parking spaces shall be provided per doctor and 1 space for each additional employee.
Animal shelters
and
kennels
1 parking space shall be provided for each 1.5 employees, with a minimum of 2 spaces.
Auditoriums,
meeting rooms,
convention halls
and
other places of
assembly
Parking space shall be provided equal to 30 per cent of the capacity of the facility in persons.
Cemeteries 1 parking space shall be provided for each 1.5 employees.
Churches,
temples,
synagogues and
chapels
1 parking space shall be provided for each 4 seats in the main auditorium.
Colleges,
universities,
professional and
trade
schools
1 parking space shall be provided for each 5 students (based on the maximum number of students that the facility is designed
to handle at any one time), plus 1 for each 2 employees.
Elementary and
junior
high schools
2 parking spaces shall be provided for each classroom. However, if a place of assembly is provided in the school and the
parking spaces provided for the place of
assembly is equal to or in excess of the requirement for the classrooms, the classroom requirement need not be provided.
High school 1 parking space shall be provided for each 8 students (based on the maximum number of students that the facility is designed
to handle at any one time), plus 2 spaces for each classroom. However, if a place of assembly is provided in the school and
the parking spaces provided for the place of assembly is equal to or in excess of the requirement for the classroom, the
classroom requirement need not be provided.
Hospitals 1 parking space shall be provided for each 2 beds, plus 1 for each 2 employees.
Nursery schools,
child care
centers and
similar
establishments
1 parking space shall be provided for each employee.
Nursing homes
convalescent
center, geriatric
center
and similar type
establishments
1 parking space shall be provided for each 5 beds, plus 1 for each 2 employees, plus 1 for each doctor assigned to the staff.
Libraries, art
galleries,
museums and
aquariums
1 parking space shall be provided for each 800 square feet of floor area.
Parish,
parsonage,
rectory,
convent,
monastery,
nunnery,
and religious
retreat
1 parking space shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of floor area.
Parks,
playgrounds,
zoos, forest
preserves,
beaches, athletic
fields and
grounds of
recreational
clubs, public
1 parking space shall be provided for each 1.5 employees plus 1% of total land area.
Philanthropic and
eleemosynary
institution
1 parking space shall be provided for each 500 square feet of floor area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 471/702
Private clubs and
lodges
Parking spaces shall be provided equal in number to 30 per cent of the capacity in persons.
PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT
Parking facilities shall be provided on the basis of the required spaces for each individual use.
OTHER USES For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking requirements, the number of required parking spaces shall be
determined by the Village Board on the same basis as required for the most similar listed uses.
10-11-1-7: MODIFICATIONS:
The Village Board may authorize a modification, reduction or waiver of the foregoing requirements as a Variation, pursuant to the regulations of Chapter
13, if it should find that in the particular case the peculiar nature of the residence, business, trade, industry or other use or the exceptional shape or size of
the property or other exceptional situation or condition, would justify such action.
10-11-2: OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE:
The provisions of this section shall apply and govern in all districts.
10-11-2-1: WHEN REQUIRED:
Off-street loading space shall be required and maintained in connection with any building or part thereof which is to be occupied by uses requiring the
receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise.
10-11-2-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. The duty to provide the off-street loading space herein required shall be the joint and/or separate responsibility of the operator and owner of the
structure or structures for which off-street loading space is required to be provided.
B. An absence or deficiency of required loading facilities for any use that is otherwise in conformance with this ordinance at the effective date of its
adoption shall not be construed to render that use a Nonconforming Use; provided:
1. The use was in conformance with the loading requirements in effect at the time of the establishment of the use.
2. If the use is abandoned or is destroyed or damaged by any means out of the control of the owner to the extent that the cost of restoration to the
condition in which it was before the occurrence shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of restoration of the entire structure, it shall not be
restored unless said structure and the use thereof shall conform to all the regulations of this title.
If such land, structures or uses are enlarged, expanded or changed, there shall be provided and maintained, for the increment of expansion only, at
least the amount of off street loading space that would be required hereunder, if the increment were a separate land, structure or use established or
placed into operation after the effective date of this title.
C. For all uses established or placed into operation after the effective date of this title, there shall be constructed, provided, preserved and maintained the
amount of off street parking space hereinafter set forth.
D. All off street loading space, whether provided in accordance with the provisions of this title or in accordance with the provisions of any former ordinance,
shall be maintained as hereinafter required.
E. Loading spaces for all types of uses may be provided either in garages or open parking areas conforming with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 78-40, 5-
16-1978)
10-11-2-3: LOCATION:
A. Located On Same Lot As Structure: Off street loading space shall be located on the same lot as the structure for which it is provided. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-
1978)
B. Located In Yards; Exceptions: Off street loading space may be located in any required yard, other than the front yard or corner side yard, provided it
conforms with all applicable requirements for screening and setbacks; provided, however, on property which is zoned I-2 EDA overlay district, off street
loading space may also be located in the front yard provided that the loading dock is fully enclosed and that there is sufficient depth at the loading dock
location to avoid traffic hazards on any adjacent street or, if in the rear yard, exterior off street loading may be permitted with proper screening and
landscaping approved by the village zoning administrator. (Ord. 2001-127, 10-2-2001)
C. Setbacks: All loading areas shall conform to the applicable requirements for setbacks from lot lines contained in the zoning district in which such loading
areas are located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 472/702
D. Location Near Intersection: No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within thirty five feet (35') of the nearest point of intersection of any
two (2) streets.
E. Trucks: The parking of trucks as an accessory use, when used in the conduct of a permitted use listed in the commercial, office/research and industrial
districts, shall be limited to vehicles of not over one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence
district boundary line. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-11-2-4: DESIGN, DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
Every parcel of land hereafter used for off street loading space shall be designed, developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
A. No loading area shall be used for the repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.
B. Each loading area shall be graded for proper drainage and provided with an impervious surfacing material capable of bearing a line load of two hundred
(200) pounds per square foot and shall be maintained at all times in such a manner as to prevent the release of dust and to be free of dust, trash and
debris. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
C. Off street loading spaces shall be screened in accordance with the provisions in subsection 10-11A-4E1c of this chapter. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
D. Each loading space shall be provided with entrances and exits not less than twelve feet (12') in width and so designed and located as to minimize traffic
congestion.
E. Each loading berth shall be so located that no portion of a vehicle shall project into a street or alley while being loaded or unloaded.
F. Unless otherwise specified, a required off street loading berth shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width by at least thirty feet (30') in length, exclusive of
aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
G. Space allocated to any off street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking facilities
or portions thereof.
H. Uses for which off street loading facilities are required herein, but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum prescribed for such
required facilities, shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle, from any adjacent alley, service drive or open space
on the same zoning lot. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-11-2-5: SPACE REQUIRED:
At least the following amounts of off street loading space shall be provided, plus an area or means adequate for maneuvering, ingress and egress.
A. Residential Uses: Hotels, motels, lodging houses, apartment hotels and multi-family dwellings: For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to two
hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of floor area, one off street loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each
additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
B. Commercial Uses:
1. Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors: For buildings containing eight thousand (8,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
floor area, one loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof.
2. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.
a. Airports and commercial heliports.
b. Amusement establishments.
c. Bowling alleys.
d. Dance halls.
e. Gymnasia.
f. Pool halls.
g. Skating rinks.
h. Swimming pools.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 473/702
3. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred fifty thousand
(150,000) square feet of floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of floor
area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area shall be less than
twelve feet in width by sixty-five feet in length (12' x 65').
a. Radio and television stations and studios.
b. Recording studios.
c. Hotels and motels, clubs and lodges (not for profit), containing retail shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, business or professional
offices (other than accessory).
4. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000)
square feet of floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.
a. Schools _ music, dance, business and trade.
b. Theaters, indoors.
5. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing five thousand (5,000) to forty thousand (40,000) square
feet of floor area. For buildings containing forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area, two (2) loading
berths shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area shall be not less than twelve feet in width
by sixty-five feet in length (12' x 65').
a. Cartage and express facilities.
b. Mail order houses.
c. Printing and publishing.
C. Office Uses: For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand
(100,00) square feet of floor area; for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area up to five hundred thousand (500,000)
square feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional five hundred thousand (500,000)
square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in excess of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet.
1. Banks and financial institutions.
2. Medical and dental clinics.
3. Offices, business and professional.
4. Offices of labor organizations.
D. Industrial Uses:
1. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing five thousand (5,000) to forty thousand (40,000) square
feet of floor area; for buildings containing forty thousand (40,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area, two (2) loading berths
shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area shall not be less than twelve feet in width by sixtyfive
feet in length (12' x 65').
a. Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products.
b. Fuels, petroleum, flammable liquids, fats or oils _ storage and wholesale distribution.
c. Motor freight terminals.
d. Storage and warehousing.
2. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area shall not be less than twelve feet in
width by sixty-five feet in length (12' x 65').
a. Air, railroad and water freight terminals; railroad switching and classification yards; repair shops and roundhouses.
b. Sewage treatment plants, community.
E. Schools, Institutions and Places of Assembly:
1. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area shall be not less than twelve feet in
width by sixty-five feet in length (12' x 65').
a. Arenas.
b. Auditoriums.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 474/702
c. Health and medical institutions.
d. Institutions for the care and treatment of alcoholics, drug addict patients, or the insane or feebleminded.
e. Nursery schools.
f. Penal and correctional institutions.
g. Places of assembly.
h. Race tracks.
i. Stadiums.
2. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred fifty thousand
(150,000) square feet of floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of floor
area or fraction thereof. Each such loading berth for buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area shall be not less than
twelve feet in width by sixty-five feet in length (12' x 65').
a. Banquet halls.
b. Convention halls.
c. Exhibition halls.
3. For the uses listed hereunder, one loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to two hundred thousand (200,000)
square feet of floor area, plus one additional loading berth for each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.
a. Educational and cultural institutions.
b. Meeting halls.
c. Philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions.
d. Religious institutions.
4. Recreation Buildings or Community Centers, non commercial: For buildings containing ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of floor area, one loading berth shall be provided; for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area up to five
hundred thousand (500,000) square feet, one additional loading berth shall be provided, plus one additional loading berth for each additional five
hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in excess of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet.
F. Planned Unit Developments: Loading berths shall be provided on the basis of the required berths for each individual use.
G. For any permitted or special use not covered above, loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Floor Area of Establishment in
Thousands of Square Feet
Required Number and
Size of Berths
5 to 10 1 - (12 ft. x 30 ft.)
10 to 25 2 - (12 ft. x 30 ft. ea.)
25 to 40 2 - (12 ft. x 65 ft. ea.)
40 to 100 3 - (12 ft. x 65 ft. ea.)
For each additional two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of floor area, one additional loading berth shall be provided; such additional berth to
be at least twelve feet in width by sixty-five feet in length (12' x 65').
10-11-2-6: MODIFICATIONS:
The Village Board may authorize a modification, reduction or waiver of the foregoing requirements as a Variation, pursuant to the regulations of Chapter
13, if it should find that in a particular case the peculiar nature of the business, trade, industry or other use, or exceptional situation or conditions would
justify such action. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78)
Chapter 11A
LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND TREE PRESERVATION
10-11A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
This Chapter of the Zoning Ordinance is established to create uniform landscape, screening and tree preservation standards for the development of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 475/702
property in the Village and the review of plans therefor, in order to ensure that the Village remains attractive, safe and comfortable. This Chapter shall
govern all developments except detached single and attached two-family residential subdivisions.
10-11A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions noted below apply uniquely to this Chapter and supersede any conflicting definitions found in Chapter 2 of the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance
("this Title"). The rules for interpretation found in Chapter 2 shall be applicable to these definitions.
EXTERIOR PARKWAY: The unpaved portion of the public street right of way in front of a property (see Diagram 1 at end of this Section).
FOUNDATION AREA: The ground area immediately adjacent to a building on all sides thereof. Foundation areas extend a minimum of four feet (4') in all
directions from the foundation of the building (see Diagram 2 at end of this Section).
INTERIOR PARKWAY: A landscaped open space extending a minimum of ten feet (10') from all street rights of way (see Diagram 1 at end of this Section).
LANDSCAPED OPEN SPACE: Land covered by trees, shrubs, turf grasses or ground cover. Impervious surfaces, such as buildings, parking lots,
walkways, or patios are not considered landscaped open space.
PERIMETER LANDSCAPE AREA: An area around the periphery of a property not facing a public road (see Diagrams 1 and 2 at end of this Section). The
perimeter landscape area extends from the property line to the nearest building face, parking area, or access drive, exclusive of the foundation area and
the interior parkway.
PROTECTED TREE: An existing tree designated on the landscape plan to remain after construction.
SITE INTERIOR: The open space area behind and between buildings on a site with multiple structures, excluding the interior parkway, foundation area
and perimeter landscape area.
Diagram 1
Diagram 2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 476/702
Diagram 3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 477/702
10-11A-3: PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall establish the standards for the preparation and submission of required plans for landscape, screening and tree preservation.
A. Landscape Plan Required. A landscape plan approved by the Village staff on the basis of the standards set forth in this Chapter shall be required for all
projects requiring site plan review and/or a special use permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 478/702
B. Content of Landscape Plan. All landscape plans shall include or have attached thereto the following information:
1. North arrow, scale, date of plan and any subsequent revisions.
2. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, parking lots and driveways, roadways and rights of way, sidewalks,
bicycle paths, ground signs, refuse disposal areas, fences, free standing electrical equipment, light fixtures, other surface utility structures, and other
free standing structural features as determined by the Community Development Department, tot lots and other recreational facilities, setbacks and
easements. The landscape plan shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50').
3. The location, quantity, size and both scientific and common names of all proposed plant materials.
4. Existing and proposed contours, including the location of all proposed berming, at a one foot (1') contour interval. Also included shall be the location,
extent and general elevations of all detention and retention areas and drainageways.
5. Specification of the type and boundaries of all proposed ground cover, including both scientific and common names of all proposed plant materials.
6. The designation, location, type and size of all existing trees four inches (4") and larger in diameter measured one foot (1') above natural grade. Any
trees to be removed should be clearly identified. Trees measuring between two and one-half inches (21/2") and four inches (4") in diameter which will
be used to meet landscape requirements shall also be indicated. If required for reasons of clarity, this information may be placed on an additional
illustration.
Where existing trees are grouped in a dense cluster, an overall tree mass may be used without a specific delineation of individual trees. If this
technique is used, protected trees used to meet site landscape requirements must be tagged on-site and identified on the plan in tabular form.
7. Details of all fences and walls proposed to be constructed on the site.
8. Elevations, cross-sections and other site of construction details determined to be necessary by the Community Development Department.
C. Timing of Landscape Improvements. All required landscaping shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The best times for
planting in this area are early spring and early fall. Plants planted in the summer run the risk of dehydration.
See Section 10-13-9E regarding applicable assurance requirements for landscape improvements. If weather conditions or other circumstances beyond
the developer's control prevent installation of all or portions of the landscape materials and all other requirements for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy have been met, a letter of credit or a performance guarantee approved by the Village Attorney to insure completion of approved
landscaping shall be filed with the Village Treasurer. The amount of the performance guarantee and the required completion data shall be
recommended by the Zoning Administrator based on current costs and set by the Village Board. If such a letter of credit or performance guarantee has
already been submitted for the proposed landscape improvements, the Village Board may permit the developer to extend the performance guarantee
for an additional specified period of time.
10-11A-4: LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall establish standards for the landscape improvements required to be installed as part of the development of new buildings, structures
and uses of land governed by this Title:
A. General Landscape Standards. Every development shall provide sufficient landscaping so that:
1. Neighboring properties are shielded from the negative visual influence of that development;
2. The development is shielded from the negative impacts of adjacent uses, including streets or railroads;
3. The appearance and desirability of the development contributes to the overall attractiveness and economic health of the Village.
B. Minimum Landscaped Open Space. For each parcel of land to be developed, the minimum landscaped open space shall comply with standards
established in Section 10-11A-4D. In zoning districts for which no minimum landscaped open space requirements are specified, a minimum of fifteen
percent (15%) of the total parcel shall be devoted to landscaped open space area. Section 10-11A-4D details landscape requirements for various
portions of the total landscaped open space.
C. Flexibility in the Administration of Required Landscape Standards. To meet the objectives outlined in Section 10-11A-4A, the following landscape
requirements are hereby established. Theses standards provide specific requirements for site landscaping. However, the Village recognizes that,
because of the wide variety of types of developments and the relationships between them, some flexibility in applying standards set forth in Section 10-
11A-4D are appropriate as long as the intent of specified requirements are met. Any deviation of twenty percent (20%) or more from the requirements
of any specific requirement of this Chapter shall require a variation.
Whenever the Village allows or requires deviation from the requirements set forth in this Section, it shall enter on the face of the landscape plan the
reasons for allowing or requiring deviation from the requirements of this Section.
D. Types of Landscaped Areas. This Chapter regulates landscaping of five (5) distinct areas of a parcel as follows:
1. Interior parkway
2. Perimeter area
3. Foundation area
4. Parking lots
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 479/702
5. Site interior
Diagrams 1, 2 and 3 provide graphic illustrations of each area. Each area shall be landscaped in accordance with the following criteria:
1. Interior Parkway Landscaping. An interior parkway shall be provided in all nonresidential zoning districts as identified in the following table:
Table 1
Interior Parkway Requirements
Zoning
Classification
Minimum
Interior Parkway
Office-Research 20'
Com./Village Center 10'1
Com./B-2 15'
Com./B-3 20'
Com./B-4 25'
I-1 20'
I-2 35'
PD 10 - 35'2
1 In the Com./Village Center District, this requirement shall be waived if a front yard setback of less than twenty feet (20') is permitted.
2 Property zoned PD shall meet or exceed perimeter screening required of the most appropriate standard zoning district as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
Except for access drives, interior parkways shall be landscaped as follows:
a. Where parking is provided in the front yard, one tree per thirty feet (30') of street frontage shall be provided. At least fifty percent (50%) of the
required trees shall be large deciduous or evergreen trees as identified in the Recommended Trees, Shrubs and Ground Cover List (Table 3). Tree
type may vary depending on design intent. However, as a general rule, all trees on a street, between two (2) intersecting streets, shall be the same
species and variety to provide continuity along the roadway.
In addition, shrub planting shall screen the parking area from the roadway. This shrub planting shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height and
be located within the interior parkway. A maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the parking lot frontage may be left unscreened to permit design
flexibility (see Diagram 4). However, when the landscape plan indicates a single row of shrubs, the entire parking lot frontage shall be screened.
The remainder of the interior parkway shall be planted with ground cover, flowers, or grass.
Diagram 4
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 480/702
b. Where no parking spaces will be located in the front yard, one tree per forty feet (40') of street frontage shall be provided. At least fifty percent
(50%) of the required trees shall be large deciduous or evergreen trees as identified in the Recommended Trees, Shrubs and Ground Cover List
(Table 3). Tree type may vary depending on design intent. However, as a general rule, all trees on a street, between two (2) intersecting streets,
shall be the same species and variety to provide continuity along the roadway. The remainder of the interior parkway shall be planted with shrubs,
ground cover, flowers or grass.
2. Perimeter Landscape Area. The appropriateness of proposed perimeter landscaping will depend upon the relationship between the proposed use of
the property and adjacent properties. Three (3) types of perimeter screening have been defined. The particular type of screening that will be required
shall depend upon the relationship of the proposed land use and the adjacent land use. Type 1 screening shall generally be required between
residential and nonresidential uses. Type 2 perimeter landscape screening shall generally be required to provide screening of parking areas between
adjacent nonresidential uses. Type 3 perimeter landscape screening shall generally be required between low and high density residential areas.
Tables 2A and 2B of this section shall be used to determine the requirements for perimeter screening between uses. Where the adjacent property
has already been developed, the required screening shall be governed by the existing use. Table 2A of this section details screening and buffering
requirements where the adjacent property has been developed. In cases where a mixed use development exists on the adjacent parcel, the
predominate use on that site shall determine the required screening.
Table 2B of this section shall be used to determine required screening where the adjacent property is undeveloped. Current zoning shall determine
the appropriate screening treatment unless the property is zoned ER-1, in which case the comprehensive plan shall be used to determine the
anticipated use and the resulting screening requirements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 481/702
TABLE 2A
PERIMETER SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(Adjacent To An Existing Use)
Proposed Use
Adjacent Property
Existing Use
Single-/Two-Family Residence
Multi-Family
Residence Office Commercial Industrial Public
Single- or two-family residence, detached 4 4 4 4 4 4
Multi-family residence 3 4 4 4 1 4
Office 1 2 2 2 2 2
Commercial 1 1 2 2 2 2
Industrial 1 1 2 2 2 2
Public 2 2 2 2 2 2
Notes:
1. Type 1 screening.
2. Type 2 screening.
3. Type 3 screening.
4. No screening required.
When a proposed use is adjacent to a property zoned PD, the zoning administrator shall determine appropriate screening required based on the
most appropriate standard zoning district. TABLE 2B
PERIMETER SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
(Adjacent To Undeveloped Property)
Proposed Use
Adjacent Property
Existing Zoning
ER-
1
ER-
2
ER-
3
SR-
1
SR-
2
SR-
3
SR-
4
SR-
5
SR-
6
MH-
1
OR
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-4
I-1
I-2
P-1
Single- or two-family residence,
detached
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
Multi-family residence 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 1 4
Office 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Commercial 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Industrial 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Public 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Notes:
1. Type 1 screening.
2. Type 2 screening.
3. Type 3 screening.
4. No screening required.
When a proposed use is adjacent to a property zoned PD, the zoning administrator shall determine appropriate screening required based on the
most appropriate standard zoning district. Minimum perimeter landscape requirements shall be as follows:
a. Type 1 Screening: Type 1 perimeter landscape requirements are designed to provide a substantial buffer between uses. Where type 1 screening
is required on table 2A or 2B of this section, one of the following three (3) buffering alternatives shall be required. The property owner may select
the buffering alternative which best meets the configuration of the site and the proposed development. All fences, walls and hedges shall comply
with this title. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
Alternate A: The buffering area shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width for this alternative. An opaque brick or other approved masonry wall
six feet (6') high shall be constructed along the entire perimeter, excluding area within the required front yard setback. The wall may be continued
within the front yard provided the height is reduced to four feet (4'). If the proposed use is for a mining operation or for related building or structure
for screening, crushing, mining, washing or storage, the required masonry wall shall be eight feet (8') high. In addition, large deciduous trees in a
quantity equal to one tree per seventy five feet (75') of perimeter length shall be provided. Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and
design considerations.
Alternate B: A minimum twelve foot (12') buffer area shall be required for this alternative. A fence of wood or other approved material six feet (6')
high and at least seventy five percent (75%) opaque shall be constructed along the entire perimeter, excluding area within the required front yard
setback. The fence may be continued within the front yard provided the height is reduced to four feet (4'). If the proposed use is for a mining
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 482/702
operation or for related building or structure for screening, crushing, mining, washing or storage, the required masonry wall shall be eight feet (8')
high. In addition shrubs shall be planted within the buffer area. Large deciduous trees shall be provided in a quantity equal to one tree per sixty
feet (60') of perimeter length. Tree location shall be determined by tree species and design considerations. (Ord. 2015-97, 12-1-2015)
Alternate C: A minimum twenty five foot (25') buffer area shall be required for this alternative. A berm at least three feet (3') in height with a
maximum three to one (3:1) slope shall be constructed along the entire perimeter. Breaks in the berm may be provided as appropriate to
accommodate drainage. The berm shall be planted with shrubs four feet (4') or greater in height to provide screening along at least seventy five
percent (75%) of the perimeter length. Trees shall be provided in a quantity equal to one tree per sixty feet (60') of perimeter length. Tree spacing
shall be determined by tree species and design considerations. Up to twenty five percent (25%) of the required trees in this screening alternative
may be small deciduous trees (crab apples, etc.).
Diagram 5
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 483/702
b. Type 2 Screening: Type 2 perimeter landscape screening is generally required between adjacent nonresidential uses to screen parking areas from
adjacent uses. Where a parking lot will be placed along a perimeter such that parked cars will face the abutting property, shrubs and trees shall be
required. Shrubs shall be provided along at least fifty percent (50%) of the length of the parking area. Where parking will be placed adjacent to a
residential use, shrub screening shall be continuous along the entire parking area and a minimum of six feet (6') high. Shrubs shall be a minimum
of three feet (3') in height when screening a parking lot from adjacent nonresidential uses. Trees shall be provided in a quantity equal to one large
deciduous tree per sixty feet (60') of parking lot length. Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and design considerations. Up to twenty
five percent (25%) of the required trees in this screening alternative may be small deciduous trees (crab apples, etc.). If the proposed use is for a
mining operation or for related building or structure for screening, crushing, mining, washing or storage, an eight foot (8') high fence or wall shall be
provided along the perimeter in lieu of parking lot screening.
c. Type 3 Screening. Type 3 perimeter landscape screening is generally required between low and high density residential areas. Where a Type 3
screen is required according to Table 1, berming, trees and shrubs shall be provided to create a visual separation between properties. Appropriate
berm height will depend on the width of the landscape area, with no berm having a slope greater than three to one (3:1). A minimum of sixty
percent (60%) of the length of the perimeter shall be planted with shrubs that will reach a height of at least six feet (6'). Trees shall be provided in a
quantity equal to one tree per sixty feet (60') of perimeter length. Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and design considerations. Up
to twenty-five percent (25%) of the required trees in this screening alternative may be small deciduous trees (crab apples, etc.).
3. Foundation Area Landscaping. A minimum four foot (4') wide landscape area is recommended adjacent to all building walls, (exclusive of driveways,
access walks, and service and delivery areas). Planting should emphasize softening large expanses of building walls, accenting building entrances
and architectural features, and screening mechanical equipment. Where extended roofs or canopies are used to provide a covered walkway adjacent
to a building, foundation plantings are not required. However. landscaping is recommended to separate vehicular areas from buildings.
4. Parking Lot Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required within all parking lots containing twenty (20) or more parking spaces, to meet the following
standards:
a. There shall be a minimum seven foot (7') wide (measured from back of curb) curbed planting island at the end of every parking row. The depth of
the planting island shall be equal to the depth of the parking stalls.
b. To break up long expanses of parking rows, landscape islands are required. One of the following three (3) alternatives shall be used to divide rows
of twenty (20) or more parking spaces.
Alternative A. A continuous curbed landscape island between rows may be provided in lieu of full stall planting islands between parking bays.
Where such a continuous island is provided, it shall be a minimum of seven feet (7') in width and shall contain a minimum of one tree per twenty
(20) spaces (see Diagram 6).
Alternative B. A maximum of twenty (20) parking spaces will be permitted in any length of parking bay. A curbed island at least seven feet (7') wide
and as deep as the parking stalls shall be provided to divide the bay length. There shall be a minimum of one large deciduous tree per island.
Branching shall start no less than six feet (6') above the pavement measured from pavement level.
Alternative C. Smaller curbed islands at the head of and between parking stalls may be permitted. If smaller curbed planting islands are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 484/702
appropriate, they shall be a minimum of six and one-half feet by six and one-half feet (61/2' x 61/2') (measured from back of curb to back of curb)
and shall be provided at the rate of two (2) small islands for every full size island required in Alternative B. There shall be a minimum of one large
deciduous tree per island. Branching shall start no less than six feet (6') above the pavement measured from pavement level.
c. In addition to required trees, an appropriate planting of shrubs, ground cover plants, flowers, sodded lawn and mulch shall be provided within all
landscape islands. To insure visibility, shrubs shall not exceed a mature height of thirty inches (30") above pavement on landscape islands at the
end of parking rows (see Diagrams 7 and 8).
Diagram 6
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 485/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 486/702
Diagram 7
Diagram 8
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 487/702
5. Site Interior Landscaping. On parcels with more than one structure, the open space between buildings shall be appropriately landscaped to provide:
a. Screening of adjacent dwelling units.
b. Screening and shading to improve energy efficiency.
c. A visually appealing living environment.
The planting of trees is the most effective means of defining and enhancing open space areas. As the appropriate quantity and location of trees
will be dependent upon the site and building configuration of individual developments, each project will be evaluated independently. However, open
space areas within the interior of a site should generally contain a minimum of one tree per five thousand (5,000) square feet of open space.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 488/702
Other landscape features, including shrubs, flowers, ground cover, grasses, and berming should be used as appropriate to enhance the overall
appearance and function of the open space area.
E. Landscape Design Requirements. Functional activities within and adjoining the development site must be considered in the design of landscape
improvements, including consideration of the following:
1. Service Area Screening. All service areas shall be screened from view through the use of evergreen plant materials or masonry screen walls
compatible with the proposed building design.
a. Trash dumpsters and other waste receptacles or equipment shall be screened with three (3) sided brick or other approved masonry walls at least
six feet (6') in height, with a solid, attractive single or double access gate on one side only.
b. All utility equipment (meters, transformers, etc.) shall be provided with appropriate planting screens. All dish antennas shall be adequately
screened from adjoining properties by an opaque wall, fence, hedge or berm.
c. All garage doors and loading areas shall be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining rights of way and property zoned for any
residential use.
d. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products within five hundred feet (500') of a residence district shall be effectively screened
and enclosed by a solid wall or fence at least eight feet (8') in height. If materials to be stored outdoors are in excess of eight feet (8') in height,
then landscape screening shall be provided in addition to the fence or wall installed along the outside perimeter of the fence or wall, equal or
exceeding the height of the materials to be stored outdoors.
2. Intersection Visibility: Landscaping must be designed and installed to minimize potential obstruction of critical sightlines.
Landscape planting shall be so designed as to avoid obstruction of a motorist's vision at the intersections of outlet access drives and ring roads,
access roads, or municipal streets.
Unobstructed visibility between two feet (2') and six feet (6') above the height of the paved surface of the access road must be maintained at all
intersections. To maintain this visibility, no shrubs or other landscape material which will reach a mature height greater than two feet (2') shall be
permitted within ten feet (10') of the right of way of a primary thoroughfare, or five feet (5') from the right of way of a lesser roadway, for a distance of
forty feet (40') from the right of way intersection (see diagram 9 of this section). Trees are allowed in these critical visibility areas if the lowest
branching begins not less than six feet (6') above the pavement.
3. Parking Area Island Planters: All parking area island planters should be overexcavated to a two foot (2') depth for their entire width and length,
backfilled with an appropriate mix of topsoil, peat moss and nutrients to replace the excavated material, and shall be compacted, leaving a crowned
or mounded top.
4. Berming Slope: Berming shall not exceed a maximum slope of three to one (3:1) except in parking islands, where the maximum slope shall not
exceed two to one (2:1).
5. Mulch Materials: Mulch materials shall be shredded bark or other organic material best suited for the village. Lava rock or large diameter (11/2 inch
diameter plus) bark chips ("chunk bark") are not acceptable. Gravel and stone mulches are not permitted, unless specifically approved in writing by
the village. Mulch beds at time of planting shall extend a minimum of two feet (2') beyond the center of a shrub.
6. Edging: Edging is recommended to separate grass areas from shrubs, ground cover and mulch and shall be a good quality steel, plastic, or weather
resistant (redwood, cedar) or treated wood secured with stakes.
7. Wood Fences: All wood fences proposed to be used to meet perimeter screening requirements shall be of red cedar, redwood, cypress, or other
approved decay resistant treated wood, at least six feet (6') high, and of solid construction. Wood fences shall be not less than seventy five percent
(75%) opaque, with all supporting posts exposed to the lot interior. Stockade type fences are not permitted.
Diagram 9
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 489/702
(Ord. 91-26, 4-16-1991)
10-11A-5: TREE PRESERVATION:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to establish regulations limiting the removal and ensuring the replacement of trees removed from private
property within the village, and in doing so, safeguard the ecological and aesthetic environment of the community. These regulations are further
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 490/702
intended to serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing and distributing of land so as to:
1. Preserve trees as an important public resource enhancing the quality of life and the general welfare of the village and enhancing its unique character
and physical, historical and aesthetic environment;
2. Preserve the essential character of those areas throughout the village which are heavily wooded and in a more natural state with plant material
indigenous to the region;
3. Enhance and preserve the air quality of the village through the filtering effect of trees on air pollutants;
4. Reduce the noise within the village through the baffle and barrier effect of trees on the spread of noise;
5. Aid in the stabilization of soil by the prevention of erosion and sedimentation;
6. Reduce energy consumption through the windbreak and shade effects of trees when they are properly placed on the lot;
7. Preserve and enhance nesting areas for birds and other wildlife which in turn assists in the control of insects;
8. Reduce storm water runoff and the cost associated therewith and replenish the ground water supplies;
9. Provide moderation of temperatures;
10. Prevent the existence of trees which pose a threat or danger to the public or to the property in the village;
11. Protect and increase property value; and
12. Provide a visual landscape buffer between properties when feasible.
B. Preconstruction Tree Requirements: A tree survey and a tree preservation plan shall be required for all development activity requiring site plan review
and approval, a special use permit, zoning for a planned development ("PD"), approval of a planned unit development ("PUD") plan, and/or approval of
a preliminary and/or final plat of subdivision (or resubdivision), unless the community development director, or his or her authorized designee,
determines from a physical inspection of the proposed development site that no significant tree stand exists on the property.
1. Tree Survey: A tree survey shall include the location, size and species (both scientific and common names) of all deciduous trees located on the
parcel with a trunk size of four inches (4") or greater in diameter measured one foot (1') above natural ground level, all multistemmed trees greater
than six feet (6') in height with an aggregate trunk diameter of ten inches (10") or greater measured at diameter at breast height (54 inches above
natural ground level), and all evergreen trees measuring five feet (5') or greater in height, hereinafter the "significant surveyed trees". All of the
significant surveyed trees illustrated on the tree survey shall be numbered on the tree survey and on the tree preservation plan and the significant
surveyed trees on the proposed development property shall be tagged with the corresponding number.
2. Tree Preservation Plan: Whenever a significant surveyed tree is proposed to be removed, or may be affected by construction, a tree preservation
plan shall be submitted that indicates which trees are proposed to be removed, which trees are proposed to be preserved in place, and which trees
are proposed to be relocated. The tree preservation plan shall show the location of the site, a north arrow, location of buildings (existing and
proposed), and the excavation limits required to construct proposed improvements, including, without limitation, roads, driveways, parking areas,
utilities, detention basins, detention ponds and other relevant information concerning the proposed improvements. Said plan shall also indicate the
methods that are to be used to preserve the existing trees upon the property proposed to be developed meeting the minimum requirements of the
required tree preservation measures during construction set forth in subsection C of this section, and the methods to be used to relocate any
significant surveyed trees to a different location on the development property. Every reasonable effort shall be made to retain existing tree lines on
the perimeter of development parcels so as to preserve natural buffers between adjoining properties and to preserve significant interior tree clusters
to the extent practicable, taking into account the size of the parcel, the location and size of the proposed improvements, and the probability that the
protected trees will survive.
3. Tree Preservation Easement Areas: The community development department, in conjunction with the village arborist and the village engineer or his
authorized designee, shall review and determine desired perimeter tree protection areas on the proposed development site based on field
observation, and shall recommend to the developer and the corporate authorities the size and location of perimeter tree preservation areas, taking
into account the size of the development property, the location of the proposed improvements, utilities, drainage, surrounding uses and the
probability that the significant surveyed trees in the tree preservation easement(s) will survive if the required tree preservation measures during
construction are followed. The owner and developer of the proposed development property shall depict all tree protection easement areas on all site
plans, preliminary and final plats of subdivision, preliminary and final PUD plans, and preliminary and final engineering plans for the proposed
development. The scale of the tree preservation plan shall be consistent with the scale of the PUD plan(s), subdivision plat(s), site plan, landscape
plan and engineering plans for the development.
4. Restrictive Covenants: The final plat of subdivision or final PUD plan shall depict and grant permanent tree preservation easements to protect the
existing perimeter tree areas as depicted on the preliminary plat and/or preliminary PUD plan, and shall contain the permanent easement provisions
set forth in subsection D of this section. For developments that do not involve the subdivision of land or a PUD, but that require site plan review and
approval, the owner and/or the developer shall prepare a separate plat of easement to create the tree preservation easements. The owner and
developer of the development parcel shall also execute restrictive covenants that run with the land for the protection of the trees within the tree
preservation easements to protect trees during construction, after construction of the development and in perpetuity. The language granting the tree
preservation easements and the restrictive covenants relating to tree preservation contained in the covenants, conditions and restrictions for the
development (the "CCRs") shall be in form and substance as approved by the village attorney.
5. Tree Preservation Bond: A tree preservation bond shall be required for all developments that are required to have tree preservation easements
calculated as follows: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per caliper inch for each living significant surveyed tree (regardless of species) lying within any
tree preservation easement times a discount factor of fifty percent (50%). The developer shall be required to post a tree preservation bond prior to
commencing any grading, earthmoving or other construction activities on the development parcel to help ensure that there is a fund in place to pay
for the removal and replacement of any fallen, damaged, diseased, decayed or dead trees within the tree preservation easements with trees at a
ratio of one to one (1:1) having a minimum diameter of four inches (4") measured at a point one foot (1') above the natural grade and of like species
if approved by the village arborist, or species selected from the varieties of deciduous trees listed in subsection 10-11A-6D of this chapter. The
amount of the tree preservation bond shall in no way limit the developer's obligation or the liability of the developer if the cost to remove and/or
replace such fallen, damaged, diseased, decayed or dead trees exceeds the tree preservation bond, except that the developer's obligations with
respect to the tree preservation in the development shall cease upon the termination date of the developer's tree preservation obligations as defined
in subsection C of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 491/702
6. Village's Right To Enforce: The village shall be granted the right, but shall not have the obligation, to enforce the tree preservation easements and/or
the CCRs, should the owner and/or developer fail to do so prior to the termination date for the developer's tree preservation obligations as defined in
subsection C of this section. After said date, the owners' association for the development, if any, shall be solely responsible to enforce the tree
preservation easements and CCRs, or if there is none in existence on the termination date for the developer's tree preservation obligations, the
village may, but shall not be obligated to, enforce them.
C. Required Tree Preservation Measures During Construction: In consultation with and upon inspection by the village arborist and the village building
department, each tree preservation easement area shall be protected prior to commencing any grading, earthmoving or other construction activities on
the development property, and the developer shall be responsible to maintain and keep in place the protection measures hereinafter set forth during
the construction of the development until: 1) the date the public improvements for the development have been accepted by the village (the "public
improvement acceptance date"), or 2) the date on which the developer has turned over control of the owners' association to the owners (the "turnover
date"), whichever is later (the "termination date for the developer's tree preservation obligations"), to ensure the survival of existing trees on the lots
encumbered by the tree preservation easement during the construction of the public improvements and infrastructure and the construction of private
improvements upon the development parcel using the following methods:
1. Protect trees with fencing during the entire construction period and check and maintain the fencing weekly;
2. Fencing should be placed at or beyond the drip line of the protected trees using bright colored plastic fencing;
3. The ground around existing trees shall not be compacted by heavy equipment or vehicles, nor shall dirt or other materials be stored or stockpiled
beneath the crown of any tree within the tree preservation easements;
4. Fires or other sources of heat shall be kept well clear of all protected trees in the tree preservation easements;
5. Repair damaged roots or branches immediately, and cover all exposed roots with topsoil to a depth that matches the soil cover prior to any
disturbance;
6. Whenever roots are destroyed, a proportional amount of branch must be pruned so the tree does not transpire more water than it takes in;
7. Injured trees must be thoroughly watered during the ensuing growth season;
8. Prune all existing trees to be saved that are surrounded by pavement to prevent dehydration;
9. The existing elevations around protected trees on the tree preservation easement should be maintained to the fullest extent possible;
10. Where grade changes of four inches (4") or more are required within the drip line of a protected tree, low retaining walls or other appropriate tree
protection techniques shall be used to ensure the long term health of the tree as approved by the village engineer and the village arborist; and
11. To the extent practicable, utilities shall be located outside of the tree preservation easements.
Erosion control fencing shall not be used as tree protection fencing such that if the areas overlap, dual fencing shall be required.
D. Permanent Easement: The lots or property encumbered by a tree preservation easement shall be subject to and be bound by the following permanent
covenants and restrictions which shall run with the land and bind future owners of such lots and the property so encumbered:
1. No building, shed, pad, or accessory structure or fence (other than temporary plastic snow fencing around the perimeter during construction) of any
kind shall be constructed or maintained for any purpose on any tree preservation easement, and no trees or shrubs shall be removed from any tree
preservation easement except for the removal of fallen, damaged, diseased, decayed or dead trees with the written approval of the owners'
association for the property, and if prior to the termination date for the developer's tree preservation obligations, the additional approval of the village
arborist.
2. There shall be no change made to the topography or grade of any tree preservation easement area or deposit of fill materials of any kind without the
written approval of the owners' association.
3. There shall be no filling, dredging, mining, drilling or removal of topsoil, sand, gravel, rock, minerals or other material to or from the tree preservation
easement areas without the written approval of the owners' association, and prior to the termination date for the developer's tree preservation
obligations, the additional approval of the village arborist.
4. From and after the termination date for the developer's tree preservation obligations, each owner of record of a lot or property encumbered by a tree
preservation easement shall maintain the area on his or her lot designated as such tree preservation easement and toward that end shall be entitled
to engage in normal and routine pruning and tree fertilization.
E. Owners' Association Enforcement: The owners' association, and its agents and designees, shall have the right to enforce the terms, conditions and
covenants contained on the final plat of subdivision and/or the CCRs relating to tree preservation and shall be entitled to enjoin in a court of equity any
activity on or use of the tree preservation easement inconsistent therewith. (Ord. 2007-63, 6-5-2007)
10-11A-6: GUIDE FOR LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW:
The following guidelines shall be considered in reviewing the design and implementation of landscape plans in conjunction with review of site plans and
special use permits.
A. Standards For Plant Materials: Materials planted in any development shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The quality and size of plant material selected shall comply with the latest edition of the "American Standard Of Nursery Stock" published by the
American Association of Nurserymen unless otherwise indicated.
2. No artificial plants of any type shall be used to meet the requirements of this chapter in any landscape area within the parcel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 492/702
3. Minimum sizes for plant materials at time of installation for all landscape areas shall be as follows:
a. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum size of two and one-half inches (21/2") caliper when installed. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum six feet (6')
in height when installed.
b. Deciduous shrubs (other than dwarf varieties) shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in height at time of installation if used as a perimeter screen
planting, and thirty inches (30") in height for all other installations. Dwarf varieties and plants normally measured by spread shall be a minimum of
twenty four inches (24") in height/spread.
c. Ground cover shall be so planted and spaced that complete coverage can be obtained within two (2) years after date of installation.
d. Flower beds are encouraged and shall be mass planted in acceptable areas to create color, texture and interest.
4. Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining all landscaping shown on the approved landscape plan throughout the life of the development.
All dead plants shall be replaced with plants which meet original requirements. Annual flower beds shall be replanted each year with flowers adapted
to the village. No changes shall be permitted without the approval of the village staff.
B. Guide For Planting Trees: The trees recommended in subsection D of this section have minimal maintenance requirements. However, all trees must
receive a certain degree of care, especially during and immediately after planting. To protect an investment in new trees, the developer should ensure
that proper horticultural techniques are followed. The following recommendations are provided as a guide for tree planting based on current
horticultural practice:
1. The best times for planting are early spring and early fall. Plants planted in the summer run the risk of dehydration.
2. Plant trees and shrubs at least three feet (3') from the back of curb along head-in parking spaces to prevent damage from car overhangs. Mulch,
lawn or planted ground cover shall be utilized in this three foot (3') area. Aligning trees with the stripes between parking stalls will further help avoid
damage.
3. Dig tree pits at least one foot (1') wider than the root ball.
4. Especially in areas where construction activity has compacted the soil, the bottom of the pit should be scarified or loosened with a pickax or shovel.
5. After a pit is dug, observe subsurface drainage conditions. Where poor drainage exists, special provisions should be made to ensure proper
drainage around the tree.
6. Backfill should include a proper mix of soil, peat moss, and nutrients. All roots must be completely covered. Backfill should be thoroughly watered as
it is placed around the roots.
7. Plants should remain plumb and level. Newly planted trees may be supported with stakes and ties to hold it firmly in place. Remove stakes and ties
after one year.
8. Spread at least two inches (2") of mulch over plant beds in order to retain moisture and keep down weeds. A three inch (3") saucer should be
provided to form a basin around the trunk of the tree. This saucer helps catch and retain moisture.
9. The lower trunks of new trees may be wrapped with burlap or paper to prevent evaporation and sun scald. The wrapping should remain on the tree
for at least one year.
10. Conscientious postplanting care, especially watering, pruning and fertilizing, is a must for street and parking lot trees. Branches of new trees may
be reduced by as much as one-third (1/3) to prevent excessive evaporation.
11. All landscape plant material (except lawns) and areas within public rights of way shall be within one hundred fifty feet (150') of an operable hose bib
(exterior water source).
C. Guide For Planting Shrubs: Shrubs planted for screening purposes should be given a proper growing environment. Many of the guidelines for tree
planting listed in subsection B of this section also apply to shrubs. However, because specific requirements vary considerably between shrub types,
this chapter does not attempt to specify the needs of all shrubs.
D. Lists Of Recommended Trees, Shrubs And Ground Cover: The following lists indicate plantings which will meet the landscape requirements of this
chapter. The lists are by no means comprehensive and are intended merely to suggest the types of flora which would be appropriate for these
purposes. Plants were selected for inclusion on these lists according to four (4) principal criteria: 1) general suitability for the climate and soil conditions
of this area, 2) ease of maintenance, 3) tolerance of city conditions, and 4) availability from area nurseries.
Table 3
Recommended Trees, Shrubs and Ground Cover
1. Small Deciduous Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Malus species Crabapple
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam
Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 493/702
Cornus mas Flowering Dogwood
Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood
Crataegus species Hawthorn
Magnolia x soulangiana Saucer Magnolia
Amelanchier x grandiflora Apple Serviceberry
Pyrus calleryana Callery Pear
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac
2. Large Evergreen Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Picea abies Norway Spruce
Picea pungens Colorado Spruce
Picea glauca White Spruce
Pinus strobus Eastern White Pine
Pinus nigra Austrian Pine
3. Large Deciduous Trees
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer platanoides Norway Maple
Acer rubrum Red Maple
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple
Corylus colurna Turkish Filbert
Ginkgo biloba (male only) Ginkgo or Maidenhair Tree
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless Honeylocust
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Tree
Quercus rubra Red Oak
Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden
Tilia tomentosa Silver Linden
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green Ash
Fraxinus americana 'Aut. Purple' Autumn Purple Ash
Platanus acerifolia London Plane Tree
4. Small Evergreen Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Pinus mugo Mugo Pine
Thuja species Arborvitae (Globe, Little
Gem, etc.)
Juniperus species Juniper (Armstrong,
Pfitzer, etc.)
Taxus species Yew
Buxus microphylla Boxwood
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 494/702
Picea abies 'Nidiformus' Bird's Nest Spruce
5. Large Evergreen Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Thuja occidentalis 'Techny' Techny Arborvitae
Juniperus Upright Juniper
Taxus cuspidata 'Hicksii' Hick's Yew
6. Large Deciduous Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer ginnala 'Compactum' Compact Amur Maple
Aesculus parvilflora Bottlebrush Buckeye
Berberis thunbergii Japanese Barberry
Chionanthus virginicus White Fringetree
Forsythia species Forsythia
Cotinus coggygria Smokebush
Cotoneaster lucidus Hedge Cotoneaster
Hamamelis virginiana Common Witch Hazel
Rhanmnus frangula 'Asplenifolia' Cutleaf Glossy Buckthorn
Spiraea x vanhouttei Vanhoutte Spirea
Cornus species Dogwood
Syringa species Lilac
Myrica pennsylvanica Bayberry
Viburnum dentatum Arrowood Viburnum
Viburnum lantana Wayfaringtree Viburnum
Viburnum opulus European Cranberrybush
Viburnum
Viburnum sieboldii Siebold Viburnum
Viburnum trilobum American Cranberrybush
Viburnum
Euonymus alatus Burningbush
7. Small Deciduous Shrubs
Botanical Name Common Name
Berberis thunbergii 'Crim. Pig.' Crimson Pigmy Barberry
Forsythia x intermedia 'Arn. Dwf" Arnold Dwarf Forsythia
Spirea x bumalda Bumalda Spirea (also
Anthony Waterer, Frobelii
and Gold Flame)
Euonymus alatus 'Compacta; Dwarf Burningbush
Ribes alpinum 'Green Mound' Green Mound Alpine
Currant
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 495/702
Potentilla fruticosa Bush Cinquefoil
Viburnum carlesii 'Compactum' Compact Koreanspice
Viburnum
Viburnum opulus 'Compactum' Compact Cranberrybush
Viburnum
8. Ground Covers
Botanical Name Common Name
Euyonumus fortunei 'Coloratus' Purpleleaf Wintercreeper
Hedera helix 'Thorndale' Thorndale English Ivy
Pachysandra terminalis Japanese Pachysandra
Vinca minor Periwinkle
Ajuga reptans Ajuga
Notes:
Trees listed in italics are recommended for use as street trees or in parking areas.
Trees used in parking areas and as street trees shall be of a fruitless species.
All listed small deciduous and evergreen shrubs except Potentilla fruticosa are suitable for low screening applications.
(Ord. 91-26, 4-16-91)
Chapter 12
SIGNS
10-12-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
This chapter of the zoning ordinance is established to create the standards for a comprehensive and balanced system of signs for the following purposes:
A. Purpose:
1. To facilitate an easy and pleasant communication between people and their environment by authorizing the use of signs which are:
a. Compatible with their surroundings.
b. Appropriate to the type or activity to which they pertain.
c. Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors as well as of the community as a whole.
d. Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
e. Respectful to the reasonable rights of other sign owners.
2. To preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
3. To promote traffic safety by imposing reasonable restrictions on signs.
4. To protect the physical and mental well being of the general public by encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation for the village's visual
environment.
5. To ensure that signs are designed as integral architectural elements of the building and site to which they principally relate.
6. To improve the economy and the village business and industrial activity by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs.
7. To protect village residents from the substantial hazards to traffic safety and aesthetic harm caused by billboards or a deluge of signs.
8. To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses.
B. Findings: In adopting this chapter of the zoning ordinance, the corporate authorities make the following findings:
1. There presently exists in the village an ample number of alternative means of communicating commercial and noncommercial speech.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 496/702
2. The corporate authorities have considered and relied upon the narrowly tailored statements and opinions of its police and engineering staff to arrive
at restrictions that reach no further than is necessary to accomplish its interest in promoting public safety.
3. The corporate authorities have considered and relied upon the written statements and opinions of its community development staff to arrive at
narrowly tailored restrictions that reach no further than necessary to accomplish the village's interest in preserving the aesthetics of the village and
the underlying property values of the owners of property in the village. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-2: SCOPE:
No sign shall be constructed, erected, originally painted, converted, altered, rebuilt, enlarged, remodeled, relocated or expanded until a permit for such
sign has been obtained in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in this chapter. However, no permit shall be required for "maintenance"
as defined herein. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions noted below apply uniquely to this chapter and supersede any conflicting definitions found in chapter 2 of this title. The rules for
interpretation found in chapter 2 of this title shall be applicable to these definitions.
A-FRAME OR SANDWICH BOARD SIGN: A portable sign used to advertise daily specials or offers for a business placed in front of that business on the
sidewalk or parkway. Sandwich board signs are limited to twenty four inches by forty eight inches (24" x 48") in size and can only be displayed during
business hours of operation of the business that it is advertising. A-frame or sandwich boards signs are limited to one per business or one per frontage for
a double frontage business. Sandwich board signs cannot be placed in a manner in which it can cause vision clearance problems with vehicles or obstruct
pedestrian traffic.
ADMINISTRATOR: The zoning administrator of the village of Bartlett.
ADVERTISING SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity or service sold, offered, or manufactured, or
an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located or to which it is affixed.
AWNING: Any structure entirely supported by the wall to which it is attached and which has a frame covered by a temporary material and/or which can be
retracted against the wall by which it is supported.
AWNINGS, CANOPY, AND MARQUEE SIGN: A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to, an awning, canopy or marquee.
BILLBOARD: A sign or graphic structure which advertises goods, products, facilities, or services not sold or distributed on the premises on which the sign
or graphic structure is located, or which directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located.
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN: A sign that identifies an institution or organization on whose premises it is located and which contains the name of the institution
or organization and announcements of events or activities occurring on the site. Such a sign may also present a greeting or similar message.
CANOPY: Any permanent exterior roof structure attached to a building at the inner end and supported on the outer end in conformance with the building
code of the village of Bartlett.
CHANGEABLE MESSAGE/READER BOARD SIGN: A sign on which message copy can be manually, electronically or digitally changed through the use
of a computer, electronic or manual means. A sign of this type cannot exceed thirty two (32) square feet and must be incorporated into a ground or pole
sign which also identifies the business or use. The background for such lettering and graphics shall be opaque or translucent and shall transmit light at a
level substantially less than that transmitted through the lettering and graphics. Each changeable message on this type of sign must remain static for a
minimum of thirty (30) seconds or more before any subsequent message can be displayed.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT: Any property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-2 EDA or any commercial subdivision or commercial PUD in any PD planned
development district or commercial area in any planned unit development under the Bartlett zoning ordinance.
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND/OR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS: Any commercial district, office research district and/or industrial district and any areas of any
PD planned development district subdivided as such or designated as such on any preliminary PUD or concept plan or any combination thereof, or which
predominantly allows such uses that are permitted or special uses in such zoning districts.
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND/OR INDUSTRIAL LOT: Any parcel in any commercial, office and/or industrial district.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors and similar professionals
involved in the design and construction of a structure or project during the period of construction.
DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign listing the names, and location of various activities conducted within a building or group of buildings.
DISPLAY FRONTAGE: The length of a building, which is essentially parallel to and directly exposed to a public street or thoroughfare.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, rehang, place, affix, or relocate and includes the painting of lettering for signs.
FLASHING SIGN: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign where the source of illumination is not maintained constant or stationary in the intensity or color at
all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this chapter, a revolving sign, or any advertising device which attracts attention by moving parts
operated by mechanical equipment or movement caused by natural sources, whether illuminated, indirectly illuminated or not, shall be considered a
flashing sign.
GASOLINE STATION: A premises used primarily to dispense fuels for motor vehicles.
GROUND SIGN: Any detached sign which has its bottom portion erected upon or supported directly on the ground.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The measurement from the top of the highest element of the sign to the average level of the finished ground surface around any sign
located more than twenty five feet (25') from a street right of way; the established street elevation when the sign is located within twenty five feet (25') from
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 497/702
one street right of way; or the average of all street elevations when the sign is located within twenty five feet (25') from more than one street right of way.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign where the text gives the name and address of a building, business, development, or establishment. Such a sign may also
be wholly or partly devoted to a readily recognized symbol.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which is illuminated by light sources.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: Any property zoned I-1, or I-2 EDA, economic development area overlay district, or any newly created zoning district that allows
predominant industrial uses, or any industrial subdivision or industrial PUD, or industrial area in a planned unit development under the Bartlett zoning
ordinance.
LOT: A parcel, tract, plot, or area of land accessible by means of a street or other permanently reserved principal means of access. It may be a single
parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds, or it may include parts of or a combination of
such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one.
MARQUEE: Any hood or awning of permanent construction supported entirely by the building, and projecting from the building's wall over a sidewalk or
pedestrian thoroughfare.
MIXED USE BUSINESS PARK/INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A ground sign that contains only the name of the subdivision and
appropriate logo, management company or developer name, address or location.
MOVIE OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT THEATER: A fully enclosed building with fixed seats arranged in an auditorium fashion, where motion pictures or live
entertainment acts are presented.
OFF SITE SIGN: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT: Any property zoned O-R or any O-R subdivision or O-R PUD in any PD planned development district, or O-R planned
unit development.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
POLE SIGN: A sign mounted on one or more freestanding pole(s).
POLITICAL SIGN: Any sign encouraging the election or defeat of any candidate seeking any political office or encouraging the passage or defeat of any
ballot measure.
PREMISES: That portion of a lot or building occupied by a single occupant, exclusive of common area, if any, shared with adjacent occupants.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support, and which projects more than twelve inches (12") in a perpendicular
fashion from such building.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the lot or tract of land on which the sign is located, or to the sale or lease of one or more
structures or a portion thereof located thereon.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: Any property zoned ER-1, ER-2, ER-3, SR-2, SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-6, MH-1 or any residential subdivision or PUD in any PD
planned development district, or planned unit development under the Bartlett zoning ordinance.
RESIDENTIAL LOT: Any subdivided lot in any residential district.
ROOF SIGN: A sign mounted on the roof of a building.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, message, or illustration which is affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon, a building,
structure, or piece of land so as to be seen from out of doors and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization, or business.
SIGN CONTRACTOR: A person or entity who performs work for compensation in connection with the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, improvement, maintenance, conversion or manufacture of any sign.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The sign and all parts associated with its mounting.
SIGN SUPPORTS: All structural features by which a sign is held up, including, for example, poles, braces, guywires, and anchors.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign, banner, or other advertising device or display constructed of cloth, canvas, cardboard, wallboard, or other light temporary
materials, with or without a structural frame, intended for a temporary period of display, such as decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations.
UNIFIED BUSINESS CENTER SIGN PLAN: A sign plan for a property containing four (4) or more individual offices or businesses sharing a private
parking lot and approved upon technical review by the community development department.
VILLAGE: The village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage and Kane Counties, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The president and board of trustees of the village of Bartlett.
WALL SIGN: Any sign erected against the wall of any building with the plane of the face parallel to the plane of the wall.
WINDOW SIGN: An advertising sign affixed to a window, or visible from the exterior of the business inside a window. Window signs do not count toward
the total overall signage for a business and are limited to twenty five percent (25%) coverage of the windows. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-4: EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 498/702
The following shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter:
A. Addresses: Address numerals and other signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule, or regulation provided that the content and
size of the sign do not exceed the requirements of such law, order, rule or regulation.
B. Business Nameplates: Nonelectrical nameplates denoting the business name of an occupation legally conducted on the premises, provided that the
sign area does not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
C. Construction Signs: One construction sign per construction project denoting the name of the project, the architect, engineer, contractor, and/or lending
agency for the project. Such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area in residential districts or twenty four (24) square feet in commercial, office
and/or industrial districts, nor shall such signs be erected prior to the beginning of construction for which a valid building permit has been issued. They
shall be confined to the site of construction, and shall be removed ten (10) days of the earlier of the completion of construction or the expiration of the
building permit.
D. Directional Signs: Not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, which provides instruction or direction and are located entirely on the property to which
they pertain to identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking lot entrances and exits, and features of a similar nature.
E. Flags And Emblems: Not exceeding twenty four (24) square feet in a residential district and ninety six (96) square feet in a commercial, office and/or
industrial district.
F. Government Signs: Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or other similar regulatory devices, directional signs, legal notices,
warnings at railroad crossings, and other instructional or regulatory signs having to do with health, hazards, parking, swimming, dumping, etc.
G. Holiday Decorations: Displays of a primarily decorative nature, clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with any national, local or
religious holidays.
H. Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets listing names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part
of the building or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
I. Model Home Signs: A sign identifying a nonoccupied new home used as a demonstrator constructed for the purpose of selling other homes. Each model
home located on and within a recorded residential subdivision for the sale of homes or lots thereon, may have one identification sign not to exceed six
(6) square feet in area, located entirely within the lot containing the model.
J. Open Signs: No more than two (2) temporary signs which advertise premises open for inspection, provided such signs do not exceed six (6) square feet
each, are located with no more than one sign per frontage, either on the premises to be inspected or on other private property with that property
owner's or tenant's permission, and are only in place when the related premises is actually open for inspection.
K. A-Frame Or Sandwich Board Signs: A portable sign used to advertise daily specials or offers for a business placed in front of that business on the
sidewalk or parkway. Sandwich board signs are limited to twenty four inches by forty eight inches (24" x 48") in size and can only be displayed during
business hours of operation of the business that it is advertising. A-frame or sandwich boards signs are limited to one per business or one per frontage
for a double frontage business. Sandwich board signs cannot be placed in a manner in which it can cause vision clearance problems with vehicles or
obstruct pedestrian traffic.
L. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs, including, but not limited to, temporary political signs.
M. Historic Symbols: Historic symbols, identification emblems or commemorative plaques of recognized historical agencies, provided that no such symbol,
plaque or identification emblem shall exceed six (6) square feet.
N. Religious Symbols: Religious symbols or identification emblems of a religious order.
O. Special Displays: Special displays used for holidays, public demonstrations, or the promotion of civic welfare or charitable purposes, provided they are
approved by the village board after submission of a written application, they contain no noncharitable advertising, and they are removed by the
deadline established by the board in their approval.
P. Warning Signs: No trespassing or no dumping signs, not exceeding one and one-half (11/2) square feet per sign, and not exceeding four (4) in number
per lot.
Q. Signs On Athletic Field Fences, Walls And Scoreboards: Signs are allowed to be placed on the athletic field fences, walls and scoreboards on property
within the P-1 public lands district where athletic fields are installed for the purposes of playing league games. Signs placed on athletic field fences and
walls are limited to temporary or seasonal banner type signs not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size. Signs mounted on any scoreboard on
property zoned P-1 public lands district shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size and must be preapproved by the village board. A sign permit
issued by the community development department shall be required for any sign mounted or affixed to any scoreboard. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-5: ADMINISTRATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 499/702
A. Zoning Administrator: The zoning administrator is designated to administer this chapter.
B. Conformance Survey: After the adoption of this chapter the zoning administrator shall, as soon as practicable, survey the village for signs which do not
conform to its requirements. Upon determination that a sign is legal nonconforming, the zoning administrator shall use reasonable efforts to so notify in
writing the user or owner of the property on which the sign is located.
C. Unsafe Or Illegal Signs: If the zoning administrator shall at any time find that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been
constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter he or she shall give written notice to the sign contractor (if the
sign erection is incomplete or improper), to the person to whom the sign permit had been issued, or if the permittee cannot be located, to the owner of
the premises on which the sign is located. If the notified party fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within
forty eight (48) hours after notice, such sign may be removed, or altered to comply, by the village in accordance with applicable law. Notwithstanding
the foregoing however, any sign reasonably determined by the zoning administrator to be an immediate peril to persons and/or property may be
removed pursuant to subsection 10-12-6H1 of this chapter without such prior notice in order to protect persons and/or property from imminent harm.
D. Financial Liability: The cost of sign repair or removal performed on privately owned signs at the order of the zoning administrator in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter shall be the joint and several liability of the following:
1. The sign contractor, if the sign erection was improper or not complete at the time notice of violation was given, and shall be collected from his or her
bond, or
2. The sign owner, or
3. If the sign owner cannot be located by the zoning administrator within thirty (30) days, the premises owner.
E. Lien To Recover Costs: In the event of failure by any party to reimburse the village within sixty (60) days for costs incurred for repair or removal ordered
by the zoning administrator, the village board shall certify the charges for repair or removal to the village attorney who will be then authorized to file a
notice of lien in the appropriate office of the recorder of deeds to foreclose this lien, and to sue the owner of the real estate, or sign permittee, or their
agents, in a civil action to recover the money due to the foregoing services, plus all expenses, as hereinafter more fully described, and reasonable
attorney fees to be fixed by the court. Any such judgment shall be enforced in accordance with the law. Included in the expenses recoverable by the
village, the village is entitled to collect the costs of filing the notice of lien, foreclosing said lien and all litigation costs, together with all office and legal
expense incurred in connection with the collection of the amount due hereunder.
F. Permit Application: Application for permits shall be submitted on a form and in the manner prescribed by the zoning administrator. Each application shall
be signed by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property upon which it is to be located, and shall be accompanied by such information as may
be required to assure compliance with all applicable regulations. The application shall be processed in a timely manner and within five (5) days of
receipt the zoning administrator shall either issue, or reject with cause, the necessary permit.
G. Permit Fee: A permit fee shall be charged for each sign as specified in the village building code.
H. Registered Sign Contractor: No person shall perform any work or service for any person for compensation, in or in connection with the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, improvement, maintenance, conversion or manufacture of any sign in the village, or any work or
service in connection with causing any such work to be done unless such person or firm is registered as a sign contractor by the village.
I. Certificate Of Liability: Every sign contractor shall provide or show proof of certificate of liability to indemnify the village against any form of liability to a
minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or shall be responsible through an agent or subcontractor.
J. Public Indemnification: All sign contractors engaged in the erection, alteration, relocation, maintenance of a sign or other sign work in or over or
immediately adjacent to a public right of way or public property so that a portion of the public right of way or public property is used or encroached upon
by the contractor, shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the village, its officers, agents, and employees from any and all claims of negligence
resulting from such work.
K. Denial Or Revocation: The zoning administrator may deny, suspend, or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is
issued on the basis of a misstatement of fact or fraud. When a sign permit is denied by the zoning administrator, he or she shall give written notice of
the denial to the applicant, together with a brief written statement of the reasons for the denial.
L. Preconstruction Inspection: The sign contractor shall schedule with the community development department and the building department a
preconstruction inspection prior to installing any sign requiring a permit. Such inspection shall include a footing and electrical inspection, if applicable,
and confirmation of the sign setback and location and other details of mounting.
M. Final Inspection: The sign contractor shall notify the community development department upon completion of the work for which a permit is required
and to schedule a final inspection by the appropriate inspectors.
N. Six Month Deadline: If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall
become null and void.
O. Refusal Of Further Permits: The village shall refuse to issue any further sign permit to any such party or owner, or their agents or representatives, who
is in violation of the requirements of this chapter, or who refuses to pay costs assessed for corrective action under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2014-55, 6-17-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 500/702
10-12-6: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. Messages: The following restrictions shall govern signs located within the village's corporate limits:
1. No sign shall be permitted to contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene, pornographic, or immoral character, or which contain advertising
matter which is untruthful.
2. No sign shall be permitted which purports to be or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic sign or signal.
3. No sign shall make use of the words "Stop", "Go Slow", "Caution", "Warning", "Look", "Drive-In", "Danger" or any word, phrase, symbol, or character
in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
4. No sign shall recite that real property is zoned for land uses, or will be zoned for land uses in the future under the zoning rules and regulations of the
village, when in fact such real estate is not so zoned.
5. No sign on real estate shall declare that the property is reserved for or is being held for future land use which is inconsistent with the then existing
zoning classification of the village for the land, or any words of like import of a similar nature.
B. Applicable Regulations: All signs must conform to the regulations and design standards of the building code, the electrical code, and all other applicable
ordinances and regulations of the municipal code of the village.
C. Location: The following restrictions shall govern sign location:
1. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
2. No sign shall interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
3. Signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with
national electrical code specifications, depending on voltages concerned. However, in no case shall a sign be installed closer than twenty four inches
(24") horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility guywire.
4. No sign may be so located as to obstruct the view from a public thoroughfare of any existing sign, display window, or major entrance of an adjacent
lot.
5. No sign of any kind may be attached to a standpipe or fire escape or to any other fire safety related device.
6. No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape or color, it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the
view of, or be confused with, any traffic control sign, signal or device or where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
7. All signs exceeding thirty inches (30") in height shall be located no less than ten feet (10') from the property line along the primary street and five feet
(5') from the property line along the secondary street for the first forty feet (40') of the property, measured along both lot lines from the corner of the
property which is located at the intersection of the streets. The "secondary street" is defined as the street with a stop sign, stoplight or yield sign. The
"principal street" is defined as a street with a designation of local collector, major collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial. (Principal streets are
assumed to have a higher traffic volume and higher speed traffic than a secondary street.) If both streets have the same type of traffic signal, both
streets will be considered secondary streets.
8. No signs shall be nailed, tacked or otherwise affixed to trees or other vegetation in such a way as to puncture the bark.
9. No signs shall be painted directly upon the exterior walls of a structure.
10. Any projecting or hanging sign must have a vertical clearance from the bottom of the sign to the grade below of nine feet (9').
11. No sign, other than signs placed by the village or other governments or agencies of government with jurisdiction over the public right of way, may
be posted on any public appurtenances or erected within, upon or hanging over any public right of way or public property.
12. No commercial sign facing the side or rear lot line of an abutting residentially zoned lot shall be located within fifty feet (50') of that residential lot
line.
D. Illuminated Signs: All illuminated signs shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. All electrical work on illuminated signs and signs with electrical wiring must be covered by a valid electrical permit.
2. Relettering which requires a change of piping or sign wiring shall be subject to the approval of the village's electrical inspector.
3. The voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection with the sign shall be conspicuously placed on that apparatus.
4. Illuminated signs shall not have any flashing, scintillating, traveling, or blinking lights or rotating beacons, nor shall any beam of light be projected
through a mechanism which periodically changes the color of the light reaching the sign. A sign on which the current time or temperature, or both, is
indicated by intermittent lighting changes shall not be deemed to be a flashing sign if the lights do not exceed forty (40) watts per lamp, the changes
are limited to the numerals indicating the time or temperature, and the sign is in conformance with the other regulations for such signs in this chapter.
5. Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residence district or upon any public street or
park. Any illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any residence district, which sign is visible from such residence
district, shall not be illuminated between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
6. Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine fully through only the lettering and graphic elements of the sign. The background for such
lettering and graphics shall be opaque or translucent and shall transmit light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through the lettering
and graphics.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 501/702
E. Movable Sign Parts: No sign or its parts shall be permitted to be movable or rotating. Nor shall any sign have illuminated effects which convey the
illusion of movement.
1. With the exception of approved changeable message center signs, theater signs and certain temporary signs, no sign may contain movable letters
or other changeable copy.
2. All manually movable items on a sign, such as covers to service openings, shall be secured by chains or hinges.
F. Maintenance: All signs (including those for which no permit is required) and their supports shall be kept in a safe, presentable, and good structural
condition in accordance with the following requirements and with the applicable codes and ordinances of the village:
1. The owner of any sign shall keep the sign and support structure clean and properly treated so as to prevent rust, peeling, flaking or fading.
2. Broken panels, missing letters, flaking or peeling paint and other damage to a sign or support structure shall be repaired within twenty (20) days of
its occurrence.
3. The area surrounding all signs shall be maintained free of any debris or nuisance and any related grassed area or landscaping shall be kept trimmed
and in a healthy condition.
G. Temporary Signs:
1. Temporary signs shall be allowed for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. Time extensions may be granted by the zoning administrator based on
his or her inspection of the sign and determination that the sign is in good repair and constructed in such a manner as to remain in good repair for the
duration of the extended period.
2. All temporary signs shall be anchored and supported in a manner which reasonably prevents the possibility of the signs becoming hazards to the
public health and safety as determined by the zoning administrator.
3. No temporary sign shall cover more than ten percent (10%) of any wall nor more than twenty five percent (25%) of any window.
4. Temporary signs shall be kept in reasonable size relationship to permanent signs permitted on the premises and in no case shall be larger than six
(6) square feet in area in residential districts and twenty four (24) square feet in area in commercial, office and/or industrial districts.
5. Not more than four (4) temporary signs, none of which shall exceed six (6) square feet per sign, or twenty four (24) square feet in the aggregate,
shall be allowed on each residential lot, except on residential lots with more than eighty (80) linear feet of street frontage there shall be allowed an
additional six (6) square feet of temporary signage for every forty (40) linear feet of street frontage above eighty (80) linear feet per residential lot.
6. Not more than four (4) temporary signs, none of which shall exceed twenty four (24) square feet per sign or forty eight (48) square feet in the
aggregate, shall be allowed on any commercial, office and/or industrial lot with one hundred (100) linear feet or less of street frontage. On
commercial, office and/or industrial lots with over one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage there shall be allowed up to four (4) temporary
signs for every one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage none of which temporary signs shall exceed twenty four (24) square feet per sign, or
the lesser of forty eight (48) square feet per one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage, or ninety six (96) square feet in the aggregate on any
commercial, office and/or industrial lot.
H. Removal Of Signs:
1. The village may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
2. Any sign posted in violation of subsection C11 of this section may be removed by the village, summarily without notice, and may be disposed of in a
manner deemed appropriate by the village.
a. The zoning administrator shall keep a record of the location from which any such sign was removed and shall store said sign in a safe location for
a period of fourteen (14) days.
b. Signs posted in violation of subsection C11 of this section may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the village after the sign has
been stored for fourteen (14) days after its removal. Prior to disposing of such sign, the zoning administrator shall make a reasonable effort to
provide telephonic notice to the owner, or other person responsible for posting the sign, provided, however, that such information is reasonably
ascertainable.
c. In the event any sign posted in violation of subsection C11 of this section, and the village causes said sign to be removed, a storage fee of one
dollar ($1.00) per day per sign, beginning on the day such sign is removed, shall be paid to the village before any such sign will be returned.
d. In cases where unusual effort is needed to remove a sign, such as the cutting or removal of supporting structures, use of aerial devices, towing of
"trailer signs" or other unusual situations, such as the posting of numerous signs in violation of subsection C11 of this section, after having been
given notice of a prior violation of such subsection, the village shall collect from the person responsible a sum sufficient to cover the costs and
hourly wages of employees so utilized in the removal of the sign. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-7: PERMITTED SIGN TYPES:
A. Awning And Canopy Signs:
1. No awning or canopy signs may project above or beyond the awning or canopy to which they are mounted, however signs may be hung beneath
canopies.
2. Awning signs may be painted with weather resistant paint directly on the awning material.
3. No awning or canopy sign may exceed the dimensions outlined in the maximum sign limit chart.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 502/702
4. All awning signs constructed of materials other than paint or the material with which the awning is covered shall be permanently attached to the
frame of the awning.
5. No awnings with signs shall contain any lighting or illuminating apparatus nor have any electrical wiring attached or connected thereto in any way.
B. Ground Signs:
1. The ground sign shall contain architectural features and materials utilized in the buildings on the site.
2. No part of a ground sign or related structure shall be higher than that height indicated for the use and street identified in the appropriate chart within
subsection 10-12-9B of this chapter.
3. Masonry, wooden bases and landscaping incorporated as part of a ground sign shall not be counted as part of the permitted sign area as long as the
masonry or wooden base does not contain lettering or graphic symbols.
4. No ground sign shall contain more than two (2) faces.
5. The faces of a ground sign shall be parallel and located no more than one and one-half feet (11/2') apart.
6. The landscaped base shall include a minimum of two (2) conifers among the plant materials.
7. No ground sign shall be located closer than two hundred feet (200') from another ground or pole sign on the same premises.
8. No ground sign shall be located closer than five feet (5') from any property line.
9. If the ground sign is located within any type of village or public utility or drainage easement, approval of the sign location by the village engineer shall
be required.
C. Permanent Window Signs:
1. All permanent window signs shall be hung, painted, metal leafed, or in some other manner permanently applied to either side of the glass of an
exterior building window or door. No application using an adhesive shall be permitted unless the zoning administrator determines that the application
is safe and will be permanent.
2. Permanent window signs must be confined to the glass of the window, shall not encroach upon the frame, mullions or other supporting features and
shall not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the window area.
D. Pole Signs:
1. The bottom of the sign face structure on a pole sign must be at least seven feet (7') from the ground.
2. No pole sign shall contain more than two (2) faces.
3. The faces of a pole sign shall be parallel and located no more than two feet (2') apart.
4. No pole sign shall have more than two (2) poles nor shall any pole have a cross sectional area at any point greater than one square foot.
5. No pole sign shall be located closer than two hundred feet (200') from another pole or ground sign on the same premises.
6. No pole sign is permitted on frontage in the B-1 zoning district unless the business building(s) are located more than forty feet (40') back from the
street side property line.
7. The maximum height of a pole sign shall be equal to the average height of the building to which the sign relates but not to exceed the maximum sign
height for the use and location as indicated on the maximum sign limit chart.
8. The minimum setback for a pole sign shall be equal to the height of the sign, except for pole signs which were lawfully erected prior to the adoption
of this chapter and are otherwise in conformance with this chapter. These later signs shall be permitted to stand at the setback distance originally
permitted by the village.
9. The landscaped base shall include a minimum of two (2) conifers among the plant material.
E. Projecting Signs:
1. No projecting sign shall project more than six feet (6') from the plane of the wall nor closer than two feet (2') from the curb line.
2. The innermost point of a projecting sign face shall be no more than one foot (1') from the plane of the wall.
3. No projecting sign shall contain more than two (2) faces.
4. The faces of a projecting sign shall be parallel and located no more than one foot (1') apart.
5. Projecting signs may swing, but all projecting signs must be permanently mounted.
6. No projecting signs are permitted in the O-R, I-1 or I-2 EDA zoning district.
F. Roof Signs:
1. No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with the sign face or any part of the sign structure projecting beyond the plane of the outside walls.
2. No roof sign may exceed four feet (4') in height nor may the sign structure's highest point exceed the highest point of the roof to which it is attached.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 503/702
3. No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building so as to interfere with any openings in the roof or as to prevent free passage from one part of
the roof to another, or to an adjacent roof.
4. Roof signs shall have one face only.
5. No signs may be painted directly on a roof.
6. All mounting brackets and other hardware used to mount a sign on a roof shall be concealed by the sign or integrated into the design of the sign.
7. No roof signs are permitted in the B-1 zoning district.
G. Time And Temperature Signs:
1. Time and temperature signs shall conform to the regulations of the sign type to which they most clearly resemble.
2. Time and temperature signs shall have a display area for numbers of a minimum of two feet (2') in one dimension and a maximum of four feet (4') in
the largest dimension.
3. Time and temperature signs must be adjusted to present accurate readings.
4. Temperature signs shall not change except when the temperature changes one degree (1°), unless the display face is used for alternate time
readings.
5. With the exception of a second hand, time signs shall be permitted to change no more frequently than one minute intervals, unless the display face
is used for alternate temperature readings.
6. If the same display face is used for alternating time and temperature readings, the frequency of change shall be no more than once every seven (7)
seconds.
H. Wall Signs:
1. No wall sign shall extend above or beyond the wall to which it is attached.
2. No wall sign shall be located higher than eighty five percent (85%) of the average height of the total building elevation parallel to and adjacent to the
sign.
3. No wall sign shall project more than twelve inches (12") beyond the plane of the wall to which it is attached.
4. No signs may be painted directly on any wall.
5. All mounting brackets and other hardware used to affix a sign to a wall shall be concealed by the sign or integrated into the design of the sign.
6. The maximum permitted area for a wall sign is one square foot for each one foot (1') of display frontage.
I. Subdivision Identification Signs:
1. The sign contains only the name of the subdivision or multiple-family residential complex and appropriate logo, but does not advertise the availability
of lots and residential dwelling units, or any of them, for sale or rent; and
2. Only one sign shall be erected on each side of each street leading into such subdivision or complex ("entrance"), for a total of two (2) signs per
entrance; and
3. If there is more than one street leading into such subdivision or complex, the distance between entrance signs along the perimeter of such
subdivision or complex shall be at least five hundred feet (500'); and
4. All signs shall be located at least ten feet (10') from the nearest right of way line of the street on which it is located and the street from which it is to
be viewed and shall be so placed as to conform to the requirements of subsection 10-12-6C7 of this chapter regulating vision clearance; and
5. The sign shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from any dwelling unit; and
6. All subdivision identification signs shall be located in a sign easement and no signs shall be located on public right of way or other public property;
and
7. If the subdivision identification sign is located within any type of village or public utility or drainage easement, approval of the sign location by the
village engineer shall be required; and
8. A homeowners' association shall be responsible for the maintenance of every such sign; and
9. The sign area of an individual sign face shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet; and
10. The maximum height of the sign shall not exceed six feet (6'); and
11. The sign shall have a landscaped base with a minimum of two (2) conifers among the plant materials.
J. Mixed Business Park/Industrial Subdivision Identification Signs:
1. The sign contains only the name of the subdivision and appropriate logo, management or developer name, address or location, but does not
advertise the availability of lots for sale or lease; and
2. The development shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 504/702
3. Only one sign shall be erected on each side of each street leading into such subdivision or complex ("entrance"), for a total of two (2) signs per
entrance, however, each set of entrance signs must be spaced a minimum of five hundred feet (500') apart in instances where there is more than
one entrance to the subdivision; and
4. All mixed business park/industrial subdivision identification signs shall be located at least ten feet (10') from the property line and shall be so placed
as to conform to the requirements of section 9-16-3 of the Bartlett municipal code regulating vision clearance; and
5. All mixed business park/industrial subdivision identification signs placed at each entrance must be uniform in appearance; and
6. All mixed business park/industrial subdivision identification signs shall be located in a sign easement and no signs shall be located on public right of
way or other public property (if the sign is located within a village, public, drainage, or utility easement, the village engineer's approval of its location
shall be required); and
7. If not previously included in the subdivision's covenants or final plat of subdivision, provisions for private ownership and maintenance of both the sign
easement area and signage contained within the easement shall be furnished and recorded; and
8. No sign shall contain more than two (2) faces and the sign area of each sign face shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet as calculated
in accordance with section 10-12-9, "Allowable Sign Area", of this chapter; and
9. The maximum overall height of the sign shall be ten feet (10'); and
10. The sign and base shall be made of masonry or stone materials only, but may include individual channel lettering and symbols of other materials
(i.e., metal, acrylic, etc.) which shall be affixed directly to the sign structure; and
11. A landscape plan that meets the standards established below shall be provided:
a. A landscaped area shall be provided; sodded or seeded areas shall not qualify as such a landscaped area;
b. Forty percent (40%) of the provided landscaped area must be comprised of evergreen trees and/or shrubs;
c. The landscaped area shall be comprised predominately of shrubs, perennial and annual flowers, ornamental grasses, ground cover plants, and
mulch in accordance with subsection 10-11A-6D of this title, recommended trees, shrubs and ground cover;
d. Mulch materials shall be shredded bark and shall be spread a minimum of two inches (2") over landscaped area; and
12. Fees for mixed business park/industrial subdivision identification signs shall be as follows:
a. Nonilluminated sign: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
b. Illuminated sign: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-8: PERMITTED EXTRA SIGNS:
A. Criteria: Certain business operations are hereby found to be unique with respect to their sign requirements and therefore justified to be permitted to
have extra signs as specified below. These include:
1. Gasoline Stations: Gasoline stations are unique because their primary functions are performed out of doors in a manner prescribed by state statutes.
2. Movie And Live Entertainment Theaters: These theaters are unique because of the rapid turnover of the name of their entertainment product.
3. Unified Business Centers: Unified business centers are unique because of the concentrated development and their centralized ownership
characteristics.
B. Gasoline Stations: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following signs are permitted uniquely to gasoline stations:
1. Two (2) signs per pump island which designate the function of the island as "self-service" or "full-service". Such signs shall not have more than two
(2) faces and shall not exceed three (3) square feet per face.
2. One sign per type of fuel sold which designates the price of that fuel. Such signs shall not have more than two (2) faces and shall not exceed six (6)
square feet per face. The sign area for more than one type of fuel may be combined into one sign.
3. One nonilluminated sign identifying the service performed in each service bay may be placed over the opening to each bay. Such signs shall have
one face and shall not exceed three (3) square feet each.
4. One nonilluminated nameplate identifying the owner or operator is permitted adjacent to the doorway of the station. Such nameplate shall have one
face and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
5. Temporary signs advertising batteries, tires, oil or other products directly related to motor vehicles, if the signs are located directly adjacent to a
display of the product(s) described. Such signs may have two (2) faces, however, their total area shall not exceed ten (10) square feet.
6. Any signs required by state or federal government.
7. Safety shall be encouraged through a fifteen percent (15%) bonus applied to the aggregate area of ground signs in gasoline stations (service
stations) if the station's price information sign is incorporated into the principal identification sign.
C. Movie And Live Entertainment Theaters: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following sign is permitted uniquely to
theaters:
1. Each theater may have one sign of up to fifty (50) square feet which will accommodate changeable lettering copy for theaters located in commercial
or industrial districts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 505/702
2. A theater's changeable copy sign may have two (2) faces if it is freestanding, but both faces must be parallel and located no more than two feet (2')
apart.
3. A theater's changeable copy sign may be located on a marquee, provided it does not project above or beyond the structural limits of such marquee,
nor does it project closer than two feet (2') from the curb line.
4. Otherwise, a theater's changeable copy sign shall conform to the regulations for the sign type to which it most nearly resembles.
D. Unified Business Center Sign Plan: No permit shall be issued for a sign to be located in a unified business center until a comprehensive sign plan has
been approved for the center and the sign complies with the provisions thereof.
1. Application: Application for approval of a unified business center sign plan shall be made in writing to the community development department on an
appropriate application form.
2. Application Content: The application shall include a written description and a to scale graphic depiction of all signs to be used in the center, including
their maximum size, color, location, illumination details, lettering type, mounting details, and (if any) landscaping details.
3. Approval: A unified business center sign plan application or amendment shall be reviewed and approved by the community development
department.
4. Criteria: The criteria for approval of a unified business center sign plan shall be the following:
a. Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to the other signs, buildings and surroundings.
b. The signs in the plan shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which they principally relate and shall not
appear as "add ons" or intrusions.
c. The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates.
d. The number of graphic elements and letters shall be held to the minimum needed to convey each sign's major message and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign's face.
e. Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention.
5. Permitted Signs: In addition to the signs permitted by other sections of this chapter, the following signs are permitted uniquely to unified business
centers:
a. A unified business center may have one identification sign for the center in addition to the signs permitted for each separate business.
b. Such identification signs may only include the name and graphic logo of the center, address of the center, and also may include a time and/or
temperature sign.
c. The permitted area of such identification sign shall be based upon a ratio of four (4) square feet per one acre of the center's site, up to a maximum
of seventy five (75) square feet. Every unified business center is permitted an identification sign of four (4) square feet.
d. Otherwise, unified business center identification signs shall conform to the regulations of the sign type to which they most closely resemble.
e. Unified business centers may have one common directory sign not to exceed seventy five (75) square feet, advertising individual businesses on
the site. Such signs shall be limited to three (3) square feet per business listed on the sign. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-9: ALLOWABLE SIGN AREA:
A. Aggregate Sign Area: The aggregate area of all signs, other than temporary signs, for each premises shall not exceed one and twenty five onehundredths
(1.25) square feet for each linear foot of display frontage of that premises. The total aggregate sign area may be distributed between one or
more signs of one or more sign types, so long as no individual sign exceeds the maximum allowable area for that individual sign as set forth in the table
of maximum sign area as set forth in subsection B of this section.
The table illustrates the maximum height, area, and percentage of window or wall coverage for any individual sign or combination of signs.
B. Maximum Sign Limits:
SIGNS FOR INSTITUTIONAL OR OFFICE USES
Category Of The Adjoining
Street1 Maximum Area Maximum Height
Maximum
Wall Coverage
Awning and canopy
signs
Local or collector Lesser of 0.6 sq. ft./l.f. of awning or 50
sq. ft.
Height of building 10% of wall area
Minor arterial " " " " "
Major arterial " " " " "
Ground signs Local or collector Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
50 sq. ft.
5.5 ft. n/a
Minor arterial Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
75 sq. ft.
10 ft. n/a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 506/702
Major arterial Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
75 sq. ft.
10 ft. n/a
Permanent window
signs
Local or collector 25% of window area Window height Max. allowed as wall
sign
Minor arterial " " " " "
Major arterial " " " " "
Pole signs Local or collector Sign type not permitted for these uses on a local or collector street
Minor arterial 50 sq. ft. 12 ft. n/a
Major arterial 50 sq. ft. 15 ft. n/a
Projecting signs Local or collector 10 sq. ft. per face Height of wall n/a
Minor arterial Not permitted
Major arterial Not permitted
Roof signs Local or collector 1 sq. ft./l.f. of display frontage Lesser of 4 ft. or top of
roof
n/a
Minor arterial " " " " "
Major arterial " " " " "
Wall signs Local or collector 1 sq. ft./l.f. of display frontage 85% of wall height 10%
Minor arterial " " " " "
Major arterial " " " " "
Note:
1. As identified in the Bartlett comprehensive plan and the Bartlett thoroughfare map.
SIGNS FOR INDUSTRIAL USES
Category Of The Adjoining
Street1 Maximum Area Maximum Height
Maximum
Wall Coverage
Awning and canopy
signs
Local or collector Lesser of 0.6 sq. ft./l.f. of awning or 50 sq.
ft.
Height of building 10% of wall area
Minor arterial " " " " "
Major arterial " " " " "
Ground signs Local or collector Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
50 sq. ft.
5 ft. n/a
Minor arterial Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
100 sq. ft.
5 ft. n/a
Major arterial Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
150 sq. ft.
12 ft. n/a
Permanent window
signs
Local or collector 25% of window area Window height Max. allowed as wall
sign
Minor arterial " " " " "
Major arterial " " " " "
Pole signs Local or collector Sign type not permitted for these uses on a local or collector street
Minor arterial 50 sq. ft. 12 ft. n/a
Major arterial 75 sq. ft. 15 ft. n/a
Projecting signs Local or collector Not permitted
Minor arterial Not permitted
Major arterial Not permitted
Roof signs Local or collector 1 sq. ft./l.f. of display
frontage
Lesser of 4 ft. or top of
roof
n/a
Minor arterial " " " " "
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 507/702
Major arterial " " " " "
Wall signs Local or collector 1 sq. ft./l.f. of display frontage 85% of wall height 5%
Minor arterial " " " " 5%
Major arterial " " " " 10%
Note:
1. As identified in the Bartlett comprehensive plan and the Bartlett thoroughfare map.
SIGNS FOR COMMERCIAL USES
Category Of The Adjoining
Street1 Maximum Area Maximum Height
Maximum
Wall Coverage
Awning and canopy
signs
Local or collector Lesser of 0.6 sq. ft./l.f. of awning or 50 sq.
ft.
Height of building 10% of wall area
Minor arterial " " " " "
Major arterial " " " " "
Ground signs Local or collector Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
50 sq. ft.
5 ft. n/a
Minor arterial Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
100 sq. ft.
10 ft. n/a
Major arterial Lesser of 0.7 sq. ft./l.f. of display front or
150 sq. ft.
12 ft. n/a
Permanent window
signs
Local or collector 25% of window area Window height Max. allowed as wall
sign
Minor arterial 25% of window area " " "
Major arterial 25% of window area " " "
Pole signs Local or collector Sign type not permitted for these uses on a local or collector street
Minor arterial 80 sq. ft. 12 ft. n/a
Major arterial 100 sq. ft. 15 ft. n/a
Projecting signs Local or collector 10 sq. ft. per face Height of wall n/a
Minor arterial Not permitted
Major arterial Not permitted
Roof signs Local or collector 1 sq. ft./l.f. of display frontage Lesser of 4 ft. or top of
roof
n/a
Minor arterial " " " " "
Major arterial " " " " "
Wall signs Local or collector 1 sq. ft./l.f. of display frontage 85% of wall height 10%
Minor arterial " " " " 15%
Major arterial " " " " 15%
Note:
1. As identified in the Bartlett comprehensive plan and the Bartlett thoroughfare map.
C. Sign Area Calculation: The following methods shall be used to calculate the sign area of various types of signs:
1. For ground signs, pole signs, projecting signs and roof signs, the sign area shall be calculated by measuring the entire area enclosed within the
smallest regular geometric form, or combination of regular geometric forms, which may be inscribed within the perimeter of the sign structure,
excluding structural support members extending beyond the frame or background border of the sign. In the case of signs with more than one face the
area shall be computed only for the maximum single display surface which is visible from any one ground position.
2. For wall signs, awning and canopy signs, and window signs, the sign area shall be calculated by measuring the entire area enclosed within the
smallest regular geometric form, or combination of regular geometric forms, which may be inscribed to encompass all letters and graphic symbols of
the sign, including horizontal spacings between such letters and symbols plus any additional portion of the background which is framed by a border,
internally illuminated, consisting of a color or tone different than the wall to which the sign is attached, or projects more than three inches (3") beyond
the plane of the wall to which it is attached.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 508/702
3. For temporary signs, the sign area shall be calculated by measuring one side of the sign surface area, even though said sign may be double faced,
not including the area or dimensions of any metal, wood or other type of support.
D. Multiple Frontages: When a business has more than one display frontage the restrictions on the number of signs and sign area shall apply to each
frontage, subject to the following limitations:
1. The maximum permitted sign area shall apply to both display frontages.
2. Double faced signs erected on or near the corner of a building or parcel so as to be equally visible from each frontage shall be counted as part of the
permitted sign area for each frontage.
E. Multiple Floors: When a business premises contains more than one floor above ground the display frontage level may be used to calculate permissible
sign area for each floor, subject to the following limitations:
1. If the operations of a single business cover more than one floor, then twenty five percent (25%) of the display frontage at the ground level may be
added to calculate permissible sign area.
2. If a building contains one or more businesses different from the business(es) occupying the ground floor, and if the aggregate area occupied by such
business(es) equals at least seventy five percent (75%) of the upper floor(s), then one hundred percent (100%) of the display frontage of the upper
floor(s) may be used to calculate permissible sign area.
F. Multiple Occupants: In buildings with multiple business occupants, each occupant shall be allotted a sign area based upon the display frontage
proportional to the ratio of total floor area in the building. Common areas shall not be included in this calculation. Every occupant shall be allowed a
minimum sign area of three (3) square feet.
G. Business Premises Without Buildings: For business premises which do not contain buildings larger than four hundred (400) square feet, and which
lawfully store their merchandise outside, the permitted sign area shall be calculated on the basis of five one-thousandths (0.005) of a square foot of
sign area for each one square foot of the subject parcel, up to a maximum of eighty (80) square feet of sign area. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-10: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Compliance: Any sign made nonconforming by the passage of this chapter shall be removed, modified, or altered to comply with this chapter no later
than seven (7) years from the date of the passage of this chapter.
B. Change In Condition: Every nonconforming sign must come into compliance with this chapter or must be removed within fourteen (14) days if any of the
following occurs to the sign:
1. It is damaged, deteriorated or destroyed and the cost of reconstruction, repair or maintenance is sixty percent (60%) or more of its depreciated value
at the time it is damaged, deteriorated or destroyed; or
2. It has not been used for a period of six (6) months or longer; or
3. It is substantially modified; or
4. It is relocated on the same or different premises; or
5. Fifty percent (50%) of the building display frontage to which the sign relates is remodeled; or
6. The ownership, tenancy or activity for the premises on which the nonconforming sign is located requires a new occupancy permit.
C. Continuing Obligation: Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or user of a nonconforming sign or owner of the property on which the
nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs, provided, however, that any
repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign structure or copy in any way which
makes it more nonconforming. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-11: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs and graphic structures are prohibited from erection or placement within the village:
A. Signs, attention gathering devices or graphics which by color, location, or design resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or signals.
B. Graphics or signs attached to power poles or light standards.
C. Billboards. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-12: NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS:
The purpose of this chapter is to guarantee that noncommercial speech receives protection at least as great as that provided for commercial speech.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 509/702
Accordingly, notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, noncommercial messages may be contained on any sign authorized
hereunder. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
10-12-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and
each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 2014-55, 6-17-2014)
Chapter 13
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10-13-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, DUTIES:
The Village Board shall designate a Zoning Administrator who shall be in charge of the administration and enforcement of this title. The Zoning
Administrator shall:
A. Receive applications required, issue permits and furnish certificates, all as authorized by this title.
B. Examine premises for which permits have been issued, and make necessary inspections to determine compliance.
C. When requested by the Village President or Board of Trustees, or when the interest of the Village so requires, make investigations and render written
reports.
D. Issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
E. Keep careful and comprehensive records of applicants, permits, certificates, inspections, reports, notices, orders and all localized actions of the Board
of Trustees and shall file the same permanently by street address.
F. Keep all such records open to public inspection, at reasonable hours, but not for removal from his/her office.
G. Report to the President and the Board of Trustees at least once each month as to permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated.
H. Request and receive the assistance and cooperation of the Police Department, the Village Attorney and other Village officials.
I. Inform the Village Attorney of all violations and all other matters requiring prosecution or legal action.
J. Be entitled to rely upon any opinion of the Village Attorney as to the interpretation of this title or the legal application of this title to any factual situation.
K. Discharge such other duties as may be placed upon him/her by this title. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
10-13-2: OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES:
A. No building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date hereof and no addition to a previous existing building shall be occupied, and no land
vacant on the effective date hereof shall be used for any purpose until an occupancy certificate has been issued by the Building Commissioner. No
change in a use in any district shall be made until an occupancy certificate has been issued by the Building Commissioner.
B. No occupancy certificate for a building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this title, or for a change in use, shall be issued until the
premises have been inspected and certified by the Building Commissioner to be in full compliance with all the applicable standards of the zoning district
in which it is located. Pending the issuance of an occupancy certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six
(6) months from its date during the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. An occupancy certificate shall be issued, or
written notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, not later than fourteen (14) days after the Building
Commissioner is notified in writing that the building or premises is ready for inspection.
C. Every application for a building permit shall also be deemed to be an application for an occupancy certificate. Every application for an occupancy
certificate for a new or changed use of land or building where no building permit is required shall be made to the Building Commissioner. (Ord. 78-40,
5-16-1978)
10-13-3: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. Membership: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village, as heretofore created and established under the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the
Village, as amended, is hereby reconstituted as the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) under the provisions of this title. The said Board shall consist of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 510/702
seven (7) members appointed by the President and Board of Trustees voting jointly, one of whom shall be designated as chairman at the time of his
appointment. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78; amd. Ord. 79-15, 3-20-79)
B. Meetings: All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman or at such other times as the ZBA may determine. All
testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this Title shall be given under oath. The chairman of the ZBA, or in his absence the vicechairman,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the ZBA shall be open to the public. The ZBA shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also
keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case of a requested variation,
specifying the reasons for granting or denying such variation. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order,
requirements, decision or determination of the ZBA shall be immediately filed in the office of the ZBA and shall be public record. The ZBA shall adopt
its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the Illinois Revised Statutes.
C. Procedures: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide matters as authorized by this Title in a specific case and after public hearing.
D. Jurisdiction and Authority: The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
1. To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator under this Title.
2. To hear all petitions for variations, and make recommendations to the Village Board relative thereto.
3. To hear all other matters referred to it by the Village Board and other matters upon which it is required to conduct hearings under this Title, and to
make recommendations to the Village Board relative thereto.
10-13-4: APPEALS:
A. Authority: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
officer charged with the enforcement of this Title.
B. Initiation and Processing: An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department,
board, bureau or commission aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination under this Title.
The appeal shall be taken within forty-five (45) days of the action complained of by filing with the Village Clerk a notice of appeal, specifying the
grounds thereof. Such appeal shall be taken upon forms provided by the Village. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the ZBA all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the ZBA, after the notice of
appeal has been filed with him/her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such event, the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the ZBA or by a court of
record on application and on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
The ZBA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the appeal within a reasonable
time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The ZBA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or to modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination and to that end has all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
C. Decisions:
1. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the ZBA shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning
Administrator, to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Title, or to recommend any variation or
modification in this Title to the Village Board.
2. All decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator shall,
in all instances, be final and subject to review under the Administrative Review Act of the State of Illinois.
10-13-5: VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider variations from the bulk regulations of this Title in harmony with its general purpose and intent,
and shall recommend that the Village Board vary them only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth, where the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
have made a finding of fact based upon the standards hereinafter prescribed.
B. Initiation: An application for a variation may be made by any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau or commission
requesting or intending to request application for a building permit or occupancy certificate.
C. Processing: An application for a variation shall be filed with the Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village and accompanied by such information as
shall be established from time to time by the Village and kept on file with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall forward such application to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for processing in accordance with applicable statutes of the State of Illinois and the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-
78)
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make its recommendation after a public hearing, of which there shall be a notice indicating the time and place of
such hearing published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers published
in the Village, or, if no newspaper is published in the Village, then in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village. In addition, at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the date of the public hearing, the petitioner shall cause to be posted on the real estate which is the subject of such variation petition
the following notice:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 511/702
Public Notice. Public Hearing for variation from Bartlett Zoning Ordinance for this site (insert date and time), Bartlett Municipal Building, 228 South Main
Street.
The Bartlett Zoning Board of Appeals
The procedure for posting the notice hereinbefore required shall be governed by Section 10-13-9 hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78; amd. Ord.
79-47, 7-17-79; Ord. 80-5, 2-5-80)
D. Authorized Variations: Variations from the regulations of this Title shall be granted by the Village Board only in accordance with the standards set out in
this Section and may be granted only in the following instances and no others: (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78)
1. To permit up to a twenty percent (20%) reduction in the front, side or rear yard required by this Title; provided, however, the corporate authorities
may by a vote of a) five (5) Trustees, or b) the Village President and four (4) Trustees, grant a variation which permits more than a twenty percent
(20%) reduction in the front, side or rear yards required by this Title. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78; amd. Ord. 79-45, 7-17-79)
2. To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of insufficient area of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the respective
area of the lot be less than ninety percent (90%) of the required area. The percentage set forth in this subsection is not to be reduced by any other
percentage for minimum lot area set forth in this Title.
3. To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by not more than one parking space or loading space, or twenty percent
(20%) of the applicable regulations, whichever number is greater.
4. To increase by not more than ten percent (10%) the maximum gross floor area of any use so limited by the applicable regulations.
5. To extend the period of time a nonconforming use may continue or remain.
6. To exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under this Section, when a lots of record or a zoning lot, vacant or legally used on the effective
date of this Title, is by reason of the exercise of the right of eminent domain by any authorized governmental body or by reason of a conveyance
under threat of an eminent domain proceeding so reduced in size that the remainder of said lot does not conform with one or more of the regulations
of the district in which said lot of record or zoning lot or structure is located. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-78)
7. To permit up to a twenty percent (20%) reduction in landscape planting requirements based on site specific conditions. (Ord. 91-26, 4-16-91)
E. Standards for Variations:
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend a variation from the provisions of this Title unless it shall have made findings based upon the
evidence presented to it in the following cases:
a. That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the specific property involved would result in a particular hardship
upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
b. That conditions upon which the petition for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not applicable,
generally, to other property within the same zoning classifications.
c. That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property.
d. That the alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by the provisions of this Title and has not been created by any person presently having an interest
in the property.
e. That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhoods in
which the property is located.
f. That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in the
public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the adjacent
neighborhood.
g. That the granting of the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the provisions of this Title to
other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.
2. A variation shall be recommended only if the evidence, in the judgment of the Board of Appeals, sustains all the conditions enumerated above.
F. Vote Required: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to recommend any variation to the Village
Board. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
In addition, the Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend the imposition of such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation
as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this Title to reduce or minimize the effect of such variation upon other property in the
neighborhood, and to better carry out the general intent of this Title.
G. Village Board Action: The Village Board shall review the report and recommendation of the ZBA and shall either approve the requested variation by
ordinance or deny it. (Ord. 83-20, 4-26-1983)
10-13-6: PLAN COMMISSION:
The Plan Commission shall be governed by the provisions of Title 2, Chapter 2 of this Village Code.
A. Jurisdiction: The Plan Commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 512/702
1. To hear such applications for amendments and special uses as may be referred to it by the Village Board and thereafter submit reports of findings
and recommendations thereon to the Village Board only in the manner prescribed in this Section for amendments and special uses;
2. To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of this Title, and to make reports of its recommendations to the Village Board
not less frequently than once each year; and
3. To hear and make recommendations relative to all matters upon which it is required to conduct hearings under this Title.
B. Meetings And Rules: All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call of the chairman, and at such times as the Plan Commission may
determine. All hearings conducted by said Plan Commission under this Title shall be in accordance with Illinois statutes. In all proceedings of the Plan
Commission provided for in this Title, the chairman, and in his/her absence, the acting chairman, shall have the power to administer oaths. All
testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this Title shall be given under oath. The Plan Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every amendment and special use, and every
recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the Plan Commission under this Title shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk
and shall be a public record. The Plan Commission may adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict with the provisions of this Title or with
applicable Illinois statutes. (Ord. 79-15, 3-20-1979)
The Bartlett Plan Commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, to be appointed by the Village President, subject to confirmation by the Board of
Trustees, each member to serve a four (4) year term or such shorter term as the corporate authorities may determine. (Ord. 91-82, 11-5-1991)
10-13-7: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this Title may be amended from time to time by ordinance, in
accordance with applicable statutes of the State. An amendment shall be granted or denied by the Village Board only after a public hearing before the
Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals, and after a report of its findings and recommendations has been submitted to the Village Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 79-15, 3-20-1979)
B. Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board, by the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, other
governmental bodies, or by any resident of or any owner of property within the jurisdictional limits of this Title. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 79-47,
7-17-1979)
C. Processing: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village and accompanied by such
information as shall be established from time to time by the Village and kept on file with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall, upon instructions from
the Village Board, forward such application to the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals with a request to hold a public hearing.
The designated hearing body shall make its recommendation after a public hearing, of which there shall be a notice indicating the time and place of
such hearing published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers published
in the Village or, if no newspaper is published in the Village, then in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village. In addition, at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the date of the public hearing, the petitioner shall cause to be posted on the real estate which is the subject of the proposed amendment
to the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance, the following notice:
Public Notice. Public hearing to zone (rezone) this site (insert zoning district classification) (insert date and time), Bartlett Municipal Building, 228
South Main Street.
The Bartlett Plan Commission
or
The Bartlett Zoning Board of Appeals
The procedure for posting the notice hereinbefore required shall be governed by Section 10-13-10 of this Chapter. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord.
79-15, 3-20-1979; Ord. 80-5, 2-5-1980)
D. Protests: In the case of written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or zoning district classification of any property, signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage
immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to
be altered, is filed with the Village Clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the Trustees of the
Village then holding office.
E. Decisions: The Village Board, upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the body holding the public hearing, and without further public hearing,
may grant by ordinance or deny any proposed amendment in accordance with applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, or may refer it back to the
body holding the public hearing for further consideration. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 79-15, 3-20-1979)
10-13-8: SPECIAL USES:
A. Purpose: The development and execution of the Zoning Ordinance is based on the division of the Village into zoning districts, within any one of which
the use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures, as related to the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized,
however, that there are special uses which because of their unique character cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring lands and upon the public need for the particular use or the particular
location. Such special uses fall into two (2) categories:
1. Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities, or uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Uses entirely private in character but of such a nature that the operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 513/702
B. Authority: Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the Village Board by ordinance in accordance with the procedural provisions of this Title and
the regulations and conditions set forth herein for special uses. No application for a special use shall be acted on by the Village Board until after a
public hearing is held before the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the findings and recommendations of the body holding such
public hearing have been reported to the Village Board.
C. Initiation: An application for a special use may be made by any person, firm or corporation, or by an office, department, board, bureau or commission
requesting or intending to request a building permit or occupancy certificate. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 79-15, 3-20-1979)
D. Processing: An application for a special use shall be filed with the Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village and accompanied by such information
as shall be established from time to time by the Village and kept on file with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall upon instructions from the Village
Board forward such application to the Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals with a request to hold a public hearing.
The designated hearing body shall make its recommendation after a public hearing, of which there shall be a notice indicating the time and place of
such hearing published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers published
in the Village or, if no newspaper is published in the Village, then in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village. In addition, at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the date of the public hearing, the petitioner shall cause to be posted on the real estate which is the subject of the proposed amendment
to the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance, the following notice:
Public Notice. Public Hearing for special use under Bartlett Zoning Ordinance for this site (insert date and time), Bartlett Municipal Building, 228 South
Main Street.
The Bartlett Plan Commission
or
The Bartlett Zoning Board of Appeals
The procedure for posting the notice hereinbefore required shall be governed by section 10-13-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord.
79-15, 3-20-1979; Ord. 80-5, 2-5-1980)
The designated hearing body shall hold the public hearing and forward its recommendations and findings of fact in the form of a written report to the
Village Board within a reasonable time, usually within thirty (30) days following the date of public hearing on each application, unless it is withdrawn by
the petitioner. Such findings of fact shall include all of the following:
1. That the proposed use at that particular location requested is necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the interest of public
convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or community;
2. That such use will not under the circumstances of the particular case be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity or be injurious to property value or improvement in the vicinity;
3. That the special use shall conform to the regulations and conditions specified in this title for such use and with the stipulation and conditions made a
part of the authorization granted by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 79-15, 3-20-1979)
E. Protests: In the case of written protest against any proposed special use, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the Village Clerk, the special use shall
not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the Trustees of the Village then holding office. (Ord. 83-20, 4-26-1983)
F. Decisions: The Village Board, upon receipt of the report and recommendation of the body holding the public hearing, and without further public hearing,
may grant by ordinance or deny any proposed special use in accordance with applicable statutes of the State, or may refer it back to the body holding
the public hearing for further consideration. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 79-15, 3-20-1979)
10-13-9: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
Prior to obtaining a building permit a site plan review shall be required as part of a development application for a rezoning, special use(s) and/or
variation(s) on any property located within an SR-5, SR-6, MH-1, P-1, Commercial, Office/Research or Industrial Zoning District.
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of requiring a site plan review is to ensure that site plans associated with a rezoning, special use(s) and/or
variation(s) is/are otherwise in conformance with this title. The site plan should include the compatible arrangement of buildings, off-street parking,
lighting, landscaping, ingress and egress, and stormwater control of the site and shall be designed in a manner that will promote safety and
convenience for the public and will preserve property values of surrounding properties.
B. Procedure: The applicant shall file the required items as outlined in the development application packet provided by the Village, as well as all supporting
documents and fees. Once the Zoning Administrator has determined that the development application packet is complete, the review process outlined
in the packet shall be followed.
C. Findings And Conditions Of Approval: The Plan Commission shall review and make recommendations on a site plan, subject to the following findings of
fact and any other conditions included in their recommendation:
1. That the proposed use is a permitted or special use in the district in which the property is located;
2. That the proposed arrangement of buildings, off-street parking, access lighting, landscaping and stormwater control is compatible with adjacent land
uses;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 514/702
3. That the vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site and circulation within the site provides for safe, efficient and convenient movement of
traffic not only within the site, but on adjacent roadways as well;
4. That the site plan provides for the safe movement of pedestrians with the site;
5. That there is a sufficient mixture of grass, trees and shrubs within the interior and perimeter (including the public right-of-way) of the site so that the
proposed development will be in harmony with adjacent land uses and will provide a pleasing appearance to the public. Any part of the site not used
for buildings, structures, parking or access ways shall be landscaped with a mixture of grass, trees and shrubs;
All landscape improvements shall be in compliance with chapter 11A of this title, landscape requirements.
6. That all trash enclosures and outdoor storage areas are screened and are in accordance with standards specified by this section.
D. Assurance Of Performance: As a condition of approval, the Village Engineer and/or Building Director may recommend that the applicant be required to
file with the Village a performance guarantee approved by the Village Attorney to ensure completion of approved landscaping, fencing, utilities, parking
and loading, stormwater control and other items specified by the Village Engineer. The amount of the performance guarantee and the required
completion date shall be recommended by the Village Engineer based on the Village Engineer's estimate of costs.
If upon inspection of the completed project by the Village Engineer, it is found that the conditions of the site plan have been met, the Village Engineer
shall write a letter to the applicant and the performance guarantee shall be released.
If the applicant does not complete the development of the items specified on the site plan within the time specified in its guarantee, the Village Engineer
shall give written notice of the incomplete items to the applicant and the surety or other guarantor. If the site is not in conformance with the conditions of
the site plan the Village will not accept the public improvement(s) and will not release the performance guarantee.
E. Building Permits: A building permit for earthmoving, construction, alteration, or any other purpose shall not be issued for a site until a site plan is
approved by the Village Board. Any earthmoving, construction or alteration determined not to be in substantial compliance with the approved site plan,
in the opinion of the Building Director shall be a violation of this title.
F. Amendments To An Approved Site Plan: Amendments to an approved site plan may be submitted to the Building Department as part of a building permit
application and reviewed in accordance with section 10-13-9-1, "Administrative Site Plan Review", of this chapter. If a rezoning, special use(s) and/or
variation(s) is/are requested as part of the amendment request, the site plan will be reviewed in accordance with this section. (Ord. 2017-136, 10-17-
2017)
10-13-9-1: ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN REVIEW:
An administrative site plan review may be submitted to the Building Department as part of a building permit application if no rezoning, special use(s) and/or
variation(s) is/are requested.
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of requiring an administrative site plan review is to ensure that site plans are otherwise in conformance with
this title, include the compatible arrangement of buildings, off-street parking, lighting, landscaping, ingress and egress and stormwater control of the
site, and shall be designed in a manner that will promote safety and convenience for the public and will preserve property values of surrounding
properties.
B. Procedure: The applicant shall file a site plan as part of the required building permit application with all supporting documents and fees. Once the
Building Director has determined that the building permit application is complete, the review process outlined in section 9-2-12 of the Bartlett Municipal
Code shall be followed.
C. Assurance Of Performance: As a condition of approval, the Village Engineer and/or Building Director may recommend that the applicant be required to
file with the Village a performance guarantee in the form of a surety bond or letter of credit or cash bond (the "performance guarantee") and approved
by the Village Attorney to ensure completion of, and payment for, the approved landscaping, fencing, utilities, parking and loading, stormwater control
and other items specified by the Village Engineer. The amount of the performance guarantee and the required completion date shall be recommended
by the Village Engineer based on the Village Engineer's approval of the estimate of costs.
If upon inspection of the completed project by the Village Engineer it is found that the conditions of the site plan have been met, the Village Engineer
shall write a letter to the applicant, and the performance guarantee shall be released.
If the applicant does not complete the development of the items specified on the site plan and/or engineering plans within the time specified in its
performance guarantee, the Village Engineer shall give written notice of the incomplete items to the applicant, and if a performance and payment bond
was furnished as the performance guarantee, to the surety on said bonds, or if a letter of credit was furnished as the performance guarantee, to the
issuer thereof. If the site is not in conformance with the conditions of the site plan, the approved engineering plans, the building permit, and/or the
performance guarantee, the Village will not accept the public improvement(s) and will not release the performance guarantee, but may take action
against the applicant and the surety on any surety bond, or draw upon any letter of credit, or cash bond, and may withhold the issuance of any
occupancy permit.
D. Building Permits: A building permit for earthmoving, construction, alteration, or any other purpose shall not be issued for a site until a site plan is
approved by the Zoning Administrator, engineering plans have been approved by the Village Engineer (if applicable), and building plans have been
approved by the Building Director, and a performance guarantee in form approved by the Village Attorney, has been posted or deposited with the
Village. Any earthmoving, construction or alteration determined not to be in substantial compliance with the approved site plan, engineering plans,
building plans, and/or the building permit(s), or any of them, in the opinion of the Building Director, shall be a violation of this chapter and cause for
revocation of the building permit and entitle the Village to take action on the performance guaranty.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 515/702
E. Amendments To An Approved Administrative Site Plan: Amendments to an approved administrative site plan may be submitted as part of a building
permit application and reviewed in accordance with this section. If a rezoning, special use(s) and/or variation(s) is/are requested, then the plans will be
reviewed in accordance with this section 10-13-9. (Ord. 2017-136, 10-17-2017)
10-13-10: NOTICES OF PUBLIC HEARING:
Each applicant for zoning amendments, variations or special uses shall provide notice of the public hearing as follows and present proof of such notice at
the public hearing:
A. Published Notice: Published notice shall be given of the subject, time and place of the hearing not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing as set forth in subsections 10-13-5C, 10-13-7C and 10-13-8D of this chapter. Upon completion of the application form and
submission of all required information and fees by the applicant the Village Clerk shall publish such notice.
B. Personal Notice: Not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, the applicant, his agent or attorney, shall notify the person
who last paid the General Real Estate Taxes on each property located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the boundaries of the subject hearing site:
1) by personal service, 2) by leaving a copy with an adult member of such taxpayer's household, or 3) by first class mail, addressed to such taxpayer at
the address shown on the most recent records of the County Collector. Such notification shall include the subject, time and place of the hearing.
C. Posting Of Notice On The Subject Property: Notice shall be posted on the real estate which is the subject of the application, not less than fifteen (15)
nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing date, setting forth the time, place and purpose of such public hearing on a sign, the size and
location of which shall be determined by the frontage of such real estate on a public street or streets in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Unimproved (Vacant) Real Estate:
Setback From Front Property
Line Not More Than Depth - Length Size Of Sign
10 feet 2 feet x 3 feet
2. Improved Real Estate: A two foot by three foot (2' x 3') sign shall be placed near the front door of the building or as required for unimproved real
estate, as the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may direct.
The sign hereinbefore required to be posted shall be so placed as to be fully visible from the public street on which the subject real estate is located
or, if the subject real estate has frontage on more than one public street on each such street.
The sign shall be white and black print as follows:
"PUBLIC NOTICE"
(PURPOSE AND HEARING)
DATE AND TIME
Bartlett Municipal Building
228 South Main Street
Bartlett Plan Commission
(or Bartlett Zoning Board of Appeals)
The size of the lettering shall be large enough to be read from each public street on which the subject real estate has frontage at the setback
distances established above.
It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to remove the public notice sign(s) within five (5) days after the final Village Board action. The petitioner
shall submit to the Village, with petitioner's sign permit application, a cash bond of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per sign to assure removal of the
sign(s). The cash bond will be refunded to the petitioner after the removal of the sign(s) has been verified by the Village. If the petitioner does not
remove the sign(s) within the specified period, the Village may remove the sign(s) and the cash bond shall be retained by the Village as liquidated
damages. (Ord. 83-20, 4-26-1983)
10-13-11: FEES:
A. Schedule Of Fees: A schedule of fees, charges and expenses for appeals, application for amendments or special uses and other matter pertaining to
the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance shall be established by ordinance by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
B. Consultant Fees: The Village uses an attorney, an engineer, and from time to time a planner as consultants during the review of any development
activity. These consultant fees are based on the time spent by the individual consultant in the review of the project and/or application, including such
attendance at staff, Plan Commission, committee, and Village Board meetings at which time such application is reviewed. All consultant fees will be
billed directly to the developer, builder, subdivider or any person or entity which submits an application and shall be paid prior to the completion of the
project's review.
C. Petition: No petition shall be forwarded by the Clerk to any Hearing Commission heretofore or hereafter established by the Corporate Authorities, and
no notice of such hearing shall be published unless and until such development fees have been paid. (Ord. 95-121, 12-19-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 516/702
D. Final Action: Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no final action shall be taken on any application, amendment or
appeal by the Village Board. (Ord. 78-40, 5-16-1978)
Chapter 14
ADULT USE ZONING ORDINANCE
10-14-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the BARTLETT ADULT USE ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-14-2: PURPOSE:
A. The regulations established herein are intended to ensure that the adverse effects created by adult entertainment establishments (hereinafter defined)
are minimized and controlled so as not to cause or contribute to crime, increased blighting, or downgrading of adjacent property and the surrounding
neighborhoods by restricting their proximity from pre-existing public and private schools, preschools, day care facilities, churches, synagogues,
temples, other religious facilities, public parks, liquor establishments, and areas zoned or designated for residential use.
B. The regulations established herein are intended to protect and preserve the quality, property values, integrity and character of the Village's
neighborhoods and commercial and business districts, deter the spread of urban blight, and protect the citizens of Bartlett from the adverse secondary
effects of adult entertainment establishments.
C. It is the intent of this Chapter to minimize the secondary effects associated with adult entertainment establishments by placing reasonable restrictions
on the location of such establishments within the Village. The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to impose a limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, nor restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of the
Constitution of the United States, nor to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. (Ord.
96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-14-3: USES REGULATED:
In the development and execution of this Chapter, it is recognized that there are some uses, which, because of their very nature, are recognized as
resulting in or causing serious secondary effects, particularly when located near certain other types of uses thereby having a deleterious effect upon the
adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhoods or businesses. These special regulations are itemized in this Chapter. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of
minimizing the secondary effects associated with adult entertainment establishments. Adult entertainment establishments, as herein defined, including, but
not limited to the following uses, shall be subject to these controls:
A. Adult bookstores.
B. Adult motion picture theaters.
C. Adult mini motion picture theaters.
D. Adult cabarets. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-14-4: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOK STORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, adult motion pictures (as
defined herein) and/or other periodicals that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
material.
ADULT CABARET: An establishment offering to its patrons as entertainment, any live exhibition or display or any theatrical or live performances that
feature topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or any persons singing, reading,
posing, modeling or serving food or beverages where such exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to sexually arouse the entertainer or the
patrons, or where the attire of the persons involved is such to expose specified anatomical areas (as defined herein).
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any adult book store, adult motion picture theater, adult mini picture theater, cabaret or other commercial
establishment open to the public which a) displays, distributes, issues, gives, provides, lends, delivers, transfers, transmits, circulates, disseminates,
presents, exhibits, advertises, sells, rents or leases a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, any material depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas; b) utilizes a substantial or significant part of its display areas, including, but not limited to,
floor, shelf, rack, table, stand, case, display areas, boxes, cabinets, drawers, cartons or any other storage area or apparatus, for any material
characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or c) exhibits for a substantial or significant portion of the total
representation time, any material characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. An "adult entertainment
establishment" shall be further defined as any commercial establishment open to the public which involves employees or customers who engage in
conduct which is distinguished or characterized by specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 517/702
ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting adult motion pictures
(as defined herein) material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting adult motion pictures (as
defined herein) and/or material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURES: Films, motion pictures, video cassettes or tapes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
DAY CARE FACILITY: Any person, group of persons, agency, association or organization, whether established for gain or otherwise, who or which
receives a license pursuant to the Child Care Act of 1969 (225 ILCS 10/1 et seq.), and who or which receives or arranges for care or placement of one or
more children, unrelated to the operator of the facility, apart from the parents, with or without the transfer of the right of custody in any facility, established
and maintained for the care of children.
SCHOOL: Any public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Less than completely and opaquely covered:
A. Human genitals, pubic region,
B. Buttock, and
C. Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
D. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation.
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-14-5: PROHIBITED USES AND PERMITTED USES WITH SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
A. Sections 10-4A-6, 10-4B-6, 10-4C-6, 10-4D-6, 10-4E-6, 10-4F-6, 10-4G-6, 10-4H-6, 10-4I-6, 10-4J-6, 10-6A-6, 10-6B-6, 10-6C-6, 10-6D-6, 10-5A-6,
and 10-8A-6 of the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance are hereby amended to make adult book stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini motion picture
theaters, adult cabarets and other adult entertainment establishments, as defined in Section 10-14-4 of this Chapter, prohibited uses in the ER-1, ER-2,
ER-3, SR-1, SR-2, SR-3, SR-4, SR-5, SR-6, MH-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, O-R and P-1 Districts.
B. Section 10-9A-6 of the Bartlett Municipal Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended to make adult book stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini
motion picture theaters, adult cabarets and other adult entertainment establishments, as defined in Section 10-14-4 of this Chapter, prohibited uses in
any area or areas within a PD Planned Development District where such area or areas have been designated for one or more of the following use or
uses: residential, mobile home, office research, public land, commercial, and/or business.
C. The Planned Unit Development provisions of the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance are hereby amended to make adult book stores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult mini motion picture theaters, adult cabarets and other adult entertainment establishments, as defined in Section 10-14-4 of this Chapter,
prohibited uses in any Planned Unit Development that is located within any area or areas zoned for residential, mobile home, office research, public
land, commercial and/or business use or uses.
D. Sections 10-7A-3, 10-7B-3, 10-9-4, and 10-9A-3 of the Bartlett Zoning Ordinance are hereby amended to make adult book stores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult mini motion picture theaters, adult cabarets and other adult entertainment establishments, as defined in Section 10-14-4 of this Chapter,
permitted uses only within the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts, PD Planned Development Districts designated solely for industrial use, and PUDs located
entirely within an industrially zoned area. All such uses shall be subject to the following special conditions:
1. Adult book stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini motion picture theaters, adult cabarets and any other adult entertainment establishment
are prohibited within the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius consisting of the following distances from the following specified uses or
zones:
a. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residentially zoned district, including, but not limited to, ER-1, ER-2, ER-3, SR-1, SR-2, SR-3, SR-4, SR-
5, SR-6, or MH-1.
b. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any area designated for residential use or uses within a PD Planned Development District.
c. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any pre-existing public or private school, preschool or day care facility.
d. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any pre-existing church, synagogue, temple or other religious facility or institution.
e. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any pre-existing public park.
f. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other pre-existing adult entertainment establishment.
g. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any pre-existing establishment in which liquor is sold or offered for sale pursuant to a liquor license, excluding
special event retailers that sell, or offer for sale, liquor pursuant to a temporary liquor license granted pursuant to Section 3-3-2-5 of the Bartlett
Liquor Control Ordinance or pursuant to a similar temporary liquor license issued by the local liquor commissioner or commission of a county or
other municipality.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 518/702
2. The distances provided in this Section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings or structures, from the
nearest property line of the parcel of property upon which the proposed adult entertainment establishment use is proposed to be located to the
nearest property line of the parcel of property zoned (or designated if a PD Planned Development District) for residential, mobile home, office
research, public land, commercial and/or business use or uses or any of the pre-existing uses described in subsection D1a through g of this Section.
(Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
10-14-6: UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his or her agent or employee, to knowingly permit any exhibition or advertising in connection with any establishment
regulated under this Chapter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas to be displayed, depicted or
portrayed in any manner that is visible from any public sidewalk, street or highway. (Ord. 96-4, 2-6-1996)
Title 11
SUBDIVISION AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the BARTLETT SUBDIVISION AND PUD ORDINANCE (and shall replace any and all previously stated subdivision ordinance).
(Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to provide reasonable rules and regulations for the orderly development of land within the territorial jurisdiction of the village of
Bartlett in accordance with its official comprehensive plan; to establish reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of
public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, the size of
lots to be used for residential, commercial, and industrial purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, wetlands, sanitary sewers and
sewage collection and treatment, including the kind and quality of materials which shall be used in the construction of streets, alleys, and public service
facilities required in Bartlett ("the public improvements standards") and to provide regulations for the vacation of subdivisions, streets, alleys and
easements.
The requirements set forth in this title are deemed to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of the residents of
the village of Bartlett. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-1-3: TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION:
Pursuant to the authority vested in it under the provisions of the Illinois municipal code1 and the plat act (Illinois revised plat act2) Bartlett has jurisdiction
over the subdivision of all land located within its corporate limits and all of the contiguous unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of its
corporate limits, except:
A. If the unincorporated territory is within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the village of Bartlett and one or more other corporate authorities which have
adopted official plans, and the village of Bartlett and such other corporate authorities have agreed upon a line which shall mark the boundaries of the
jurisdiction of each of the corporate authorities who have adopted such agreement, the jurisdiction of the village of Bartlett shall extend to such line.
B. In the absence of such agreement, the jurisdiction of the village of Bartlett shall extend to a median line equidistant from its boundary and the boundary
of the other corporate authority nearest to the village of Bartlett at any given point on the line. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-1-4: REVIEWING AND APPROVAL JURISDICTION:
No land within the territorial jurisdiction of the village of Bartlett shall be subdivided or resubdivided, and no subdivision heretofore platted shall be vacated
unless the president and board of trustees of the village of Bartlett shall first review and approve the preliminary and final plats of subdivision of such land,
and the plat of vacation of such previously platted subdivision, including streets and easements therein. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-1-5: PLANNING JURISDICTION:
A. All plats of subdivision or resubdivision and planned unit developments of lands within the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett shall conform to the
Bartlett zoning ordinance and the official comprehensive plan, including, but not limited to, the public improvements standards set forth in this title.
B. All plats of subdivision or resubdivision and planned unit developments of lands outside the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett but within its
territorial jurisdiction shall conform to the official comprehensive plan, including, but not limited to, the public improvements standards set forth in this
title. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 519/702
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this title and any amendment thereto, the rules and definitions contained in this chapter shall be observed and applied, except when
the context clearly indicates otherwise.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tenses.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and words used in the plural shall include the singular number.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory.
D. The word "may" is permissive.
E. The word "lot" shall mean and include the words "place" and "parcel".
F. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for".
G. The word "person" shall mean and include any corporation, partnership, joint venture, company, trust, firm, association, organization or any other entity.
H. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
I. In the case of any difference of meaning or application between the text of this title and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
J. The word "subdivider" shall mean any person who subdivides or resubdivides land.
K. The word "owner" shall mean and include the owner in fee simple, the titleholder of record, the trustee of any trust which holds title to land and the
beneficiaries of such trust, or any of them. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the meanings hereinafter set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Terms not defined herein shall
have the meaning customarily given them in the land development and construction industry.
ADT: The average daily traffic which is based on current traffic counts projected for future development.
ALLEY: A dedicated public right of way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
Frontage on an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements related to frontage on a dedicated street.
BASE FLOOD: A flood having a one percent (1%) statistical probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. A base flood is also known as the
100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD AREA: The land area subject to inundation by waters of a base flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The height of the base flood in relation to the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines or shorelines
of waterways, or boundary lines of the village and/or surrounding municipalities.
BOND: Cash, a cashier's or certified check, a subdivision improvement completion and payment bond or an irrevocable letter of credit as approved by the
village attorney, which is posted with the village to guarantee the completion of public improvements and payment thereof.
BUILDING: Any structure with a permanent roof separated on all sides from adjacent open space by exterior or party walls, erected partially or wholly
aboveground, built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. This term includes, but is not limited to, gas
or liquid storage tanks, and prefabricated buildings and mobile homes permanently fixed on a site and connected to water and sanitary sewer, or a septic
system and/or a private well. Prefabricated buildings and mobile homes must also meet the requirements of the Bartlett zoning ordinance and the Bartlett
building code. The term "building" includes both the aboveground and the belowground portions of the structure.
BUILDING LINE: A line defining the buildable area of a lot, set back from its front lot line, or lines in the case of a corner lot. No building or structure shall
be constructed between such building line and the front lot line(s) of such lot or in a required yard. (See the Bartlett zoning ordinance for permitted
obstructions in front, side and rear yards.)
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An excavated hydrologically and hydraulically equivalent volume of storage created to offset the loss of existing flood
storage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 520/702
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to regulate the volume of stormwater runoff released during a specific length of time.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village of Bartlett.
DETENTION AREA: A dry bottom stormwater storage area designed to be normally dry and contains water only when excess stormwater runoff occurs.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, earthmoving, excavating, filling, grading, and
paving; mining, drilling or dredging operations; the construction of or substantial improvements made to, any building or other structure; and the placement
of trailers or mobile homes on a site. In addition "development" shall include any activity, excavation or fill alteration, subdivision, change in land use, or
practice including, without limitation, redevelopment, undertaken by public or private entities that affects the discharge of stormwater.
DRIVEWAY: A pathway for motor vehicles from a street to a structure or use used for service purposes or for access to the structure or use only.
EASEMENT: An authorization or grant by a property owner for the use of private property, or a strip or portion thereof, by the village of Bartlett, other
governmental entity, or any person or entity for a specific purpose or purposes; or the right to use such private property, or a strip or parcel thereof, for a
public or private purpose or purposes, acquired through established usage by operation of law. (See the Bartlett building code and zoning ordinance for
permitted structures in easements.)
EXCESS STORMWATER: That portion of stormwater runoff which exceeds the natural drainage channels serving a specific watershed.
FEMA: The federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff
of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): A floodplain management map issued by FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analysis, the
boundaries of the base flood, the two-tenths percent (0.2%) probability flood, and the floodway.
FLOOD BYPASS CHANNEL: A drainage ditch designed to handle off site stormwater runoff through a specific area.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map issued by FEMA that is an official community map on which FEMA has delineated both the special
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This map may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination and evaluation of hydrologic and hydraulic data sponsored by the federal emergency management
agency to determine base flood flows, floodways and related information.
FLOOD OF RECORD: An actual historical flood event for which sufficient records are available to establish its extent. No uniform probability of occurrence
is associated with floods of record. However, the probability of occurrence may be determined for the event at specific locations.
FLOOD PROFILE: Graphical representations of the elevations of the water surface of the 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50- and/or 100-year flood along a watercourse.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
FLOODPLAIN: The area adjacent to and including a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below a specified flood elevation.
FLOODWAY: The channel and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse that is needed to convey the base flood.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as may be caused by ice or debris jams.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the street, or if on
a dead end street, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of such street.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or structure.
GRADING: Reshaping natural land contours, using natural land materials such as soil, gravel, sand, black dirt, etc., for purpose of eliminating erosion or
sedimentation problems, creating or improving surface drainage, providing for the natural aesthetic contouring of property, or to accommodate a building
plan by making changes in land elevation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE: Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation, division of highways.
IDWR: The Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources.
ILLINOIS BEARING RATIO (IBR): The relationship between load carrying capacity of the soil and that of a standard crushed stone base material.
IMPROVEMENT: Any structure, grading, installation of water mains, sanitary sewers, lift station, drainage ditches, swales, culverts, storm sewers, and
appurtenant structures, detention and retention ponds, street base, curbs and gutters, street surfacing, bridges, sidewalks, bike paths, crosswalks, trees,
streetlights and other additions or deletions from the natural state of any land which increase its utility or habitability.
LAND DIVISION (DEED DIVISION): The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parts, lots, tracts or parcels, by the recording of a deed or
subdivision plat, in accordance with the plat act1.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one principal building and accessory buildings, including a designated portion of a
subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership.
Corner Lot: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets whose interior angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 521/702
Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
Reversed Corner Lot: A corner lot whose street side lot line is a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
Through Lot: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) public streets, more or less parallel, but which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both
street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT AREA, GROSS: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by a lot's front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT FRONTAGE: That boundary of a lot which lies along a public or private street.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot. When a lot extends to an abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be the nearest right of way line of such
street or alley.
Front Lot Line: That part of a lot's boundary line which lies along a dedicated public street, or, where no public street exists, the line closest to and
parallel with a dedicated public street or public way. On a corner lot, the lot line having the shortest length abutting a street right of way line shall be the
front lot line.
Rear Lot Line: That part of a lot's boundary which is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line.
Side Lot Line: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county in which
such lot is located; or, in the case of Cook County land the title to which is registered in the office of the registrar of titles of Cook County, so registered; or
a parcel of land which has been conveyed previously by a deed which was lawfully so recorded or registered.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured within the lot boundary at the building line.
MAP: A drawing illustrating the configuration of a subdivision of land.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: When used in reference to channels, means those channels framed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to
changes made by man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near its banks has not
been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area in which it is located with no substantial alteration
of its course or cross section caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel
meanders and vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and
revegetation.
OFF SITE BIKE PATH AND/OR SIDEWALK: Any bike path and/or sidewalk located outside the limits of the subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to
provide the necessary continuity between the existing bike path and/or sidewalk and the subdivision/PUD.
OFF SITE BRIDGE: Any bridge located outside the limits of the subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to provide the necessary access to the
subdivision/PUD.
OFF SITE FORCE MAIN: Any force main located outside the limits of the subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to provide the necessary sanitary
sewer service to the subdivision/PUD.
OFF SITE LIFT STATION: Any sanitary sewer lift station located outside the limits of the subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to provide the
necessary sanitary sewer service to the subdivision/PUD.
OFF SITE SANITARY SEWER: Any sanitary sewer located outside the limits of the subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to provide the necessary
sanitary sewer service to the subdivision/PUD.
OFF SITE STORM SEWER: Any storm sewer located outside the limits of the subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to provide the necessary storm
sewer service to the subdivision/PUD.
OFF SITE STORMWATER STORAGE: Any stormwater storage system, detention and/or retention facilities located outside the limits of the
subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to provide the necessary stormwater management to the subdivision/PUD.
OFF SITE STREET: Perimeter street or roadway abutting the subdivision/PUD which has no direct private access (driveways) from the subdivision/PUD.
Improvements may consist of, but not limited to, the following activities: reconstruction, widening, turn lanes, overlay curb and gutter, drainage
improvements related to the street improvement, street lighting, pavement marking.
OFF SITE TRAFFIC SIGNALS: Any temporary or permanent traffic signal located outside the limits of the subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to
accommodate the anticipated traffic generated by the construction of the subdivision/PUD.
OFF SITE WATER MAIN: Any water main located outside the limits of the subdivision/PUD which must be constructed to provide the necessary water
main service to the subdivision/PUD.
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for passive or active
recreational use, including detention areas, retention areas and wetlands.
Open Space In Condominium And Other Planned Unit Developments:
Common Open Space (Common Elements): All portions of planned unit development except the units and except limited common elements.
Limited Private Open Space (Limited Common Elements): A portion of a subdivision or planned unit development reserved for open space in the
condominium declaration or homeowners' association covenants for the use of a particular unit or units to the exclusion of other units, including, but not
limited to, balconies, terraces, patios and parking spaces or facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 522/702
Private Open Space: An open space within a subdivision or planned unit development which is reserved for open space purposes by the owner under
private ownership and management. Private open space may have some limitations on access and use.
Public Open Space: An open space, regardless of how it is owned or controlled, which is permanently reserved for open space purposes for use by the
public, or which is owned, operated and maintained by a local governmental entity with no limitations on access or use.
PARCEL: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
PARKWAY: A strip of land between the street and the front boundary line of a lot, including side boundary line of a corner lot and the rear boundary line of
a through lot, parcel or tract of land.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ("PUD"): A tract of land which is developed, under the planned unit development provisions of this title and the Bartlett
zoning ordinance under single ownership or unified control, with one or more principal buildings or uses. Also, a parcel of land planned for development as
a single lot or tract rather than as a group of individual lots, with greater flexibility than is possible under traditional zoning regulations which require side
yards, setbacks, and height limitations and prohibit mixing land uses. The greater flexibility in locating buildings and in combining different land uses often
makes it possible to achieve certain economies in construction, as well as the preservation of open space and the inclusion of significant amenities.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN OR PLAT: A drawing or map made to a measurable scale upon which is presented a description and definition of
the way in which the design requirements of the planned unit development are to be met and intended for recording with the county recorder of deeds or
registrar of titles.
PLAT ACT: Chapter 765 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes section 205, as amended from time to time.
PLAT OF SUBDIVISION: A drawing showing the division of land into lots in conformance with the requirements of this title and the plat act and all other
applicable requirements of law.
Concept Plan: A drawing or map indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision in sketch form exhibiting sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for
review and to meet the requirements and procedures set forth in section 11-3-1 of this title.
Final Plat: A map showing all of the requisite details set forth in section 11-3-3 of this title for a final plat of subdivision and, in the case of PUDs, all of the
additional details set forth in section 11-3-3 of this title and section 10-9-10 of the Bartlett zoning ordinance, in substantial conformity to the preliminary plat
of a subdivision and which meets the statutory requirements for recording by the county recorder or registration by the registrar of titles.
Preliminary Plat: A map showing all requisite details set forth in section 11-3-2 of this title for a preliminary plat of subdivision, and, in the case of PUDs,
all of the additional details set forth in section 11-3-2 of this title and section 10-9-9 of the Bartlett zoning ordinance, to be submitted to the corporate
authorities for purposes of preliminary consideration and approval.
POSITIVE GRAVITY OUTLET: The drainage of an area by means of natural gravity so that it lowers the free water surface to the invert of storm drains
within the area.
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY: Any facility not controlled by the village of Bartlett, or other governmental entity, which furnishes water for general domestic
purposes.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Street improvements, including pavements, curb, gutters, bridges, sidewalks, bike paths, streetlights, street informational
signs, traffic signals, and parkway landscaping items including trees and grass; water mains, including fire hydrants, valve vaults, water service lines, and
appurtenant structures; sanitary sewer lines, including manholes, sewer service lines, lift station, valve vaults, metering vaults, air release vaults, force
main, and appurtenant structures; storm sewers, including storm sewer lines, inlets, catch basins, manholes, headwalls, end sections, and appurtenant
structures; and control facilities including retention and/or detention areas, shore protection and appurtenant structures.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated to the village of Bartlett or other governmental entity and occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street and other public improvements and by electric, gas, telephone, cable TV and other transmission lines and appurtenant facilities, or for any special
public use, including every right of way shown on a final plat of subdivision or PUD plan or plat to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels shown
on such final plat. Rights of way intended for public use and involving maintenance by a governmental entity shall be designated as "dedicated for public
use" on the final plat of subdivision or final PUD plan or plat. The width of a public right of way shall be measured as the shortest distance between the lot
lines delineating the public right of way.
PUBLIC UTILITY: An entity duly authorized to furnish and furnishing to the public under government regulations gas, steam, electricity, telephone,
telegraph, cable television, or other communication, as defined in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended.
PUBLIC WALKWAY DEDICATION: A right of way dedicated for the purpose of providing pedestrian access, so located so as to connect two (2) or more
streets, or a street and public land parcel.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, bike path or other public thoroughfare.
RECOGNIZED AGENCY: Any agency or governmental unit that has statistically and consistently examined local and climatic hydrological conditions and
maintained records applying to stormwater runoff, e.g., United States geological survey ("USGS"), department of the army, U.S. army corps of engineers,
soil conservation service, U.S. department of agriculture, U.S. weather bureau, University of Illinois engineering experiment station and Illinois state water
survey, etc.
RECORDING: The filing of a document in the office of the recorder of deeds of the county in which the parcel described in such document is located.
RISK PREMIUM RATE ZONES: Flood hazard areas designated according to the degree of flooding experienced during the base flood. The symbols used
to designate these zones are as follows:
Zone
Explanation
A Areas of 100-year flood; base flood elevations and flood hazard factors not determined.
AO Areas of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one and three feet (3'); average depths of inundation are shown, but no flood
hazard factors are determined.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 523/702
AH Areas of 100-year shallow flooding where depths are between one and three feet (3'); base flood elevations are shown, but no flood hazard
factors are determined.
A1-
30
Areas of 100-year flood; base flood elevations and flood hazard factors determined.
A99 Areas of 100-year flood to be protected by flood protection system under construction; base flood elevations and flood hazard factors not
determined.
B Areas between limits of the 100-year flood and 500-year flood; or certain areas subject to 100-year flooding with average depths less than
one foot (1') or where the contributing drainage area is less than one square mile; or areas protected by levees from the base flood.
(Medium shading.)
C Areas of minimal flooding. (No shading.)
D Areas of undetermined, but possible, flood hazards.
V Areas of 100-year coastal flood with velocity (wave action); base flood elevations and flood hazard factors not determined.
V1-
30
Areas of 100-year coastal flood with velocity (wave action); base flood elevations and flood hazard factors determined.
SAFE STORM DRAINAGE CAPACITY: The quantity of stormwater runoff that can be transported downstream in a watercourse and/or storm sewer
system without having the water surface exceed the base flood elevation.
SEDIMENT: Solid material having a particle size of 0.02 millimeters or greater, including, but not limited to, all organic and mineral substances and debris
transported by surface water.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between any line of a building or structure and any lot line.
SEWAGE SYSTEM:
Private Sewage System: A privately owned sewage system which discharges the sewage from a building, subdivision, or PUD to a public sewage
system, a watercourse, or on site, and which meets the minimum requirements of the public health department of the county in which such system is
located.
Public Sewage System: A sanitary sewer system operated by the village of Bartlett, or other governmental entity, subject to regulation by the Illinois
environmental protection agency.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area having special flood, mudslide or mudflow, or flood related erosion hazards and which area is shown
on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, B, C, D, V, V1-30.
STORMWATER RELEASE RATE: The rate at which the excess stormwater runoff is released from dominant to subservient land or into a receiving stream
without exceeding the subservient land or stream's "safe storm drainage capacity".
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Rainfall not absorbed or detained by soil or plant material or lost by evaporation.
STREET (ROAD): A public way which affords the primary means of vehicular access to abutting property, whether designated as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway or other designation, but excepting driveways to buildings. The width of a street shall be measured from face
of curb to face of curb on streets improved with curbs and gutters and from edge of pavement to edge of pavement (not including shoulders) on streets
without curbs and gutters.
Arterial Street: A street of substantial continuity which serves or is intended to serve a large volume of traffic for both the immediate area and the region
in which it is located. An arterial street may be so designated on the village's comprehensive street plan, or a regional plan under the jurisdiction of other
governmental agencies. Tollways, freeways, expressways, state routes or county highways are examples of arterial streets.
Collector Street: A street used primarily to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets.
Cul-De-Sac Street: A street of short length having only one outlet, and having a suitable terminus approved by the village to provide for the safe and
convenient reversal of traffic movements.
Frontage Road Street: A street paralleling, adjacent to, and often within the right of way of an arterial street, which provides limited access to such
arterial street from a collector or local street system.
Industrial Service Street: A street used primarily for access to industrial sites within an industrial park or zoned industrial area.
Local Street: A street primarily providing access to adjacent land uses.
Minor Street: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties.
STRUCTURE: Anything that is erected or constructed. The term "structure" includes, without limitation, buildings, tanks, drains, sewers, constructed
channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads, sidewalks and concrete patios.
SUBDIVIDER/DEVELOPER: A person who, or entity which, subdivides land or develops it pursuant to a planned unit development plan.
SUBDIVISION: The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land which creates two (2) or more parcels of land any of which is less than five (5) acres
in area, not including those exceptions set forth in section 205/1 of the plat act as it is amended from time to time.
SURFACE WATER ELEVATION: The normal water level of a lake, stream, or streambed depicted by the Illinois department of transportation, division of
water resources.
TRACT: A contiguous area of land which can be described as provided in the plat act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 524/702
WATER SERVICE, INDIVIDUAL: The water supply system of a building or premises consists of the water service pipe, the water distribution pipes, and
the necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, and all appurtenances in or adjacent to such building or premises.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC: A water supply system that consists of drift formation, limestone formation and deep wells, surface sources, and
satellite sources for potable water to be conveyed by the village water main system.
WATERCOURSE: Any lake, river, stream, creek, brook, branch, or other drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and floodwaters flow either
regularly or intermittently.
WATERSHED: All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same stream, lake, or stormwater facility.
WATERWORKS: A waterworks in its entirety, or any integral part thereof, including hydrants, meters, valves, standpipes, storage tanks, and all other
elements useful in connection with a water supply or water distribution system.
WELL: An underground source of water made accessible by drilling or digging to the level of the water table.
WETLANDS: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
Chapter 3
SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
11-3-1: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW:
Prior to submitting a request for approval of a preliminary subdivision plat a petitioner may request a concept plan review from the village technical staff
which may include some or all of the following staff: village administrator, community development director, village planner, building director, public works
director, village engineer and village attorney. Application for the concept plan review shall be made on the application form and submitted to the
community development department and accompanied by the appropriate fees.
A. Information Required: Information to be submitted by the petitioner for the concept plan review includes a concept plan drawn to a scale and showing lot
and block arrangement, street pattern and location, proposed detention and open space areas, connection to existing village street system and utility
needs. It is not intended that the concept plan be completed as a precisely engineered plan but it must contain sufficient detail to permit a technical and
planning review. At this stage the petitioner should expect the technical staff to identify planning and design issues, and recommend major changes in
the concept plan if they are deemed necessary.
B. Number Of Copies And Submittal Deadline: Five (5) copies of the concept plan shall be submitted to the community development department at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the technical staff meeting at which it is to be reviewed.
C. Review Time And Report: The technical staff will complete their review of the concept plan within thirty (30) days of the applicant's submittal. After the
technical staff has met and reviewed the concept plan, the applicant will be informed of the technical and planning issues identified as well as the
recommended major changes. At this time the applicant may choose to prepare and submit a complete preliminary subdivision plat application, revise
the concept plan according to the technical staff's review, resubmit the concept plan and meet with the staff or request to meet with the technical staff to
discuss the items and issues raised by the staff. If the petitioner makes a complete preliminary subdivision plat application immediately after their
concept plan review, the technical staff will prepare concept plan review comments that will be included in the subsequent preliminary subdivision plan
report to the Bartlett plan commission.
D. Fee: A concept plan review fee plus consultant fees to cover the costs of the village attorney and village engineer shall be submitted with the application
(see section 11-5-7, table 1, of this title). (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-3-2: PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT:
The procedures for the preparation and filing of a preliminary subdivision plat are as follows:
A. Application: The applicant shall file with the community development department a completed application form with all required submittals as set forth
on said application form, which may be amended from time to time for approval by the corporate authorities. The proposed preliminary subdivision plat
with the number of copies as specified in the application form and a preliminary engineering report, as defined herein, accompanied by the appropriate
fees (see subsection C8 of this section) shall be submitted at least forty five (45) days prior to the regular meeting of the corporate authorities at which
they are to be considered for referral to the plan commission.
When the applicant wishes to subdivide only a portion at a time of the property proposed for subdivision, the preliminary subdivision plat shall include
the proposed general layout and all information required for the preliminary subdivision plat for the entire property ultimately to be subdivided. The part
which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be designated as unit 1, and subsequent phases designated sequentially on the preliminary subdivision
plat in order to illustrate clearly the method and sequence of development which the applicant intends to follow. Each subsequent portion of the
subdivision shall be self-contained and shall follow the preliminary subdivision plat.
B. Scale And Size Of Plan: Preliminary subdivision plats shall be drawn at the following scales:
Parcels up to 20 acres 1 inch = 50 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 525/702
Parcels 20 to 100 acres 1 inch = 100 feet
Parcels over 100 acres 1 inch = 200 feet
on a sheet at least twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), and not larger than thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36"), and shall include
all of the data required under this section except engineering plans, which may be shown on separate sheets.
In the event that the indicated scale is not conducive to depicting accurately the size and shape of the parcel to be subdivided while still maintaining a
workable size drawing, then the subdivider may request a waiver of the scale from the technical staff.
C. Required Information: The preliminary plat shall include the information required under section 205 of the plat act and the following information:
1. Name Of Subdivision: The proposed name of the subdivision.
2. Legal Description: The legal description of the parcel of land proposed to be subdivided.
3. Names And Addresses: The names and addresses of the owner of record of the land proposed to be subdivided (including all of the beneficiaries of
any land trust which holds title to such land, together with a certified copy of the trust agreement and all amendments thereto), the subdivider and the
designer who prepared the plat.
4. Dates: The date of the plat and any revision dates.
5. North Point; Scale: The north point and scale.
6. Existing Conditions: The preliminary subdivision plat shall show all the following information and any additional data that is pertinent to existing
conditions which are relevant to the development of the proposed subdivision:
a. The boundary lines of the land proposed to be subdivided, indicated by solid heavy lines, and the approximate total acreage encompassed
thereby.
b. The locations, widths and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other public
open spaces, public and private easements, permanent buildings or structures, section lines and village boundary lines, within, and within one
hundred feet (100') adjacent to, the land proposed to be subdivided.
c. The boundary lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided or unsubdivided land, shown in relation to and within one hundred feet (100') of the parcel
being proposed to be subdivided including those areas within one hundred feet (100') of the far right of way lines of adjoining streets and roads.
d. The existing zoning of the land proposed to be subdivided and adjacent tracts within one hundred feet (100'), including those areas within one
hundred feet (100') of the far right of way line of adjoining streets and roads.
e. Contours at one foot (1') intervals showing streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, swamps, wetlands and other low lying natural detention areas on the
parcel proposed to be subdivided and within one hundred feet (100') of all of its boundaries.
f. The layout and widths of proposed streets, walkways, bike paths and easements.
g. Such additional technical data as may be required in the preliminary engineering report.
7. Proposed Conditions: (See chapter 6, "Subdivision And PUD Design Standards", of this title.)
a. The layout of lots with lot numbers and lot line dimensions to the nearest foot.
b. A schedule of the lot areas for each lot and a typical lot diagram showing setbacks and easements.
c. Building setbacks, showing dimensions. (Typical setback diagrams may be used.)
d. Easements to be provided for any and all public utilities and drainage systems which will not be located within dedicated streets, to the extent that
they reasonably can be expected to be described in the preliminary subdivision plat phase. Proper continuity for public utilities within the proposed
subdivision and with existing and future adjoining areas shall be maintained.
e. The layout and labeling (i.e., Street A, Street B) of public streets, right of way widths and connections with adjoining existing platted streets and/or
planned streets and roads.
f. The identity of parcels of land, including their acreage, intended to be dedicated, preserved or otherwise set aside for public use and enjoyment or
for the use of the owners of lots in the subdivision, including any natural environmental features or significant cultural features which will be
retained on the site such as detention, retention/detention areas, park sites, school sites, bike paths, nature trails, wetlands, and other open space
areas. All such parcels and areas shall be identified by lot or outlot number.
g. Such additional technical data as may be required in the preliminary engineering report.
h. A traffic management study may be required by the community development director.
8. Preliminary Engineering Report: A preliminary engineering report shall be submitted along with the preliminary subdivision plat to provide
supplemental engineering data regarding factors that will affect the final design of the subdivision. Items to be addressed specifically in the
preliminary engineering report are:
a. The identity, locations, sizes and inverts of existing sanitary sewers to which the proposed subdivision will be connected.
b. The preliminary alignment and size of the proposed sanitary sewer system along with an appropriate schedule of calculations supporting the
quantity of flow, sewer sizing and grades as well as the population equivalent (PE) for the subdivision in its development state (N = 0.013 for all
sanitary sewers). Inverts and frame grades need not be shown on the preliminary engineering report.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 526/702
c. Whether a lift station is required, and, if so, supporting documentation regarding its required size (gallons per minute), pumping heads (TDH), force
main size, general description of control system, description of alternate power source, and the location and accessibility of the station.
d. Whether septic tanks and wells existing on the site are to be abandoned and, if so, the general procedures to be followed. If these facilities are to
be used in total or part, a description of their proposed use shall be provided.
e. The location, size and inverts of all existing storm sewers, bridges, culverts, drain tiles, drainageways, ditches, creeks or rivers on the site, or
within one hundred feet (100') of the site, into which the site will discharge.
f. Stream bottom and 100-year flood profiles of all waterways, streams, channels, basins within or outside the site which will influence the site
drainage. Such profiles shall be developed on the basis of the sources listed in the descending order of overall accuracy listed in ordinance 94-
102, an ordinance to establish stormwater management standards and requirements, stormwater management section. Where limited information
is available to prepare such profiles, existing information shall be utilized and interpreted for use in developing the required profiles.
g. A comprehensive stormwater management plan for the land to be subdivided, including the general alignments of the proposed storm sewer
system (individual catch basins and inlets need not be shown), points of connection of existing storm systems, detention (or detention/retention),
stage/storage relationship of the discharge structure to identify the varying release rates due to inlet and outlet control, off site areas of
contribution, points at which off site flows will be intercepted, and all necessary maps, computations and field data supporting the engineer's
stormwater management plan. The proposed stormwater management plan shall identify an overland flow route to accommodate flows in excess
of the storm sewer design level.
Criteria used in the development of the stormwater management plan shall be in conformity with chapter 8 of this title regulating stormwater
management.
h. The structural design (thickness and material types) to be used for the construction of the roadway system, projected traffic volumes, soils data
and IBR values shall be submitted to support the roadway design including widths, crown, thickness, type of curb and gutter; and can all be
represented by a typical section which clearly identifies the streets to which it is applicable.
i. The size and location of miscellaneous items such as parkway trees, street lighting, sidewalks, bike paths and driveway approaches shall be
identified in the report and shown in typical section or typical plan view drawings.
j. The location and size of water mains to be installed within the proposed subdivision, along with general hydrant and valve spacing. This information
shall be shown on an overall plan view of the proposed preliminary subdivision plat.
D. Preliminary Subdivision Plat Review And Approval Procedures: The following procedures shall govern the processing of a preliminary subdivision plat:
1. Village Board Committee Review: The village board committee of the whole will review the proposed preliminary subdivision plat and shall
recommend that the petitioner proceed to the plan commission or that the development requires changes to be made prior to its referral to the plan
commission. This review will take place within forty five (45) days of submittal of a completed application.
2. Plan Commission Review: The plan commission shall review the proposed preliminary subdivision plat and shall recommend its approval or
disapproval within the time specified by the corporate authorities for the review of such plat, but in no event more than one hundred twenty (120)
days from the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such
time is extended by mutual consent.
3. Conformance To Plat Act, Thoroughfare Plan And Other Applicable Ordinances: During the review process the plan commission or the president and
board of trustees may require such changes or revisions as may be required so that the preliminary subdivision plat will conform to the plat act,
thoroughfare plan, the subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the village.
4. Village Engineer Review; Preliminary Engineering Report: The village engineer shall review the preliminary engineering report for the proposed
subdivision prior to the plan commission reviewing the preliminary subdivision plat. During the review process, the village engineer may require such
changes or revisions as may be required so that the engineering design for the public improvements for the subdivision will conform to the
subdivision ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the village.
5. Submittal Of Village Engineer Review Comments: The village engineer shall submit review comments to the community development department
and to the corporate authorities as to the adequacy of the water system, stormwater management plan, sanitary sewer system, street system,
sidewalks, bike paths, street lighting, parkway trees and other appurtenant public improvements described in the preliminary engineering report for
the proposed subdivision. The village engineer's review comments shall be submitted prior to the review of the preliminary subdivision plat by the
plan commission.
6. President And Board Of Trustees Approval Or Disapproval: The president and board of trustees, upon receipt of recommendations from the plan
commission, the village engineer, the community development department and the village board committee of the whole, will then approve or
disapprove the preliminary subdivision plat.
E. Disapproval Of A Preliminary Subdivision Plat: The preliminary subdivision plat shall not be approved if it fails to meet the requirements of this title, the
Bartlett comprehensive plan, the thoroughfare plan, and, if the land is within the corporate limits or the territorial jurisdiction of the village, the Bartlett
zoning ordinance.
F. Approval Of A Preliminary Subdivision Plat; Time Limits:
1. The approval of a preliminary subdivision plat by the plan commission and the president and board of trustees indicates only the general
acceptability of the layout of the proposed subdivision as submitted.
2. Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall be effective for a maximum period of one year from the date of adoption of the ordinance approving
said plat. The president and board of trustees may grant an extension upon application for such an extension by the applicant. If the final subdivision
plat has not been approved within such time limit, or as it may be extended by the corporate authorities, the preliminary subdivision plat must be
resubmitted for review and approval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 527/702
G. Special Service Area: In any development that includes detention ponds, retention basins, storm sewer, riparian area(s) or wetland area(s) or any of
them, it shall be a condition precedent to the approval of the final plat that a special service area shall be established, and the ordinance establishing
said special service area shall have been recorded, for the entire property ultimately to be developed as shown in the applicant's concept plan and
shall not be limited to the portion, phase(s) or unit(s) the applicant is initially seeking to subdivide (the "area") for the purposes of paying the cost of:
1. Providing services for the area, including the management of stormwater which directly affects the area, including: a) the cleaning and dredging of
stormwater detention ponds and retention basins, drainage swales and ditches; b) maintenance and care, including erosion control, of the lands
surrounding such detention ponds, retention basins, drainage swales and ditches; c) the maintenance, repair and replacement of storm sewers, drain
tile, pipes and other conduit and appurtenant structures; d) the care, maintenance and restoration of wetland areas; and e) the administrative costs of
the village in connection with items a) through d) herein, including, but not limited to, premiums for liability insurance coverage (collectively, the "SSA
services"); and
2. The levy of a direct annual tax on all of the taxable property in the area to pay the annual cost of providing ordinary maintenance and care of the
storm sewer system, the lands surrounding it and wetland areas (the "levy"); and
3. The issuance of bonds secured by the full faith and credit of the area, to pay the cost of cleaning and dredging of the storm sewer detention ponds
and retention basins, drainage swales and ditches and replacing storm sewers, drain tiles, pipe and other conduit and appurtenant structures, and
the levy of a direct annual tax to pay the principal and interest on said bonds (the "SSA bonds").
The applicant shall execute and deliver and cause the person(s) or entity(ies) to whom the last real estate tax bill on the area was mailed to execute
and deliver a waiver and consent to the establishment of a special service area in form prescribed by the village prior to the public hearing on the
special service area required pursuant to 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 235/1 et seq., as amended.
H. Owner Associations: In all residential developments that include detention ponds, retention basins, storm sewer, riparian area(s), wetland area(s),
common area(s) and common elements, or any of them, it shall be a condition precedent to the approval of the final plat that there shall have been
recorded covenants or a declaration establishing a homeowners', townhome or condominium association, as the case may be, in form subject to the
approval of the village attorney, to provide for the maintenance, repair and replacement of common areas and common elements, detention ponds,
retention basins, drainage swales and ditches, storm sewer, riparian areas and wetland areas. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-3-3: FINAL SUBDIVISION PLATS:
The procedures for the preparation, filing, review and approval of final subdivision plats shall be as follows:
A. Application: After approval of the preliminary subdivision plat by the president and board of trustees and the fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations, the applicant shall submit its proposed final subdivision plat to the community development department with all required submittals as set
forth on said application form which may be amended from time to time accompanied by the appropriate fees.
1. The original copy of the final subdivision plat tracings drawn in ink on such media as accepted by the county or corporate authority in which the
subdivision plat must be recorded, supplementary reproducible copies and blue line copies in the quantities specified in the application, and the final
engineering plans shall be submitted to the community development department within one year of the date of approval of the preliminary subdivision
plat. A time extension may be granted by the corporate authorities, at least forty five (45) days prior to the regular meeting of the corporate
authorities at which the final plat and other such submittals as may be required are to be considered for referral to the plan commission. The final
subdivision plat shall be accompanied by a current title commitment showing ownership, liens and encumbrances and protective covenants which
meet with the approval of the village attorney.
2. When the applicant wishes to develop only a portion at a time of the property proposed to be subdivided, the part which is proposed to be developed
first shall be designated as unit 1, and if the subdivision consists of more than one unit, each subsequent phase and all lots shall be designated
sequentially with the unit number preceding the lot number (i.e., unit 1 may contain lots 1-101, 1-102, etc. Unit 2 may contain lots 2-400, 2-401, etc.)
in order to illustrate clearly the method and sequence of development which the applicant intends to follow. Each subsequent portion of the
subdivision shall be self-contained and shall follow the approved preliminary subdivision plat until the entire property shown on the preliminary
subdivision plat is developed.
B. Required Information: The final subdivision plat shall include the following information:
1. The name of the subdivision.
2. The legal description of the land proposed to be subdivided.
3. The names and addresses of the owners of record of the land proposed to be subdivided (including all of the beneficiaries of any land trust which
holds title to such land) together with a certified copy of the trust agreement and all amendments thereto, the subdivider and the designer who has
prepared the final subdivision plat.
4. The date of the final subdivision plat and any revision dates.
5. Permanent index number (PIN).
6. A scale of one inch to fifty feet (1" = 50'), shown graphically and numerically on a sheet twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") and no
larger than thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36"). If the plat is computer generated, such plat shall be accompanied by a disc in DXF format
containing the subdivision calculations for use in updating the village's mapping system. In the event that the indicated scale is not conducive to
depicting accurately the size and shape of the parcel to be developed while still maintaining a workable size drawing, the applicant may request a
waiver of the scale from the community development department.
7. The north point.
8. Point of beginning and point of commencement if it is utilized in the legal description.
9. The boundaries of the proposed subdivision based on an accurate transverse with angular and linear dimensions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 528/702
10. The exact location, width and names of all streets within and adjoining the subdivision. Proposed street names shall be reviewed by the village
clerk's office, or with the appropriate county official when county roads are involved or when the project falls under the county's jurisdiction.
11. The distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments which shall be accurately described in the plat. A minimum of two (2)
monuments are required.
12. Township and section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
13. The radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent lengths and bearings and lengths of all arcs.
14. All easements for public services, drainage and utilities which do not fall within dedicated rights of way.
15. All lot and boundary lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths.
16. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions, designated with lot or outlot numbers, of any areas to be donated or reserved for public use, with the
purposes indicated thereon, and of any area to be reserved by deed for the common use of all lot owners within the subdivision.
17. Building setback lines accurately shown with dimensions.
18. Square footages labeled on each lot or as set forth on a table.
C. Final Subdivision Plat Review And Approval Procedures: The following procedures shall govern the processing of a final subdivision plat:
1. Village Board Committee Review: The village board committee of the whole will review the proposed final subdivision plat and recommend that the
petitioner proceed to the plan commission or that the development requires changes to be made prior to its referral to the plan commission. This
review will take place within forty five (45) days of submittal of a completed application.
2. Plan Commission Review: The plan commission shall review the proposed final subdivision plat and shall recommend its approval or disapproval
within the time specified by the corporate authorities for the review of such plat, but in no event more than one hundred twenty (120) days from the
date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended
by mutual consent.
3. Conformance To Plat Act And Other Applicable Ordinances: During the review process the plan commission or the president and board of trustees
may require such changes or revisions as may be required so that the final subdivision plat will conform to the plat act and the subdivision, zoning
and other applicable ordinances of the village and substantially comply with the approved preliminary plat.
4. Village Engineer Review; Final Engineering Plans: The village engineer shall review the final engineering plans for the proposed subdivision prior to
the plan commission's review of the final subdivision plat. During the review process, the village engineer may require such changes or revisions as
may be required so that the engineering design for the public improvements for the subdivision will conform to the subdivision ordinance and other
applicable ordinances of the village.
5. Submittal Of Village Engineer Review Comments: The village engineer shall submit review comments followed by an approval letter once all
engineering comments have been addressed to the community development department and to the corporate authorities as to adequacy of the
water system, stormwater management plan, sanitary sewer system, street system, sidewalks, bike paths, street lighting, parkway trees and other
appurtenant public improvements described in the preliminary engineering report for the proposed subdivision. The village engineer's approval letter
shall be submitted prior to the approval of the final subdivision plat by the president and board of trustees.
6. President And Board Of Trustees Approval Or Disapproval: The president and board of trustees, upon receipt of recommendations from the plan
commission, the village engineer, the community development department and the village board committee of the whole, will then approve or
disapprove the final subdivision plat.
D. Disapproval Of A Final Subdivision Plat: The final subdivision plat shall not be approved if it does not substantially comply with the approved preliminary
plat and if it fails to meet the requirements of this title, the Bartlett comprehensive plan, the thoroughfare plan, and, if the land is within the territorial
jurisdiction of the village, the Bartlett zoning ordinance.
E. Certificates: The following certificates shall be required on all final plats, if applicable:
1. The certifications of the owner and any mortgagee of record that they have adopted and approved the final subdivision plat including the dedication
of all streets, easements and other public areas shown thereon, acknowledged before a notary public. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat
Certificates", of this title.)
2. Approval of the final subdivision plat by the signature of the village president. Such approval shall not be deemed to constitute or affect an
acceptance by the village of the dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space shown on the final subdivision plat. (See section 11-
12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
3. Certification by the plan commission chairman that the plan commission has reviewed the final plat of subdivision. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix
A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
4. Certification by the village treasurer that all special assessments, currently due on the property to be subdivided, have been paid in full. (See section
11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
5. Certification by the village engineer that the final engineering plans have been reviewed and approved. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat
Certificates", of this title.)
6. Approval by the state or county highway department regarding access and improvements to any roadway/right of way under their respective
jurisdictions. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
7. The certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the final subdivision plat is based on an accurate survey made by him and that all
monuments and markers shown thereon are in fact located as shown thereon, and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct. (See section
11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 529/702
8. Certification by the county clerk that all general real estate taxes have been paid in full. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this
title.)
9. Certification by the county recorder. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
10. Notice that a special service area has been established for the property herein subdivided by the final plat. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat
Certificates", of this title.)
11. Certification that each of the public utility companies have reviewed and approved the location of utilities within the subdivision. (See section 11-12-
1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
12. The village of Bartlett public utility easement provisions. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
13. Certification that the county public health department has reviewed and approved the subdivision for individual sewage disposal systems (if
applicable). (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
F. Additional Requirements:
1. Public Improvements Completion Agreement: An agreement in the form set forth in section 11-12-6, "Appendix F; Completion Agreement, Bonds
And Letters Of Credit", of this title requiring the construction and completion of the public improvements for the subdivision and payment of the cost
thereof in full, signed by the owner/developer, shall be submitted with the final subdivision plat.
2. Performance And Payment Bond: Completion of the public improvements for the subdivision, and payment of the cost thereof in full, shall be
guaranteed by the deposit with the village clerk of cash, a completion and payment bond or a letter of credit in the form set forth in section 11-12-6,
"Appendix F; Completion Agreement, Bonds And Letters Of Credit", of this title after the final plat of subdivision has been approved, but before it is
recorded.
3. Surface Water Statement: Certified grading mylar submitted to community development which shall include the village of Bartlett's surface water
statement signed and sealed by an Illinois registered professional engineer and the signature of either the owner of the property or duly authorized
attorney. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
4. Site Development Checklist: Completion of all the items on the site development checklist as amended from time to time. (See section 11-12-5,
"Appendix E; Site Development And Early Earthwork Checklists And Hold Harmless Agreement", of this title.)
5. Surveyor's Sealed Letter: The surveyor's sealed letter granting permission to the village clerk to record the final plat. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
Chapter 4
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
11-4-1: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW:
Prior to submitting a request for approval of a preliminary PUD plan a petitioner may request a concept plan review from the village technical staff which
may include some or all of the following staff: village administrator, community development director, village planner, building director, public works director,
village engineer and village attorney. Application for the concept plan review shall be made on the approved application form and submitted to the
community development department and accompanied by the appropriate fees.
A. Information To Be Submitted By The Petitioner For The Concept Plan Review: A concept plan drawn to scale and showing lot and block arrangement,
street pattern and location, proposed detention and open space areas, connection to existing village street system and utility needs. It is not intended
that the concept plan be completed as a precisely engineered plan but it must contain sufficient detail to permit a technical and planning review. At this
stage the petitioner should expect the technical staff to identify planning and design issues, and recommend major changes in the concept plan if they
are deemed necessary.
B. Number Of Copies And Submittal Deadline: Five (5) copies of the concept plan shall be submitted to the community development department at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the technical staff meeting at which it is to be reviewed.
C. Review Time And Report: The technical committee will complete their review of the concept plan within thirty (30) days of the applicant's submittal. After
the technical staff has met and reviewed the concept plan, the applicant will be informed of the technical and planning issues identified as well as the
recommended major changes. At this time the applicant may choose to prepare and submit a complete preliminary PUD plat application, revise the
concept plan according to the technical staff's review, resubmit the concept plan and meet with the staff or request to meet with the technical staff to
discuss the items and issues raised by the staff. If the petitioner makes a complete preliminary PUD plan application immediately after their concept
plan review, the technical staff will prepare concept plan review comments that will be included in the subsequent preliminary PUD plan report to the
Bartlett plan commission.
D. Fee: A concept plan review fee and consultant fees to cover the costs of the village attorney and village engineer shall be submitted with the
application. (See section 11-5-7, table 1 of this title.) (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-4-2: PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN:
The procedures for the preparation and filing of a preliminary PUD plan are as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 530/702
A. Application: The applicant shall file with the community development department a completed application form with all required submittals as set forth
on said application form, which may be amended from time to time for approval by the corporate authorities of the proposed preliminary PUD plan with
the number of copies as specified in the application form, and a preliminary engineering report as defined herein, accompanied by the appropriate fees
(see chapter 5, "Fees", of this title) at least forty five (45) days prior to the regular meeting of the corporate authorities at which they are to be
considered for referral to the plan commission.
When the applicant wishes to develop only a portion at a time of the property proposed for a planned unit development, the preliminary PUD plan shall
include the proposed general layout and all information required for the preliminary PUD plan for the entire property ultimately to be developed. The
part which is proposed to be developed (subdivided) first shall be designated unit 1, and subsequent phases designated sequentially on the preliminary
PUD plat in order to illustrate clearly the method and sequence of development which the applicant intends to follow. Each subsequent portion of the
subdivision shall be self-contained and shall follow the preliminary PUD plat.
B. Scale And Size Of Plan: Preliminary PUD plans shall be drawn at the following scales:
Parcels up to 20 acres 1 inch = 50 feet
Parcels 20 to 100 acres 1 inch = 100 feet
Parcels over 100 acres 1 inch = 200 feet
on a sheet at least twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), and not larger than thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36"), and shall include
all of the data required under this section except engineering plans, which may be shown on separate sheets.
In the event that the indicated scale is not conducive to depicting accurately the size and shape of the parcel to be developed while still maintaining a
workable size drawing, the applicant may request a waiver of the scale from the technical staff.
C. Required Information: The preliminary PUD plan shall include the following information:
1. Proposed Name: The proposed name of the PUD.
2. Legal Description: The legal description of land to be developed under the proposed PUD plan.
3. Names And Addresses: The names and addresses of the owner of record of the land proposed to be developed (including all of the beneficiaries of
any land trust which holds title to such land together with a certified copy of the trust agreement and all amendments thereto), the developer and the
designer who prepared the preliminary PUD plan.
4. Dates: The date of the preliminary PUD plan and any revision dates.
5. North Point; Scale: The north point and scale.
6. Existing Conditions: The preliminary PUD plan shall show all the following information and any additional data that is pertinent to existing conditions
which are relevant to the development of the proposed PUD:
a. The boundary lines of the land proposed to be developed indicated by solid heavy lines, and the approximate total acreage encompassed thereby.
b. The locations, widths and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other public
open spaces, public and private easements, permanent buildings or structures, section lines and village boundary lines, within, and within one
hundred feet (100') adjacent to, the land proposed to be developed.
c. The boundary lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided or unsubdivided land, shown in relation to and within one hundred feet (100') of the parcel
being proposed to be developed, including those areas within one hundred feet (100') of the far right of way lines of adjoining streets and roads.
d. The existing zoning of the land proposed to be developed and adjacent tracts within one hundred feet (100'), including those areas within one
hundred feet (100') of the far right of way line of adjoining streets and roads.
e. Contours at one foot (1') intervals showing streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, swamps, wetlands and other low lying natural detention areas on the
parcel proposed to be developed and within one hundred feet (100') of all of its boundaries.
f. The layout and widths of proposed streets, walkways, bike paths and easements.
g. Such additional technical data as may be required in the preliminary engineering report.
7. Proposed Conditions: (See chapter 6, "Subdivision And PUD Design Standards", of this title.)
a. The layout of buildings (and lots, with lot numbers, if the property is to be divided into lots) with dimensions to the nearest foot.
b. A schedule of the floor areas for each building (and lot areas, if the property is to be divided into lots), and areas of outlots, common areas, and
public use areas.
c. Building setbacks, showing dimensions. (Typical setback diagrams may be used.)
d. Easements to be provided for drainage and any and all public utilities which will not be located within dedicated streets, to the extent that they
reasonably can be expected to be described in the preliminary PUD plan phase. Proper continuity for public utilities within the proposed PUD and
with existing and future adjoining areas shall be maintained.
e. The layout and labeling (i.e., Street A, Street B) of public streets, right of way widths and connections with adjoining existing platted streets and/or
planned streets and roads.
f. The identity of parcels of land, including their acreage, intended to be dedicated, preserved or otherwise set aside for public use and enjoyment or
for the use of the owners of lots in the PUD, including any natural environmental features or significant cultural features which will be retained on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 531/702
the site such as detention, retention/detention areas, park sites, school sites, bike paths, nature trails, wetlands, and other open space areas. All
such parcels and areas shall be identified by lot or outlot number.
g. Such additional technical data as may be required in the preliminary engineering report.
h. A traffic management study may be required by the community development director.
8. Preliminary Engineering Report: A preliminary engineering report shall be submitted along with the preliminary PUD plan to provide supplemental
engineering data regarding factors that will affect the final design of the PUD. Items to be specifically addressed in the final PUD plan shall be those
items specified in subsection 11-3-2C8 of this title.
D. Public Hearing Notice Requirements: The following shall be completed prior to a public hearing being conducted by the plan commission:
1. The applicant shall prepare and deliver to the community development department a list of all surrounding property owners within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the subject property as part of the application submittal.
2. The community development staff shall prepare the public notice, submit such notice to the local newspapers for publication and provide the
applicant with a copy of such notice. Such notification shall be in the form required by the Bartlett zoning ordinance, including the name of the owner,
the name of the petitioner, a legal description of the property proposed to be developed, its PIN, street address or other common description, and a
general description of the zoning amendments, variations, special uses and any other zoning relief sought, and a general description of the proposed
PUD, and a list of all nearby property owners required to be notified. See section 10-13-10 of the Bartlett zoning ordinance.
3. The community development department/village clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing on the proposed preliminary PUD plan to be published
not less than fifteen (15), nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date in a newspaper circulated in the village. All fees for this publication
of the public notice shall be paid by the petitioner at the time of application.
4. The applicant shall notify surrounding property owners as required by the zoning ordinance.
5. The applicant shall post notice of the public hearing on the subject property as required by the zoning ordinance.
E. Preliminary PUD Plan Review And Approval Procedures: The following procedures shall govern the processing of a preliminary PUD plan:
1. Village Board Committee Review: The village board committee of the whole will review the proposed preliminary PUD plan and shall recommend
that the petitioner proceed to the plan commission for a public hearing or that the development requires changes to be made prior to its referral to the
plan commission. This review will take place within forty five (45) days of submittal of a complete application.
2. Plan Commission Hearing: The plan commission shall hold a public hearing at which the owner/developer or their representative shall present and
describe the proposed preliminary PUD plan and members of the public will be given an opportunity to comment thereon.
3. Plan Commission Review: The plan commission shall then review the proposed preliminary PUD plan and all evidence, testimony, exhibits and
written submissions and shall recommend its approval or disapproval within the time specified by the corporate authorities for the review of such
plan, but in no event more than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of
required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
4. Conformance To Plat Act, Thoroughfare Plan And Applicable Ordinances: During the review process the plan commission or the president and board
of trustees may require such changes or revisions as may be required so that the preliminary PUD plan will conform to the plat act, thoroughfare
plan, the subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the village.
5. Village Engineer Review; Preliminary Engineering Report: The village engineer shall review the preliminary engineering report for the proposed PUD
prior to the plan commission reviewing the preliminary PUD plan. During the review process, the village engineer may require such changes or
revisions as may be required so that the engineering design for the public improvements for the PUD will conform to the subdivision ordinance and
other applicable ordinances of the village.
6. Submittal Of Village Engineer Review Comments: The village engineer shall submit review comments to the community development department
and to the corporate authorities as to the adequacy of the water system, stormwater management plan, sanitary sewer system, street system, bike
paths, sidewalks, street lighting, parkway trees and other appurtenant public improvements described in the preliminary engineering report for the
proposed PUD. The village engineer's review comments shall be submitted prior to the review of the preliminary PUD plan by the plan commission.
7. President And Board Of Trustees Approval Or Disapproval: The president and board of trustees, upon receipt of recommendations from the plan
commission, the village engineer, the community development department and the village board committee of the whole will then approve or
disapprove the preliminary PUD plan.
F. Disapproval Of A PUD Preliminary Plan: The PUD shall not be approved if it fails to meet the requirements of this title and the Bartlett comprehensive
plan, the thoroughfare plan, and, if the land is within the corporate limits or the territorial jurisdiction of the village, the Bartlett zoning ordinance.
G. Approval Of A Preliminary PUD Plan:
1. The approval of a preliminary PUD plan by the plan commission and the president and board of trustees indicates only the general acceptability of
the layout of the proposed PUD as submitted.
2. Approval of a preliminary PUD plan shall be effective for a maximum period of one year from the date of adoption of the ordinance approving said
plan. The president and board of trustees may grant an extension upon application for such an extension by the applicant. If the final PUD plan has
not been approved within such time limit, or as it may be extended by the corporate authorities, the preliminary PUD plan must be resubmitted for
review and approval. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-4-3: FINAL PUD PLAN:
The procedures for the preparation, filing, review and approval of a final PUD plan shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 532/702
A. Application: After approval of the preliminary PUD plan by the president and board of trustees and the fulfillment of the requirements of these
regulations, the applicant shall submit its proposed final PUD plan to the community development department with all required submittals as set forth
on said application form which may be amended from time to time, accompanied by the appropriate fees.
1. The original copy of the final PUD plan tracings drawn in ink on such media as accepted by the county or corporate authority in which the PUD plan
must be recorded, supplementary reproducible copies and blue line copies in the quantities specified in the application and the final engineering
plans shall be submitted to the community development department within one year of the date of approval of the preliminary PUD plan. A time
extension may be granted by the corporate authorities, at least forty five (45) days prior to the regular meeting of the corporate authorities at which
the final PUD plan and other such submittals as may be required are to be considered for referral to the plan commission. The final PUD plan shall
be accompanied by a current title commitment showing ownership, liens and encumbrances and protective covenants which meet with the approval
of the village attorney.
2. When the applicant wishes to develop only a portion at a time of the property proposed for planned unit development, the part which is proposed to
be developed first shall be designated as unit 1, and if the subdivision consists of more than one unit, each subsequent phase and all lots shall be
designated sequentially with the unit number preceding the lot number (i.e., unit 1 may contain lots 1-101, 1-102, etc., unit 2 may contain lots 2-400,
2-401, etc.) in order to illustrate clearly the method and sequence of development which the applicant intends to follow. Each subsequent portion of
the PUD shall be self-contained and shall follow the approved preliminary PUD plan and the same procedure until the entire property shown on the
preliminary PUD plan is developed.
B. Required Information: The final PUD plan shall include the following information:
1. The name of the PUD.
2. The legal description of the land proposed to be developed.
3. The names and addresses of the owner of record of the land proposed to be developed (including all of the beneficiaries of any land trust which
holds title to such land) together with a certified copy of the trust agreement and all amendments thereto, the developer, and the designer who has
prepared the final PUD plan.
4. The date of the final PUD plan and any revision dates.
5. Permanent index number (PIN).
6. A scale of one inch to fifty feet (1" = 50'), shown graphically and numerically on a sheet twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), and not
larger than thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36"). If the plan is computer generated, such plan shall be accompanied by a disc in DXF format
containing the subdivision calculations for use in updating the village's mapping system. In the event that the indicated scale is not conducive to
depicting accurately the size and shape of the parcel to be developed while still maintaining a workable size drawing, the applicant may request a
waiver of the scale from the community development department.
7. The north point.
8. Point of beginning and point of commencement if it is utilized in the legal description.
9. The boundaries of the proposed PUD based on an accurate transverse with angular and linear dimensions.
10. The exact location, width and names of all streets within and adjoining the PUD. Proposed street names shall be reviewed by the village clerk's
office, or with the appropriate county official when county roads are involved or when the project falls under the county's jurisdiction.
11. The distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments which shall be accurately described in the plat. A minimum of two (2)
monuments are required.
12. Township and section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
13. The radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent lengths and bearings and lengths of all arcs.
14. All easements for public services, drainage and utilities which do not fall within dedicated rights of way.
15. All lot and boundary lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths.
16. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon and of any
area to be reserved by deed for the common use of all lot owners within the PUD.
17. Building setback lines accurately shown with dimensions.
18. Square footages labeled on each lot or as set forth on a table.
C. Final PUD Plan Review And Approval Procedures:
1. Village Board Committee Review: The village board committee of the whole will review the proposed final PUD plan and shall recommend that the
petitioner proceed to the plan commission or that the development requires changes to be made prior to its referral to the plan commission. This
review will take place within forty five (45) days of submittal of a full application.
2. Plan Commission Review: The plan commission shall then review the proposed final PUD plan and all evidence, testimony, exhibits and written
submissions and shall recommend its approval or disapproval within the time specified by the corporate authorities for the review of such plan, but in
no event more than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required
supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
3. Conformance To Plat Act And Applicable Ordinances: During the review process the plan commission, or the president and board of trustees may
require such changes or revisions as may be required so that the final PUD plan will conform to the plat act and the subdivision, zoning and other
applicable ordinances of the village and substantially comply with the approved preliminary PUD plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 533/702
4. Village Engineer Review; Final Engineering Plans: The village engineer shall review the final engineering plans for the proposed PUD prior to the
plan commission's review of the final PUD plan. During the review process, the village engineer may require such changes or revisions as may be
required so that the engineering design for the public improvements for the PUD will conform to the subdivision and other applicable ordinances of
the village.
5. Submittal Of Village Engineer Review Comments: The village engineer shall submit review comments followed by an approval letter once all the
engineering comments have been addressed to the community development department and to the corporate authorities as to adequacy of the
water system, stormwater management plan, sanitary sewer system, street system, sidewalks, bike paths, street lighting, parkway trees and other
appurtenant public improvements described in the final engineering report for the proposed PUD. The village engineer's approval letter shall be
submitted prior to the approval of the final PUD plan by the president and board of trustees.
6. President And Board Of Trustees Approval Or Disapproval: The president and board of trustees, upon receipt of recommendations from the plan
commission and the village engineer, will then approve or disapprove the final PUD plan.
D. Disapproval Of A PUD Final Plan: The final PUD plan shall not be approved if it does not substantially comply with the approved preliminary PUD plan
and if it fails to meet the requirements of this title, the Bartlett comprehensive plan, the thoroughfare plan and, if the land is within the territorial
jurisdiction of the village, the Bartlett zoning ordinance.
E. Certificates: Refer to subsection 11-3-3E, "Certificates", of this title.
F. Additional Requirements:
1. Public Improvements Completion Agreement: An agreement in the form set forth in section 11-12-6, "Appendix F; Completion Agreement, Bonds
And Letters Of Credit", of this title requiring the construction and completion of the public improvements for the PUD and payment of the cost thereof
in full, signed by the owner/developer, shall be submitted with the final PUD plan.
2. Performance And Payment Bond: Completion of the public improvements for the subdivision, and payment of the cost thereof in full, shall be
guaranteed by the deposit with the village clerk of cash, a completion and payment bond or a letter of credit in the form set forth in section 11-12-6,
"Appendix F; Completion Agreement, Bonds And Letters Of Credit", of this title after the final PUD plan has been approved, but before it is recorded.
3. Surface Water Statement: Certified grading mylar submitted to the community development department which shall include the village of Bartlett's
surface water statement sealed by an Illinois registered professional engineer. (See section 11-12-1, "Appendix A; Plat Certificates", of this title.)
4. Site Development Checklist: Completion of all the items on the site development checklist as amended from time to time.
5. Surveyor's Sealed Letter: The surveyor's sealed letter granting permission to the village clerk to record the final plat. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
Chapter 5
FEES
11-5-1: APPLICANT:
An applicant for a subdivision plat or PUD plan approval shall pay to the village fees sufficient to cover the costs reasonably anticipated to be incurred by
the village for the services of its planning, engineering and legal consultants and for the administrative expenses reasonably anticipated to be incurred by
the village in providing the expertise of its own community development, public works, building department, finance and their administrative support
personnel, in connection with the review of concept plats or plans, preliminary subdivision plats and PUD plans and final subdivision plats and PUD plans.
These fees shall also include payment for the review of final detailed engineering plans, specifications and cost estimates, and field observation fees of the
construction and installation of the public improvements for these subdivisions and PUDs. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-5-2: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW FEES:
An administrative fee for a concept plan review shall be made with each request. The concept plan review fee shall accompany the application and be in
accordance with section 11-5-7, table 1 of this chapter. In addition to the administrative review fees, all village consultant fees incurred by the applicant
during the concept plan review will be billed directly to the applicant and shall be their responsibility to pay prior to the completion of this review phase.
(Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-5-3: PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN REVIEW FEES:
An administrative fee for a preliminary subdivision plan review shall accompany the application and be in accordance with section 11-5-7, table 1 of this
chapter. In addition to the administrative review fees, all village consultant fees incurred by the applicant during the preliminary plat review will be billed
directly to the applicant and shall be their responsibility to pay prior to the approval of the preliminary plat. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-5-4: FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT REVIEW FEES:
An administrative fee for the final subdivision plat review shall accompany the submittal of the application and be in accordance with section 11-5-8, tables
2 through 4 of this chapter. In addition to the administrative review fees, all village consultant fees incurred by the applicant during the final subdivision plan
review will be billed directly to the applicant and shall be their responsibility to pay prior to the approval of the final plat. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-5-5: PUD PLAN REVIEW FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 534/702
An administrative fee for the review of a PUD plan shall accompany the application and shall be in accordance with section 11-5-7, table 1 of this chapter.
In addition to the administrative review fees, all village consultant fees incurred by the applicant during the PUD plan review will be billed directly to the
applicant and shall be their responsibility to pay prior to the approval of the PUD plan. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-5-6: CONSULTANT FEES:
The village of Bartlett uses an attorney, an engineer and from time to time a planner as consultants during the concept, preliminary and final subdivision
plan/plat reviews and PUD plan reviews. These consultant fees are based on the time spent by the individual consultant in the review of each phase of the
development. All consultant fees will be billed directly to the developer by the village and shall be paid prior to the completion of each review phase. (Ord.
95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-5-7: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE:
TABLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE
Concept plan (subdivision or PUD) $400.00 plus consultant fees1
Preliminary Subdivision Plat
0 - 25 lots $ 800.00 plus consultant fees1
26 - 50 lots 1,000.00 plus consultant fees1
51 - 100 lots 1,300.00 plus consultant fees1
101 - 200 lots 1,600.00 plus consultant fees1
201+ lots 1,800.00 plus consultant fees1
Preliminary PUD Plan
0 - 25 lots $1,000.00 plus consultant fees1
26 - 50 lots 1,200.00 plus consultant fees1
51 - 100 lots 1,500.00 plus consultant fees1
101 - 200 lots 1,800.00 plus consultant fees1
201+ lots 2,000.00 plus consultant fees1
Abrogation (of an easement) 150.00 plus consultant fees1
Note:
1. Consultant fees will be billed by the village.
(Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-5-8: ENGINEERING PLAN REVIEW AND ADMINISTRATION FEE SCHEDULE FOR FINAL SUBDIVISION PLATS AND PUD
PLANS:
TABLE 2
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
Number Of Residential Lots Contained Within The Development
Engineering Plan Review Fee
Administration Fee
Total Fee
0 - 25 $3,500.00 flat fee $750.00 flat fee $4,250.00 flat fee
26 - 50 125.00/lot 30.00/lot 155.00/lot
51 - 100 115.00/lot 26.00/lot 141.00/lot
101 - 200 100.00/lot 24.00/lot 124.00/lot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 535/702
201+ 95.00/lot 22.00/lot 117.00/lot
TABLE 3
ATTACHED MULTI-FAMILY
(INCLUDING TOWNHOMES, APARTMENTS,
QUADROMINIUM AND/OR CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS)
Number Of Dwelling Units (DU) Contained In The Development Plan Review Fee Administration Fee Total Fee
0 - 25 $1,600.00 flat fee $500.00 flat fee $2,100.00 flat fee
26 - 50 40.00/DU 14.00/DU 54.00/DU
51 - 100 35.00/DU 12.00/DU 47.00/DU
101 - 200 30.00/DU 10.00/DU 40.00/DU
201+ 25.00/DU 8.00/DU 33.00/DU
TABLE 4
NONRESIDENTIAL
Area Of Site To Be Developed (Acres) Plan Review Fee Administration Fee Total Fee
0 - 1 $1,100.00 flat fee $150.00 flat fee $1,250.00 flat fee
1.01 - 2.50 1,000.00/acre 150.00/acre 1,150.00/acre
2.51 - 5.00 650.00/acre 100.00/acre 750.00/acre
5.01 - 20.00 550.00/acre 80.00/acre 630.00/acre
20.01+ 500.00/acre 60.00/acre 560.00/acre
(Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-5-9: ON SITE/OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS REVIEW FEES:
From time to time a development may require the addition of on site and/or off site improvements. Typically these improvements are for lift stations,
extensions of water and sewer mains or bicycle paths. The review fees for these types of improvements are required to be paid as part of the subdivision
or PUD review process and are in addition to the administrative review fees and consultant review fees.
A. On site review fees shall be paid by the applicant when a determination is made that these improvements are necessary and cause the village
consulting engineer to include this review in the overall review of the subdivision or PUD. The on site review fees will be billed directly to the applicant
by the village and will be the amounts detailed in table 5 of this section.
B. Off site review fees shall be paid by the applicant when a determination is made that these improvements are necessary and cause the village
consulting engineer to include this review in his overall review of the subdivision or PUD. The off site review fees will be billed directly to the applicant
by the village and will be the amounts detailed in table 6 of this section.
ON SITE/OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS
FEE SCHEDULE
Table 5
Residential, Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial
Or Office/Research Off Site Improvements
Off Site Improvements Unit
Plan Review Fee
Per Unit Minimum Charge
Street Linear foot $2.05 $1,500.00
Water main Linear foot 0.53 1,200.00
Sanitary sewer Linear foot 0.68 1,200.00
Storm sewer Linear foot 0.95 1,200.00
Stormwater storage Each - 1,200.00
Force main Linear foot 0.30 1,200.00
Bike path Linear foot 0.42 1,200.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 536/702
Sidewalk Linear foot 0.20 1,200.00
Table 6
Residential, Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial
Or Office/Research On Site/Off Site Speciality Improvements
Improvement Unit Review Fee
Lift station Each $3,200.00
Traffic signals Each intersection 1,000.00
Bridges Each 2,500.00
Special management areas Each 1,200.00
Note: Fees For Additional Reviews: Additional plan reviews made after the issuance of the plan approval letter, that are necessary due to field
conditions encountered during construction activities, shall be paid by the applicant at the current hourly rate of the village engineer. In the event
an approved subdivision/PUD is not constructed within twelve (12) months of the issuance of the approval letter, a rereview of the plans at the
current hourly rate of the village engineer will be required at the time the construction activities begin. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-5-10: FIELD OBSERVATION FEES:
Field observation fees in the amounts or percentages of costs hereinafter specified shall be paid to the village to reimburse it for expenses incurred for the
services of its village engineer and its building department in connection with the field observation of the construction and installation of public
improvements and semipublic improvements, and wetland protection and mitigation, during the construction of the public improvements for each
subdivision and PUD. The fees shall be paid at the times designated in the following subsections:
A. Subdivisions: A field observation fee shall be paid to the village on the basis of one and one-half percent (11/2%) of the approved cost estimates for all
"public improvements", defined as follows:
1. All earthwork within the subdivision, including street rights of way, public and private open space, building pads, lots, common areas, undercuts and
all other appurtenant earthwork, demolition, well sealing, and the abandonment of existing facilities included in the subdivision, except excavations
for building foundations.
2. Public sidewalks and/or bike paths.
3. Parkway restoration.
4. Driveway approaches.
5. Street lighting.
6. Stormwater management systems, including storm sewers, swales and drainage ditches and detention/retention areas, including release structures,
underdrains, erosion protection, outfall pipes, seeding, topsoil, sod and paved inverts or other special landscaping treatment ("stormwater
management systems").
7. Sanitary sewer systems, including lift stations and force mains ("sanitary sewer systems").
8. Water distribution systems, including any pumping facilities, supply sources or storage facilities ("water distribution systems").
9. Wetland construction, reconstruction or mitigation.
10. Traffic signals.
11. Water and sanitary sewer services within the rights of way of public streets or easements.
12. All off site water and sanitary sewer services within public streets or easements.
13. All off site improvements required to make the subdivision operational.
B. Planned Unit Developments ("PUDs"): A field observation fee shall be paid to the village of Bartlett on the basis of one and one-half percent (11/2%) of
the approved estimate of cost for the following project improvements:
1. All earthwork within development, including street rights of way, public and private open space, building pads, lots, common areas, undercuts and all
other appurtenant earthwork, demolition, well sealing, and the abandonment of existing facilities included in the development, except excavations for
building foundations.
2. All sidewalks intended to be maintained by the village or an association.
3. All restoration and landscaping intended to be maintained by the village or an association.
4. All driveways and parking areas intended to be maintained by the village or an association.
5. All street lighting intended to be maintained by the village or an association.
6. All stormwater management systems intended to be maintained by the village or an association.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 537/702
7. All sanitary sewer systems intended to be maintained by the village or an association.
8. All water distribution systems.
9. All traffic signals.
10. All water and sanitary sewer services within public streets or easements.
11. All off site water and sanitary sewer services within public streets or easements.
12. All off site improvements required to make the PUD operational.
C. Commercial, Industrial And Office/Research Site Plans: A field observation fee shall be paid to the village on the basis of an estimated fee in
conjunction with the building permit application fee to cover the field inspection of public improvements in commercial, industrial and office/research
projects that are not part of a subdivision or PUD. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
Chapter 6
SUBDIVISION AND PUD DESIGN STANDARDS
11-6-1: GENERALLY; CONFORMITY WITH VILLAGE PLANS AND ORDINANCES:
A. Generally: The plans for every subdivision and PUD within the territorial jurisdiction of the village shall meet the planning design standards herein as
well as the standards for required public improvements set forth in chapter 7 of this title.
B. Conformance Required: The subdivision and planned development of land in the village of Bartlett shall further the goals and objectives of the village as
stated in the comprehensive plan, other plans and policies of the village, and all applicable codes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, the
zoning ordinance, the stormwater, floodplain and wetland ordinance, the stormwater management ordinance, the donation ordinance, and the building
code. In the event that a proposed subdivision is not in conformance with the plans, policies, and ordinances of the village, it shall be so modified that it
conforms. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-6-2: PLATTING:
All lots shall be designed in accordance with good planning practice.
A. Arrangement: Lots shall be laid out in an efficient and uniform manner to avoid the creation of unusable remnants of land.
B. Lot Sizes: Lot width and area shall conform to the regulations of the Bartlett zoning ordinance. Corner lots shall be of sufficient size to provide for
building lines on each street frontage not less than the depth of the required front yard and corner side yard specified in the Bartlett zoning ordinance.
C. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots are not permitted except where lots back upon a collector and/or arterial street, and in such instances,
vehicular access between the lots and the thoroughfare is prohibited. Such lots must have an additional depth of at least ten feet (10') in order to allow
for a protective screening. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-6-3: STREET AND BLOCK LAYOUT:
All streets shall be arranged in accordance with the standards detailed in this section.
A. Lots To Abut On Publicly Dedicated Streets: All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street for at least fifty feet (50') (60 feet at the building line) unless
an approved modification is granted by the corporate authorities.
B. Side Lot Lines To Be At Right Angles Or Radial To Street Lines: Side lot lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to street lines.
C. Streets And Blocks To Be Laid Out Logically: Streets and blocks shall be laid out in a clear, logical manner. Forked streets, streets that double back on
themselves, and streets that change direction shall be avoided. The street pattern and the building numbering system should enable emergency
vehicles to reach a destination quickly and without undue confusion.
D. Measurement Of Irregularly Shaped Lots: The width of irregularly shaped lots shall be measured along a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a
distance from the front lot line determined by the required front yard setback. In the case of a curved front lot line, the lot width shall be measured as
the length of the arc which is parallel to the front lot line at the building setback.
E. Block Lengths: The maximum length of blocks shall be one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') unless the village board determines that a greater length
is required to avoid or reduce a traffic hazard. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 538/702
11-6-4: VEHICULAR CIRCULATION:
Streets within the proposed subdivision shall be arranged to provide efficient vehicular circulation.
A. Traffic Impact Studies: Every application for subdivision/PUD shall be accompanied by a traffic management study prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer unless deemed unnecessary by the village engineer. (Refer to section 11-12-4, "Appendix D; Traffic Management Ordinance", of this title.) No
subdivision/PUD plat shall be approved if its development will increase traffic to the extent that a lower level of service results, unless the proposal
includes measures to fully mitigate such increased traffic. The maximum amount of traffic that will be permitted in the village shall be that which is
served by level of service C as established by the Institute of Traffic Engineers.
B. Streets And Public Lands: Wherever the comprehensive plan shows a street running through or along any boundary line of the land owned or controlled
by the subdivider/developer, or any land planned for school, park or fire station sites therein, that information shall be shown on the preliminary plat and
any conceptual land use plans for the subdivision or planned development of any part of that land. The precise layout of streets shall be considered in
relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and in relation to the proposed use of the land to be
served by such streets.
C. Continuation Of Existing Streets: All existing streets which terminate at the boundary of the proposed subdivision/PUD shall be continued into the
subdivision/PUD and be incorporated into the street pattern.
D. Continuation Of Streets: If the corporate authorities determine that it is necessary for the public safety to continue a street located within the proposed
subdivision/PUD to a street outside the subdivision/PUD, the village may require the acquisition of right of way which lies on land not owned by the
developer. In that instance the village may take such action as may be required to acquire such off site right of way, and the developer shall pay such
acquisition costs, including legal and other condemnation expenses, as well as the costs of the required off site improvements as a condition of
subdivision/PUD plat approval.
E. Perimeter Streets: When it is determined by the corporate authorities that a street should be located along a boundary line of a proposed
subdivision/PUD to connect with existing or proposed village streets designated on the comprehensive plan, it shall be incumbent upon the developer
either to dedicate the land for such street, obtain dedication of such land by the adjoining owner, or dedicate land for a half street in accordance with
this title. If the developer proposes to dedicate a half street the developer must demonstrate to the corporate authorities that the developer cannot
dedicate sufficient right of way on its property to maintain the alignment with existing or proposed streets, and that it has exhausted all reasonable
efforts to acquire the required right of way from the adjoining landowner. If such off site right of way is within the village, the corporate authorities may
require the developer to agree to pay the cost of acquiring such right of way by condemnation, including legal fees and other expenses, as a condition
precedent to plat approval.
F. Completion Of Minimum Right Of Way Dedication: When any subdivision/PUD, or any part of a subdivision/PUD, is adjacent to only one side of an
existing right of way whose width is less than the minimum width required under this title, the developer shall dedicate such additional right of way as
may be required to meet the minimum width requirements of this title.
G. Offsets: Streets with centerline offset less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be prohibited unless required to conform to the comprehensive
plan, or when they intersect a street with a curbed or barrier median. Eyebrow streets are not considered offset streets.
H. Visibility: Clear visibility at intersections shall be achieved by keeping them clear of foliage or structures within the vision triangle as defined in the
Bartlett zoning ordinance at each corner. Except for traffic control devices, utility poles, fire hydrants and street signs, no structure or plant materials
which will exceed thirty inches (30") in height above the top of curb (or centerline elevation of the street in the event there is no curb) when they mature
shall be permitted within this area in order to provide adequate sight distance.
I. Alleys: Alleys shall not be permitted.
J. Intersection Of Streets: Streets shall be so laid out that they intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. The minimum allowable angle of intersection
of two (2) streets is seventy degrees (70°). Whenever possible, the intersection of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided.
K. Spacing Of Collectors: Collectors carrying traffic in the same direction shall be spaced, whenever possible, at intervals not more than one-fourth (1/4)
mile apart.
L. Cul-De-Sac Lengths: The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be six hundred feet (600'). No cul-de-sac shall serve more than twenty (20) lots/dwelling
units. Modifications may be granted by the corporate authorities.
M. Corner Clearance: Entrances to commercial properties shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from intersections to ensure adequate corner clearance
and prevent cars from crossing queues of vehicles at such intersections.
N. Pedestrian Circulation: Sidewalks and/or bike paths shall be required within public rights of way at a distance one foot (1') from the property line, on
both sides of said public right of way.
O. Bicycle Circulation: Bike paths shall be installed in a subdivision/PUD in accordance with the village's bike path plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 539/702
P. Access Easements: Access easements may be required at appropriate locations through the center of blocks longer than six hundred feet (600') to
provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access to schools, parks, or similar destinations when determined to be required for public safety
by the corporate authorities. Access easements shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-6-5: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
Every subdivision/PUD shall be provided with a system of public streets which meets the engineering design standards set forth in section 11-7-6 of this
title and the following standards:
A. Street Plans: The location and design of the streets and roads, including their arrangement, character, extent and width, for any subdivision or PUD,
shall conform to the village's comprehensive thoroughfare plan in effect at the time of the filing of the application for approval of the preliminary plat or
plan of such subdivision/PUD and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public convenience and
safety, and the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets.
B. Minimum Rights Of Way Widths: All rights of way for streets and sidewalks shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
Arterial streets 100 feet
Bike paths2 15 feet
Collector streets 80 feet
Cul-de-sac streets1 66 feet
Frontage street 50 feet
Industrial service street 55 feet
Local streets 66 feet
Minor street 66 feet
Public sidewalks2 10 feet
Notes:
1. With not less than a 60 foot radius on the bubble of such cul-de-sac. The approach radius to the cul-de-sac shall not be less than 20 feet.
2. Which are not located in a street right of way shall be not less than 10 feet in width.
C. Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes For Commercial Properties: In front of areas zoned or designated for nonresidential use, the street width and the
roadway widths shall be increased on the side or sides on which the property for nonresidential use is located by a merging lane at least fifteen feet
(15') wide and adequate length to ensure the free flow of traffic without interference by vehicles entering or leaving parking areas. This is not to be
considered a part of the required parking area herein elsewhere required. Additional right of way shall be dedicated when acceleration and deceleration
lanes are constructed, so that the street complies with the street width standards of subsection B of this section. It is intended that where the abutting
property on both sides of a street is developed for nonresidential use, there shall be two (2) such lanes in addition to the minimum required street width
if deemed necessary by the village board.
D. Street Names: The name of each street in the subdivision/PUD shall be submitted to the village clerk's office for review and approval on a copy of the
proposed final subdivision plat or PUD plan at least thirty (30) days prior to submittal of the final plat or plan, in order to give the clerk an opportunity to
confer with the police department and the fire protection district and to develop a street numbering system for the subdivision/PUD. No street name
shall be used which duplicates or may be confused with the name of any existing street. Existing street names shall be used wherever possible. All
street names shall be subject to approval by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-6-6: PHASED CONSTRUCTION:
When a subdivision/PUD is proposed to be developed in phases over a period of time the corporate authorities may permit the developer to complete the
public improvements for the subdivision/PUD in phases; provided, that the construction of all public improvements shall be completed to each boundary of
the phase of unit proposed to be developed, the plan for phasing is approved in conjunction with the first final plat approval. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-6-7: HEALTH AND SAFETY CONTROLS:
A. Control Of Environmental Pollutants: All proposed subdivisions/PUDs must comply with the Illinois environmental protection act1 and state of Illinois
rules and regulations title 35, subtitle G, "Waste Disposal".
B. Private Sewage Disposal System: The use of septic systems for disposal of sewage shall not be permitted, unless a special exemption is granted by the
village board. Private sewage disposal systems shall meet the requirements of the county health department or other agency having jurisdiction in the
county in which the site is located. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 540/702
Chapter 7
REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS FOR ALL SUBDIVISIONS AND PUDs
11-7-1: STANDARDS:
Every subdivision and PUD within the territorial jurisdiction of the village shall be improved with the following public improvements: a water distribution
system, a sanitary sewer system, a stormwater management system, streets with curbs and gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, and parkway landscaping
("public improvements") and facilities for the distribution of electric, gas, telephone and cable television service ("public utilities"), except as hereinafter
expressly provided. No subdivision or PUD shall be approved by the corporate authorities until the village engineer certifies that the engineering plans and
specifications for the public improvements for such subdivision or PUD meet the minimum requirements specified in the following sections of this title:
Required Public Improvement Section
Site grading
Erosion control
Sanitary sewers and appurtenances
Stormwater management system (chapter 8 of this title)
Water system and appurtenances
Streets
Streetlights
Sidewalks
Bicycle paths
Driveway approaches
Landscaping
Public utilities
Utility and drainage easements
Floodplain protection
Wetland protection
A. Additional Standards: No private streets, water mains, sanitary sewers, or storm sewers will be permitted within any subdivision. Private sidewalks and
streetlights shall not be permitted within the dedicated rights of way or easements for the public street system.
B. Working Drawings And Specifications: Before considering the approval of the final subdivision plat or final PUD plan for any subdivision or PUD, the
plan commission shall require that complete working drawings and specifications for the public improvements and public utilities for such subdivision or
PUD be submitted to the village engineer to determine whether they meet the requirements of this title.
C. Review By Village Engineer: The village engineer shall review such plans and specifications and report his findings to the corporate authorities. Should
revisions be recommended by the village engineer in order for the plans to conform to the requirements of this title, the applicant shall revise their plans
and/or specifications and resubmit them directly to the village engineer for his review and recommendations. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-2: SITE GRADING PLAN:
The subdivider/developer shall supply the village with engineering plans and specifications on a site grading plan showing the following:
A. Bench mark elevations,
B. Centerline road elevations at front lot corners,
C. Top of house foundations,
D. Lot corner elevations with drainage arrows showing direction of drainage,
E. Break points at which the drainage changes direction,
F. Drainage structures with frame elevations,
G. Typical footprint of the pad area in which the house or building will be built,
H. Special treatment of embankments,
I. Retaining walls. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-3: MINIMUM/MAXIMUM YARD GRADES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 541/702
The minimum and maximum grades for yards within a lot, or at a lot line, shall be as follows: Side lot line grades shall be greater than one percent (1%)
but not greater than ten percent (10%). Front lot line grades (those parallel to the street) shall have minimum and maximum grades equal to the street on
which they front. If the front lot lines parallel a private cluster driveway area, then the minimum and maximum grades shall be "0.6 percent and seven
percent (7%) respectively". Rear lot lines shall have a minimum slope of one percent (1%). If the grade differential between adjoining rear yards cannot be
accommodated, then a retaining wall shall be incorporated into the grading plan.
A. Foundation Elevation Differences: The difference in elevations between adjacent building's top of foundations shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the
horizontal distance of the building separation (e.g., based on a 71/2 foot side yard on each lot the permitted maximum elevation difference between the
adjoining foundation elevations would be 5 percent times 15 feet or 0.75 feet).
1. In the event that the adjoining foundation difference (at the side yards) is more than five percent (5%), based on the horizontal building separation,
special consideration shall be given to the side yard treatment to accommodate drainage. Special consideration may include, but not be limited to,
retaining walls, stepped foundations, dropped siding, special landscaping techniques or greater separation of buildings.
2. Overflow routes designed to accommodate the 100-year intensity flood shall be defined on the grading plan. Where an overflow route is designed to
go between homes, a typical section shall be shown in section view for the overflow route. Design calculations shall be provided on the grading plan
next to each respective section identifying the required capacity of the overflow route.
Depth of flow and the width of flow. Side slopes for such channels shall not be steeper than four foot (4') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
The capacity of the overflow route shall be calculated using either broad crested weir or channel formula.
The runoff rate for the 100-year overflow route shall be calculated at the runoff rate for the detention volume or 4.5 cfs/ac whichever is greater.
B. General Drainage Direction: General drainage direction shall be identified as being carried along property lines or at the toe of slopes, all within
appropriate drainage easements.
C. Grading Plan Compliance: Grading plan compliance shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-4: SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS:
Except as provided in subsection E of this section, all subdivisions and PUDs shall have a sanitary sewer system connected to the village sanitary sewer
system sized in accordance with the village's master sanitary sewer plan, and designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards:
A. General Requirements For Sanitary Sewers: The sanitary sewer system for each subdivision/PUD shall meet the following general requirements:
1. Sanitary and storm sewer systems shall not be combined, and sanitary sewer systems shall be protected from infiltration of stormwaters.
2. Sanitary sewer service lines shall be constructed with service stubs located at the center of, and extended at least ten feet (10') into, each lot in the
subdivision/PUD.
B. Sanitary Sewer Materials And Testing; Pipe Materials: Any of the following materials may be used for sanitary sewer pipe within the village of Bartlett:
1. Poly (vinyl chloride) pipe ("PVC") in conformity with ASTM D-3034, type PSM for size six inches (6") through twelve inches (12") and ASTM D-3093,
type PSP for size fifteen inches (15") and larger, all having a minimum size dimension rate (SDR) of 26. Laying length shall not be less than twenty
feet (20') unless conditions require a shorter length. Each joint shall consist of a bell that is an integral part of the pipe, stiffened to securely lock a
solid cross sectional rubber ring into position. A "home" mark shall be provided on the spigot end of the pipe. The joint shall be able to withstand an
internal hydrostatic pressure of twenty five (25) psi and any leakage shall be considered a failure of the test and the joint.
2. Reinforced concrete pipe ("RCP") in conformity with ASTM C-76. Lifting holes shall not be permitted. The joint shall be an "O" ring self-centering
type rubber gasket conforming to ASTM C-361. The bell and spigot end of the pipe shall be formed by a steel ring securely welded to the inner
reinforcing and shall be suitable to accepting the rubber gasket. A two (2) coat interior epoxy coating (14 mils) shall be required on all RCP pipes
unless calculations show that the formation of a sulfide condition will not be a problem to the structural integrity of the sewer system. If this is proven,
then the coating can be omitted.
3. Ductile iron pipe ("DIP") in conformity with ANSI/AWWA-C151/A21.51 and ANSI/AWWA-C111/A21.11 with push-on or mechanical joints class 52
pipe. The pipe shall have a cement mortar lining. Ductile iron pipe will be required for sanitary sewers deeper than eighteen feet (18'), locations
where future access may be limited, or as directed by the village engineer. All force mains shall be ductile iron pipe.
C. Manholes: Manholes shall be precast reinforced concrete with monolithic bottoms, manhole steps, and cast iron frames and lids marked "Sanitary".
(Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
D. Testing Sanitary Systems: Air testing, infiltration testing or exfiltration testing, may be utilized as acceptable testing methods to demonstrate the integrity
of the sanitary sewer system. All tests shall be performed with capped sanitary sewer services and manholes in place. Air testing shall be performed in
accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", as amended from time to time. Infiltration and
exfiltration test results shall not exceed two hundred (200) gallons per inch diameter per day per mile of pipe. All PVC sanitary sewer lines shall also be
tested for deflection (mandrel test) in accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois".
All sanitary sewers shall be closed circuit television inspected prior to acceptance by the village. The sewer shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to
televising. High quality VHS videotape (or other approved medium) and a written report of all television inspections shall be submitted to the village.
The report shall indicate all sags, connections, leaks and defects. All defects and corrective work required as the result of such inspection shall be
performed by the developer. Upon completion thereof, the sewer shall be retelevised and taped by the developer. (Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 542/702
E. Exception: For subdivisions outside the corporate limits where no public sanitary sewer system is available within one hundred feet (100') of the
property owned or controlled by the subdivider/developer, the village will consider approving the use of individual sewage disposal systems or septic
systems to serve lots that have an area of one acre (43,560 square feet) or larger, provided: 1) such systems meet the minimum requirements of the
IEPA and the appropriate county health department, 2) a covenant running with the land effectively obligates future owners of lots within the
subdivision: a) to discontinue using such system, b) to connect their residences to the village sanitary sewer system whenever a village sanitary sewer
line is located within one hundred feet (100') of the property on which their residences are located, and c) to extend the village sanitary sewer to the
farthest boundary line of such property within the right of way or easement designated by the village. All test data required by the agency(ies) having
jurisdiction over the subdivision/PUD shall be submitted to the village and to such agency(ies) for review and approval. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
F. Sanitary Sewer Lift Station: Should the lay of the land be such that a sanitary sewer lift station is required, said lift station shall be built at the sole
expense of the developer. The lift station shall be on a separate lot dedicated to the village of Bartlett. The size of the lot shall be a minimum of fifty by
one hundred feet (50 x 100'). Lift stations shall be built to current "Village Of Bartlett Specifications For Sewerage Lift Station", available from the village
engineer. Required improvements shall include, but are not limited to, brick construction control building, generator, controls, pumps, and flowmeter.
A plan for the sanitary sewer lift station site shall be included as part of the preliminary engineering plans. The plan shall at a minimum include:
1. Lot dimensions,
2. Street accessible drives,
3. Proposed grading,
4. Proposed utilities,
5. Location of control/generator building, wet well, valve vaults, flowmeter vault, and other appurtenances,
6. Construction details,
7. Title commitment and plat of survey (at time of final plat). (Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-7-5: WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS:
Except as provided in subsection G of this section all subdivisions and PUDs shall have a water distribution system capable of supplying all of the lots in
the subdivision/PUD with village water, sized in accordance with the village's water main system master plan, and designed and constructed in accordance
with the following standards: (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
A. Water Main Sizing And Looping: Water mains shall not be less than eight inches (8") in diameter, conforming to the village water main system master
plan, available from the village engineer, and shall be so arranged that the entire system is looped. Shutoff valves shall be provided at each branch
main connection and at such additional locations so that: 1) not more than eight hundred feet (800') of water main, or 2) that length of water main which
serves not more than twenty (20) detached single-family residences, whichever is greater, will be shut down for the performance of maintenance work.
(Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995; amd. Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
B. Water Main Materials: Water main pipes shall be made of ductile cast iron with a cement mortar lining and a working pressure of one hundred fifty (150)
psi. All fittings shall be ductile cast iron with a cement mortar lining and suitable for a working pressure of two hundred fifty (250) psi. Water main lines
and fittings shall be specified by class for the appropriate laying depth but not less than class 52. All material shall comply with the following ASA
specification:
1. ASA A21.51: Ductile cast iron all joint types (centrifugally cast in metal molds or sand lined molds for water or other liquids).
2. ASA A21.4: Cement mortar lining for pipes and fittings.
3. ASA A21.50: Use to determine wall thickness for ductile cast iron underground pipes.
4. ASA A21.1: Determine class thickness for 18/40 strength gray cast iron pipe fittings.
C. Valves: All valves used in the water distribution system shall be Waterous resilient wedge gate valves. Gate valves shall be cast iron body, bronze stem
and stem nut, rubber seated type with nonrising stem and O-ring packing, and conforming to the latest revised requirements of AWWA specification C-
509. The resilient rubber seat shall be bonded to the gate or wedge with the bond proved by requirements of ASTM D-429 testing procedures. All
valves shall be counterclockwise opening and shall be supplied with two inch (2") square operating nuts.
D. Valve Vaults: All valves shall be installed in precast valve vaults sized as follows:
Water Main Diameter Vault Diameter
10 inches or less 4 feet
10 - 12 inches 5 feet
12 inches or more Sized to accommodate valve
All vault frames and closed lids shall be marked "Water".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 543/702
E. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be installed at not more than four hundred foot (400') intervals and so all points of every building in the
subdivision/PUD can be covered by a swing of two hundred fifty foot (250') radius about any given hydrant. All fire hydrants shall have six inch (6")
barrels with two (2) 21/2-inch standard hose connections and one 41/2-inch steamer connection. All hose connections shall have national standard
threads. Each fire hydrant shall have a six foot zero inch (6'0") laying depth, have a breakaway flange and include an auxiliary valve and valve box. Fire
hydrants shall be Waterous Pacer WB67.
F. Water Main Testing: All newly laid water main pipe, or any valved sections of such newly laid pipe, shall be tested as specified herein and shall comply
with the requirements of this title.
Each section of pipe to be tested shall be filled with water to an initial pressure of not less than one hundred fifty (150) psi. Filling of the water main
shall be accomplished by the use of a pump, gauges and water meter (all to be furnished by the contractor) to a pressure in excess of one hundred fifty
(150) psi, all connected in a manner acceptable to the village engineer. Before applying the test, all air shall be expelled from the test section. The test
section shall be allowed to stabilize at one hundred fifty (150) psi before the test commences. The test shall start at one hundred fifty (150) psi and run
for a two (2) hour period. At the end of the two (2) hour period, the system shall be pumped back up to the original pressure (150 psi) and the volume of
water required to restore the original pressure shall be measured. The allowable water loss shall be no greater than ten (10) gallons per inch diameter
per mile of pipe per day, adjusted to the duration of the test in hours or fractions thereof.
G. Exception: For subdivisions outside the corporate limits where no public water supply system is available within one hundred feet (100') of the property
owned or controlled by the subdivider/developer, the village will consider approving the use of private wells when conclusive evidence is presented by
the applicant in the form of suitable tests and surveys that demonstrate that an adequate, underground water supply of potable water is readily
available for the development of lots with private wells, and the applicant has secured the approval of the appropriate county health department. (Ord.
95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-6: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
Every subdivision/PUD shall be provided with a system of public streets which meets the planning standards of section 11-6-3 of this title and the following
engineering standards:
A. Street Improvement Standards: All materials, workmanship, equipment and testing shall comply with the current state of Illinois "Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction". Terms used herein shall have the meanings set forth in section 11-2-2 of this title.
B. Minimum/Maximum Street Grades: All street grades shall be in accordance with the limits set forth in table 1 of this subsection.
TABLE 1
MINIMUM/MAXIMUM GRADES
Type Of Street Maximum Minimum
Arterial streets 3.0 percent 0.5 percent
Collector streets 5.0 percent 0.5 percent
Local streets:
Cul-de-sacs 7.0 percent 0.6 percent
Frontage roads 7.0 percent 0.6 percent
Industrial service street 7.0 percent 0.6 percent
Minor streets 7.0 percent 0.6 percent
C. Pavement Widths: All streets shall be improved with paved surfaces from edge of road to edge of road as shown on table 2 of this subsection.
TABLE 2
(EDGE OF ROAD TO EDGE OF ROAD)
Type Of Street Minimum Widths
Arterial streets 48 feet
Collector streets 36 feet
Local streets:
Cul-de-sac radii 42 feet
Cul-de-sac streets 25 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 544/702
Frontage streets 25 feet
Industrial service streets 33 feet
Minor streets 25 feet
Notes:
1. Left turn lanes with barrier type medians may be required at designated intersections.
2. A 4 foot median may be required on certain street intersections.
3. Use a 60 foot transition radius from straight roadway to radius of cul-de-sac.
D. Soils Reports Shall Be Required: A profile of the subsurface soil conditions shall be provided to a distance of ten feet (10') below the proposed grade
line or ten feet (10') below the proposed fill if required. The soils profile shall show the types of soils, natural moisture content, unconfined compression
strength, ground water data and frost susceptible material. IBR values shall be made available to the village engineer for checking the roadway design.
E. Determining Traffic Volumes: (Also see section 11-12-4, "Appendix D; Traffic Management Ordinance", of this title.)
1. When the subdivider/developer is improving existing streets, current traffic data shall be secured from responsible agencies or field counts shall be
taken.
2. When the ultimate size of the subdivision/PUD will be less than one hundred (100) acres, traffic projections for the structural integrity of the arterial
and collector streets for residential land uses, and all streets in other land uses, shall be determined on the basis of the following standards:
a. For subdivision/PUDs of detached and attached single-family residences, ten (10) trips per day per unit.
b. For commercial, industrial, office/research and institutional uses, traffic projections shall be made by a traffic engineer and submitted to the village
engineer for approval.
The breakdown of traffic by categories of passenger car (PC), single unit (SU) or multiple unit (MU) trucks shall be eighty percent (80%) PC,
nineteen percent (19%) SU and one percent (1%) MU for all residential type land uses. The division of traffic for all other land uses shall be in
accordance with the recommendations of a traffic engineer which have been submitted for review by the village engineer and approved by him.
3. When the ultimate size of the subdivision/PUD will be more than one hundred (100) acres, traffic projections made by a traffic engineer shall be
submitted for review and approval by the village engineer for all street classifications and land uses.
F. Structural Design Of Streets: All subbase, base and surface designs for streets for all land uses shall be done in accordance with the manuals for the
structural design of bituminous and Portland cement concrete pavements then currently being used by IDOT's bureau of local roads.
1. Minimum Thicknesses Of Base And Surface Courses For Bituminous Surface Streets: All surface and base course materials indicated in table 3 of
this subsection will be permitted for the construction of bituminous surfaced streets within the village's territorial jurisdiction. No roadway shall be built
with less than the specified thicknesses, regardless of the number of projected movements or the IBR values of the soil.
TABLE 3
MINIMUM BASE AND SURFACE THICKNESSES
FOR BITUMINOUS SURFACED STREETS
Arterial Street Industrial Collector
Residential Collector And
Industrial Service Residential Local
Base Course Type Base
Course
Surface
Course
Base
Course
Surface
Course
Base
Course
Surface
Course
Base
Course
Surface
Course
Portland cement concrete base course 8" 3" n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Aggregate base course type B (100%
crushed gravel or stone)
n/a n/a 14" 2" surface
3" binder
14" 2" surface
2" binder
11" 2" surface
2" binder
Pavement no. 4.02 Pavement no. 3.62 Pavement no. 3.02
Bituminous aggregate base course
(BAM)1
9" 1" surface
1" binder
7" 1" surface
1" binder
6" 1" surface
1" binder
6" 1" surface
Pavement no. 4.61 Pavement no. 4.07 Pavement no. 3.62 Pavement no. 3.02
Note:
1. A minimum of 4 inch CA-6 crushed gravel or stone subbase will be required under all bituminous aggregate (BAM) base course sections.
Residential local streets will require 5 inches of granular subbase. The maximum thickness of BAM placement shall be 4 inches.
TABLE 4
MINIMUM THICKNESSES FOR PCC PAVEMENTS
Arterial Streets Collector Streets Local Streets
Standard reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement 8" 6" 6"
Granular subbase material (aggregate base course type B) 4" 4" 4"
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 545/702
Notes:
1. Standard Reinforcing: Standard reinforcing in 6 inch and 7 inch thick pavements will not be required if transverse contraction joints are spaced
no greater than 20 feet apart. Standard reinforcing will be required in pavements 8 inches or more in thickness.
2. Granular Subbase Material: A granular subbase material shall be required to replace all soils under concrete pavement where the soil IBR is 2
or less. The depth of subbase material shall be as recommended by a professional soils engineer whose report has been submitted to the
village engineer for his review and approved by him.
3. Illinois Bearing Ratio (IBR) Values: No street (rigid or flexible) will be built on an IBR value of 2 or less. All such soil and other suitable material
shall be removed and replaced with acceptable materials or a subbase material as directed by a professional soils engineer whose report has
been submitted to the village engineer for his review and approved by him.
4. Minimum Radii At Returns: Streets shall be constructed with the minimum radii specified in table 5 of this subsection.
TABLE 5
TABLE OF MINIMUM RADII
Type Of Intersection Minimum Radii
Cul-de-sac to minor street 25 foot
Minor street to minor street 25 foot
Cul-de-sac to collector street 30 foot
Minor street to collector street 30 foot
Collector street to collector street 30 foot
Minor street to arterial street 30 foot
Cul-de-sac to arterial street 30 foot
Collector street to arterial street 40 foot
Arterial street to arterial street 40 foot
(Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
G. Concrete Curbs And Gutters: Concrete curbs and gutters shall be required on all streets. The curb shall be depressed at all driveways and intersections
to accommodate handicapped accessible sidewalks. The curb shall be B-6.12 curb and gutter (refer to section 11-12-8, "Appendix H; Standard Details
For Public Improvements", of this title).
H. Excavation And Preparation Of Subgrade: All roadways shall be excavated and the street subgrade prepared in accordance with the most current IDOT
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", current edition. A proof roll test shall be conducted prior to the placement of base
material. Soft and yielding materials encountered in the subgrade shall be removed and replaced with granular material or other fill material compacted
to ninety five percent (95%) of optimum laboratory density. (Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
I. Materials Inspections: Subgrade compaction and all materials incorporated into the roadway section shall be tested by a competent testing laboratory to
be provided at the subdivider/developer's expense. Tests shall be made in compliance with current state of Illinois recommendations, except that plant
inspections will not be required in concrete or blacktop plants continuously during production. However, one random test shall be made daily on all
material used. Results of all tests conducted shall be forwarded to the village engineer for his review and approval. No acceptance of work will be
recommended without such test results being submitted to the village engineer.
The subdivider/developer shall be required to provide cores on the roadway system prior to the placement of the final surface course in order to verify
binder course and/or base thicknesses. Cores shall be taken at five hundred foot (500') intervals or as directed by the village engineer. In the event that
cores do not meet at least ninety five percent (95%) of the total required thickness of the binder and/or base course, additional thickness of surface
course will have to be placed to compensate for the inadequate thicknesses. The adjustment in thickness will be based on the IDOT local roads
structural numbers assigned to each respective material type for which the adjustment needs to be made.
J. No Building Permits: No permit will be issued for the construction of any building in any subdivision or PUD until curbs and gutters are in place and
street pavements have been partially completed to meet the following standards:
1. Bituminous concrete streets: The base course and first lift of bituminous pavement must be in place.
2. Concrete streets: The concrete pavement must be in place.
K. Cutoff Date For Placing Bituminous Materials: No bituminous concrete base or surface course work shall be placed later than November 15 of any
calendar year without special written permission from the village engineer, which may be given on a week by week basis after November 15.
L. Street Ditch Sections: In the event that the corporate authorities permit the use of a roadway ditch section as part of the roadway cross section, the ditch
section shall conform to the following minimum requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 546/702
1. Minimum shoulder width: Six feet (6').
2. Minimum and maximum side slopes: Six to one (6:1) minimum and four to one (4:1) maximum.
3. Minimum and maximum ditch depth: Minimum depth is 2.0 feet below roadway centerline elevation and maximum depth is 3.0 feet below roadway
centerline elevation.
4. Ditch bottom width: Can vary from zero to 2.0 feet wide at bottom of slope.
5. Ditch bottom slope: Minimum slope is one percent (1%) and maximum slope is five percent (5%).
M. Temporary Street Name Signs: During the construction of the public improvements in a subdivision or PUD the subdivider/developer shall erect
temporary street name signs with lettering at least three inches (3") high and waterproofed to facilitate easy delivery of materials and provide ample
direction for emergency equipment.
N. Permanent Street Sign Fees: Prior to final subdivision plat or PUD plan approval, the subdivider/developer shall pay to the village a fee to cover the
estimated cost of purchasing the street name signs for the subdivision/PUD, plus eighty percent (80%) of such cost to cover the estimated cost of the
village installing the street name signs. The village will use these funds to purchase and install street name signs upon completion of street and
underground improvements. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-7: STREETLIGHTS:
Streetlights shall be provided in all subdivisions and PUDs in accordance with the following standards:
Streetlights shall be provided on all streets. On arterial and collector streets, the lights shall be located at all intersections and at mid block locations. On
local streets, streetlights shall be installed: a) at all intersections, b) on all street curves unless the radius is such that, in the opinion of the village engineer,
a streetlight is not needed for safety, and c) at the ends of all cul-de-sac streets.
A. Streetlight Placement: Streetlight standards shall be mounted on a base three feet six inches (3'6") behind the curb, except where the distance between
curb and sidewalks prohibits this location, or three feet six inches (3'6") back of shoulder when no curb and gutter exists.
B. System Type: The following street lighting systems will be acceptable:
1. A central control system with circuits from one control panel connected to each light by means of buried electrical conductors, type RR six hundred
(600) volt insulation direct burial. No conductor shall be smaller than #6 ASG copper with a voltage drop from the control center to the farthest light
not to exceed five percent (5%). All voltage on the system shall be two hundred forty (240) volt.
2. Each light can be connected individually to a Commonwealth Edison riser or transformer and turned on and off by means of a photocell. The wire
from the light standard to the Commonwealth Edison riser shall be two - one conductor #6 copper direct burial cable for power and one - one
conductor #6 copper bare stranded for ground.
C. Streetlight Intensities: Streetlight intensities shall be in accordance with the minimum illuminated standards as follows (foot-candles):
MINIMUM ILLUMINATION INTENSITIES
(MEASURED AT STANDARD LOCATION ON PAVEMENT SURFACE)
Location Arterial Street Collector Street Local Streets
Residential 0.4 0.2 0.2
Institutional, commercial and office/research 1.2 0.4 0.4
Industrial 0.6 0.4 0.2
D. Streetlight Mounting Heights:
Location Arterial Street Collector Street Local Streets
Residential 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet
Institutional, commercial and office/research 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Industrial 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
E. Streetlight Standards: Streetlight standards shall be round aluminum poles, Hapco Co. series 77 or equal with flange base for fifteen foot (15') top
mounting height and series 30 with flange base and a minimum eight foot (8') truss style arm with a twenty five foot (25') mounting plate, pedestal or
transformer base and tempered to a T-6 temper. A five-eighths inch by ten foot (5/8" x 10') ground rod shall be installed at each standard location and
connected to the pole with a #8 standard copper wire.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 547/702
F. Luminaires: Luminaires shall be General Electric as shown in section 11-12-8, standard detail nos. 38 through 41 of this title. All luminaires shall provide
high output white mercury vapor and provide IES type III distribution. Luminaires installed at intersections shall be type II four-way refractors.
Luminaires shall be made of heat resistant borosilicate glass.
G. Ballasts And Lamps: Ballasts and lamps shall be so designed as to operate an individual sixty (60) cycle mercury vapor lamp on a multiple circuit with a
minimum voltage and electrical characteristics as follows:
Regulation type, one hundred seventy five (175) watt, two hundred forty (240) volt, ninety seven percent (97%) PF, plus or minus thirteen percent
(±13%) allowable primary voltage variations, with twenty degree Fahrenheit (20°F) starting temperature on collector, minor and cul-de-sac streets. On
arterial streets, an eight hundred (800) watt unit shall be used with all remaining requirements as listed above.
H. Decorative Streetlighting (Downtown Style): Refer to section 11-12-8, "Appendix H; Standard Details For Public Improvements", of this title for
manufacturer information.
I. Conductors: Conductors shall be buried a minimum of thirty six inches (36") below grade and two feet zero inches (2'0") back of curb (or 2 feet 0 inches
off edge of shoulder). Where conductors cross under existing streets or private drives, they shall run in PVC schedule 40 conduit not smaller than two
inch (2") internal diameter and extend a minimum of four feet (4') on each side of all streets and driveways.
J. Streetlight Bases: All standards shall have a bolt down base extending a minimum of five feet (5') deep and shall include a two inch (2") piece of conduit
with a typical radius. Where soil conditions require, the dimension of the base shall be changed. These conditions shall be determined by the village
engineer. Bases shall be twenty four inches (24") in diameter or as approved by the village engineer. Concrete shall be a six (6) bag mix and shall be a
cast in place. The bases shall contain four (4) #4 vertical reinforcing rods and #3 reinforcing rings at twelve inches (12") on center. The length shall be
determined by manufacturer's specifications. Standards shall be mounted plumb. The base of the standards shall be set two inches (2") above the
finished adjoining grade, top of curb or edge of shoulder, whichever is highest.
K. Service And Control Center: Service centers, if used, shall be established at such points as are found feasible for the area to be serviced. The final
selection of a service and control center shall be approved by the village engineer and the Commonwealth Edison Co. At each service center, the
service switch and circuit breaker shall be mounted in a weatherproof cabinet made of rust resistant metal or aluminum and shall be marked "Street
Lighting". This cabinet shall be equal to a Crouse Hinds #27394 adapter.
1. The cabinet shall be mounted on an eighteen inch (18") diameter concrete base four feet zero inches (4'0") deep cast in place consisting of four (4)
vertical rods and #3 rings twelve inches (12") on center for reinforcing. The top of the base shall be two and one-half inches (21/2") (.1/2") above the
finished adjoining grade, the top of curb, or edge of shoulder, whichever is highest. The base shall include a two inch (2") feeder conduit with
standard radius and one and one-half inch (11/2") service conduit connected directly to the meter socket as required by Commonwealth Edison Co.
All feeder and supply conduit shall enter the cabinet from the bottom.
2. The service center distribution cabinet shall be securely grounded by driving into the ground a three-fourths inch by ten foot (3/4" x 10') copper weld
ground rod inside the concrete base of a cabinet and connected to control panel ground terminal. On the back of the control center shall be mounted
the meter socket for the mounting of the service meter. The control center cabinet shall be provided with a secure locking facility and duplicate keys
must be provided for same.
L. Operation Of Lights: Streetlights shall be so controlled by a photocell (mounted on the top of the luminaire on the pole nearest to the service center
when a control center is used) as to turn on at dusk and off at dawn. The wires connecting the photocell to the control which it is to operate shall be a
minimum of #10 THW. Any part of such control wires that runs underground must be suitable for direct burial and connections shall be made with split
bolt connectors in the base of the lighting standard where it connects with the wire from the photocell. A diagram of the control cabinet components
shall be submitted to the village engineer for his approval prior to assembly. The magnetic contactor shall be GE CR 105 or approved equal of one
hundred (100) amperes' minimum capacity. This contactor shall be controlled by the photocell. A manual switch shall be provided to permit testing of
the components or allow automatic operation. It shall be marked "Manual-Off-Automatic". Each service center shall have a duplex one hundred twenty
(120) volt receptacle, Aubbell #5242, or approved equal, mounted on the inside of the cabinet.
If a control center is not used, then a photocell shall be mounted on the top of each luminaire turning the light on at dusk and off at dawn.
M. Electrical Service: Electrical service to the controller for the street lighting system shall be run in a trench three feet (3') deep from the Commonwealth
Edison service source to the service center. The service load shall determine the size of the service wires. Service wires shall be six hundred (600) volt
THW type and shall be pulled in a minimum one and one-half inch (11/2") hot dipped rigid conduit which shall have a continuous run from the service
cabinet to the Commonwealth Edison service source. The minimum size service wires that can be used shall be #3 copper conductors.
In cases where streetlights are independently connected to a Commonwealth Edison service source, the connecting wire shall be no smaller than #8
AWG copper, direct burial with a six hundred (600) volt insulation from the light standard to the Commonwealth Edison service source. The conductor
shall be buried a minimum of three feet (3') deep.
A five foot (5') easement granted to the village shall be provided on each side of a common lot line where such conductors are to be buried.
N. Junction Boxes: Where indicated, an underground junction box, to accommodate two (2) or more feeder lines for the lighting circuits, shall be of ample
dimensions to accommodate the cables and their wires without undue crowding. Junction boxes shall be concrete, twenty four inch by twenty four inch
by eighteen inch (24" x 24" x 18") with frame and cover. The concrete used shall be of the same mix as that used for the standard bases. The conduits
protecting the cables shall be brought into the box from the bottom. A manufactured elbow shall be used at the bottom of the trench and a nipple shall
connect the box with the elbow. Sealtight shall be used to seal off the cables in the box.
O. Testing: All underground feeders shall be tested for grounds and shorts before being connected to the ballast or pole feed. A megger shall be used for
these tests, imposing a voltage on the cable under test not in excess of the voltage for which the cable was designed as tested by the underwriter's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 548/702
label. Maximum leakage to ground of cable under test is dependent on lengths of cable and shall conform to IES standards for street lighting cable
buried underground. All testing shall be done in the presence of the public works director or his duly appointed representative. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-8: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be required in all public rights of way and in other locations as determined by the village. Sidewalks shall extend through all driveways.
(Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
A. Standards: Standards for sidewalks are as follows:
1. Materials: All sidewalks in public rights of way or easements dedicated to the village shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete (6 bag mix)
conforming to section 424 of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
2. Width; Thickness: Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width, a minimum of five inches (5") in thickness, and shall be placed on a
minimum four inch (4") thick layer of crushed stone (IDOT, CA-6 gradation). (Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
B. Waiver Of Sidewalk Requirements: The president and board of trustees may waive the requirements for public sidewalks for subdivisions or PUDs with
residential lots one acre or more in area, or wooded areas, or where a bicycle path is provided in lieu of a sidewalk along certain public rights of way.
C. Handicapped Accessible Sidewalks: All sidewalks shall be provided with ramps from streets to sidewalks at all intersections to accommodate the
handicapped. Slopes for such ramps shall not exceed five percent (5%). The surface of the sidewalk ramp shall have a diamond pattern texture finish.
D. Sidewalk Transverse Slope: All sidewalk sections shall be sloped from the property line side of the walk to the street side of the walk at one-fourth inch
(1/4") per foot. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-9: BICYCLE PATHS:
Bicycle paths shall be required within or adjacent to a subdivision or PUD where a bicycle path shown on the village's bike path plan runs through all or
part of, or adjacent to, such subdivision or PUD. Bicycle paths may be installed in lieu of sidewalks with the permission of the corporate authorities.
A. Standards for bicycle paths shall be as follows:
1. Materials: All bicycle paths shall be constructed of a crushed gravel base course (CA-6) and a bituminous surface course (class I, type 3) conforming
to the requirements of the state of Illinois "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". The excavation shall be lined with
geotechnical fabric prior to the installation of the aggregate base course.
2. Width; Thickness: Bicycle paths shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10'), a minimum base course thickness of eight inches (8") and a minimum
surface course thickness of three inches (3"). (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-10: DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
A paved driveway approach will be required between the curb and sidewalk (or between the curb [or edge of pavement where there is no curb] and
property line where sidewalks are waived) for each lot before a certificate of occupancy is issued. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
A. Minimum Driveway Approach Widths:
1. The required width of driveway approaches for residential lots shall be determined per the Bartlett building code.
2. The required width of the driveway approach for nonresidential uses shall be determined per the approved site plan.
B. Materials: All driveway approaches for residential uses shall be standard reinforced PC concrete, conforming to the Bartlett building code. All driveway
approaches for nonresidential uses shall be constructed of six inch (6") standard reinforced PC concrete.
Placement of the material shall be in accordance with the current IDOT "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". (Ord. 2004-148,
10-19-2004)
C. Slope Of Drive Approaches: All drive approaches shall have a minimum slope of one percent (1%) and a maximum slope of eight percent (8%) with
drainage from the property line to the street. Slope from the street to the property line will be permitted only if it can be demonstrated that stormwater
runoff can be intercepted within the rights of way and carried by the street or storm sewer system. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
D. Depressed Curb: A depressed curb shall be provided at all driveways either by forming during construction of the curb, cutting, or full depth removal
and replacement. Cutting shall be performed with a "Kotkurb" or similar curb cutting machine. Removal and replacement of the curb shall be prohibited
after the final pavement surface has been installed. The limits of the depressed curb section shall be equal to the width of the apron at the back of curb.
The profile of the cut curb shall conform to village of Bartlett standard details. (Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-7-11: LANDSCAPING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 549/702
All parkways within dedicated street rights of way and all other public use areas shall be graded with six inches (6") of black topsoil and seeded or sodded
in accordance with the specifications set forth in section 11-12-8, "Appendix H; Standard Details For Public Improvements", of this title. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-
1995)
A. Parkway Trees: Parkway trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter (measured 12 inches above the grade) of not less than two and one-half inches
(21/2") and shall be planted in all parkways by the subdivider/developer throughout the entire subdivision or PUD and along existing rights of way
abutting the proposed development if trees are missing. Parkways trees shall be spaced not less than forty feet (40') nor more than sixty feet (60')
apart. Parkway trees shall be centered within parkways between the curb and sidewalk or bike path. No parkway trees shall be planted within fifty feet
(50') of the intersection, measured from the lot corner of the two (2) intersecting lot lines adjacent to the public rights of way. Reasonable effort shall be
made to keep parkway trees from obstructing the view of cross traffic at intersections, and from interfering with upright utilities, such as fire hydrants
and streetlights. Tree planting locations are to be staked for review and approval by the village arborist prior to planting.
B. Acceptable Varieties: Acceptable varieties of parkway trees are identified in the "Bartlett Tree List", available from the public works department. Tree
varieties are to be mixed on an approximately equal basis throughout the subdivision, with no more than twenty percent (20%) of any one genus or ten
percent (10%) of any one species. Columnar or pyramidal species of each variety should be used in narrow parkways six feet (6') wide or less. No
more than four (4) trees of any one variety shall be planted in a row. A parkway tree planting list shall be submitted to the village for approval prior to
planting parkway trees. Any questions about the suitability of any trees for parkway planting should be directed to the village of Bartlett arborist. (Ord.
2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-7-12: UNDERGROUND PUBLIC UTILITIES:
All subdivisions and PUDs shall be provided with a complete system of public utilities including telephone, electric, gas service and cable television. All
such utility lines shall be placed underground in rear lot line easements with minimal utility installation in public rights of way and side yard areas. When
cables or conduits are placed within easements or public rights of way, they shall be so placed that they will not conflict with the village's public
improvements. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-7-13: EASEMENTS FOR DRAINAGE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES:
Easements for drainage and public utilities shall be provided on all side and rear lot lines.
A. Such easements shall be not less than five feet (5') wide on each side of common side and rear lot lines, or ten feet (10') wide in cases when a five foot
(5') easement cannot be acquired from the adjoining property or properties. If it is determined by the corporate authorities on the basis of the village
engineer's recommendation that additional easements or wider easements are required, the developer shall provide such wider easements.
1. In cases where rear or side lot lines abut an existing subdivision/PUD an easement of sufficient width shall be provided to create an easement ten
feet (10') wide.
2. Easements on newly subdivided lots shall, whenever possible, be aligned and continuous with easements on adjoining lots.
3. No obstruction shall be placed in an easement that would prohibit or alter the natural flow of stormwater through the drainage easement.
4. No structures except fences shall be permitted within a drainage or public utility easement.
5. On days of extensive rain events stormwater may be present in drainage easements up to forty eight (48) hours.
6. Impermeable surfaces shall not be placed on drainage easements.
7. When cables or conduits are placed within easements or public right of way they shall be so placed that they will not interfere with the village's
sanitary and storm sewer and water lines and their appurtenant structures.
8. All transformer boxes, junction boxes, and risers shall be so located as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
9. Residential development adjacent to utility communications equipment shall be discouraged, and in no case shall any part of any residential
structure be located within twenty feet (20') of a communications tower. Utility easements in which communications towers are located shall not be
used for recreational purposes. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
Chapter 8
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
11-8-1: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS, EROSION CONTROL, WETLAND PROTECTION, FLOODPLAIN
PROTECTION AND PROTECTION OF RIPARIAN ENVIRONMENTS:
Every subdivision, planned unit development ("PUD"), planned development ("PD") and/or development within the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett,
and any subdivision, PUD, PD and/or development located within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett in
unincorporated areas of DuPage, Cook and Kane Counties, Illinois, shall be provided with a stormwater management system, erosion control, wetland
protection, floodplain protection and protection of riparian environments in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth in the DuPage
County countywide stormwater and flood plain ordinance adopted by the DuPage County board on September 24, 1991, revised June 14, 1994, April 23,
1996, November 12, 1997, June 22, 1999, June 13, 2000, March 25, 2003, January 27, 2004, June 8, 2004, March 8, 2005, February 28, 2006, March 25,
2008, April 24, 2012, with revisions effective April 25, 2012, and general certifications for chapter 15 of the DuPage County code, DuPage County
countywide stormwater and flood plain ordinance adopted by the DuPage County board on April 24, 2012, and effective April 25, 2012, and last revision
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 550/702
dated April 23, 2013, with revisions effective April 23, 2013 (the "DuPage County regulations"), whether or not such subdivision, PUD, PD or development
is located in DuPage County, and the DuPage County regulations are hereby expressly made applicable to subdivisions, PUDs, PDs and developments
within the corporate limits of the village located in DuPage, Cook and/or Kane Counties, and to unincorporated areas in DuPage, Cook and/or Kane
Counties that are within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett, and/or to properties that are otherwise within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Bartlett that are not located within the corporate limits of any other municipality and/or which may be annexed to
the village of Bartlett. The DuPage County regulations as so enacted, and as they may be amended from time to time, are expressly made part of the
Bartlett municipal code by this reference just as if they were fully set forth herein. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary of this title or title 9 of the
Bartlett municipal code, or in the DuPage County regulations aforesaid, floodplains within the village and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be as
delineated in the updated floodplain insurance studies ("FISs") and the flood insurance rating maps ("FIRMs") as prepared and approved by the
department of homeland security federal emergency management agency ("FEMA"). Exhibit 2 to the DuPage County regulations is amended and
supplemented to add the following current FEMA floodplain insurance studies ("FISs") and flood insurance ratings maps ("FIRMs") and profiles:
A. Cook County, Illinois, designated floodways/floodplains for incorporated and unincorporated areas of Cook County:
COOK COUNTY FIS STUDIES
Volume
Number
Panel
Number Community Number Tributary Effective Date
17031CV001G 144 of 832 17031 C Poplar Creek August 19, 2008
17031CV002G 163 of 832 17031 C Brewster Creek August 19, 2008
17031CV003G 164 of 832 17031 C Brewster Creek August 19, 2008
17031CV004G 305 of 832 17031 C Brewster Creek August 19, 2008
17031CV005G An area that is not part of a tributary but is located southwest of the intersection of West Bartlett Road and the
E.J.E. Railroad
COOK COUNTY FIRM MAPPING PANELS
Panel Number Community Number Updated Panel ID Effective Date
144 of 832 17031 C 0144 J August 19, 2008
163 of 832 17031 C 0163 J August 19, 2008
164 of 832 17031 C 0164 J August 19, 2008
168 of 832 17031 C 0168 J August 19, 2008
285 of 832 Not plotted
305 of 832 17031 C 0305 J August 19, 2008
306 of 832 Not plotted
B. Kane County, Illinois, designated floodways/floodplains for incorporated and unincorporated areas of Kane County:
KANE COUNTY FIS STUDIES
(INCORPORATED AND UNINCORPORATED)
Community Number Tributary Effective Date
1700896 Brewster Creek August 5, 2009
KANE COUNTY FIRM MAPPING PANELS
(INCORPORATED PANELS)
Panel Number Community Number Updated Panel ID Effective Date
169 of 410 170089 C 0169 August 3, 2009
260 of 410 170089 C 0210 August 3, 2009
C. DuPage County, Illinois, designated floodways/floodplains in incorporated and unincorporated areas of DuPage County as set forth on exhibit 2 of the
DuPage County regulations is restated and supplemented as follows:
DUPAGE COUNTY FIS STUDIES
(INCORPORATED AND UNINCORPORATED)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 551/702
Community Number Tributary Effective Date
170059 West branch DuPage River December 15, 1980
170059 Brewster Creek December 15, 1980
170059 Country Creek December 15, 1980
DUPAGE COUNTY FIRM MAPPING PANELS
(INCORPORATED AND UNINCORPORATED PANELS)
Panel Number Community Number Updated Panel ID Effective Date
3 of 8 170059 0003 C March 15, 1984
5 of 8 170059 0005 C March 15, 1984
7 of 8 170059 0007 C March 15, 1984
5 of 65 170197 0005 B April 15, 1982
The foregoing FIS and FIRM panels shall be used for insurance purposes in DuPage County as the village of Bartlett is a multicounty community, however,
for development in regulatory floodplains as depicted on regulatory flood maps and DuPage County's latest D-FIRM in effect for regulatory purposes, the
date of the DuPage FIS and DuPage panels shall be December 16, 2004.
D. The foregoing FISs and FIRMs are hereby approved, but shall automatically be amended from time to time to incorporate updated FISs and FIRMs as
approved by FEMA from time to time.
E. The base flood or 100-year flood frequency elevations for the SFHAs of Poplar Creek, Brewster Creek, Country Creek, the west branch of DuPage
River and all tributaries to the referenced rivers, creeks and streams shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide FISs prepared
by FEMA for Cook County dated August 19, 2008, for Kane County dated August 3, 2009, and for DuPage County dated December 15, 1980, for
insurance purposes, and December 16, 2004, for regulatory purposes, in effect as of the date of the adoption hereof, and such amendments to such
FISs and FIRMs as may be prepared and approved by FEMA for each of said counties from time to time.
F. The general certifications for chapter 15 of the DuPage County code, DuPage County countywide stormwater and flood plain ordinance enacted by the
DuPage County board on April 24, 2012, as its ordinance OSM-002-12, effective April 25, 2012, expressly incorporated herein by reference are titled
and numbered as follows:
1. Construction of accessory structures in a flood plain (GC no. 1),
2. Construction of boardwalks (GC no. 2),
3. Construction of boat lifts and piers in a flood plain, buffer and/or wetland (GC no. 3),
4. Construction of a deck in a flood plain or buffer (GC no. 4),
5. Demolition of structures in a flood plain, buffer, and/or wetland (GC no. 5),
6. Construction of posts, fencing, and guard rails in a flood plain or buffer (GC no. 6),
7. Construction of recreational facilities not located in a wetland (GC no. 7),
8. Construction of sidewalks, trails, patios and driveways outside of wetlands (GC no. 8),
9. Construction of storm sewer outfalls and outlet channels located in a floodway, flood plain, buffer, and/or wetland (GC no. 9),
10. Construction of shoreline or stream bank stabilization measures (GC no. 10),
11. Construction of topsoil and sand restoration in a flood plain, floodway or buffer, but not within a wetland (GC no. 11),
12. Construction of utilities (GC no. 12),
are hereby approved and made a part of the DuPage County regulations, as amended by the 2013 revisions approved by DuPage County ordinance
OSM-001-13, and are hereby made applicable to every subdivision, PUD, PD and proposed or actual development located within the corporate limits
of the village of Bartlett, or which is located within one and one-half (11/2) miles of its corporate limits that is not within the corporate limits of another
municipality, and/or which impacts or which will impact waters of DuPage, waters of Cook, or waters of Kane, located within the corporate limits of
the village of Bartlett. (Ord. 2013-59, 7-23-2013)
11-8-1-1: DUPAGE COUNTY REGULATIONS AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the DuPage County regulations are amended to clarify and supplement said regulations as follows:
A. Appendix A of the DuPage regulations entitled "Acronyms, Initialisms And Definitions" is amended to add the following definitions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 552/702
Department: The DuPage County department of economic development and planning, except for properties in Cook County that are not within the
DuPage County watershed planning areas, "department" shall mean the metropolitan water reclamation district of Greater Chicago ("MWRD"), and
for properties in Kane County that are not within the DuPage watershed planning areas, "department" shall mean the Kane County water resources
division.
Flood Profile: Graphical representations of the elevations of the water surface of the 10-year, 50-year, 100-year and 500-year rain fall event along
the water course.
Freeboard: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown
localized conditions, wave action, and unpredictable effects such as may be caused by ice or debris jams.
Jurisdictional Wetlands: Wetlands substantially connected to navigable waters and/or waters of the United States as defined in the regulations
promulgated under the clean water act ("CWA") and case law interpreting the jurisdiction of the USACE over wetlands and determined in accordance
with the USACE's most recent Wetland Delineation Manual.
Waters Of Cook: Waters of the United States as defined in federal regulations promulgated under the clean water act ("CWA") that are located in
Cook County and which are not defined as waters of DuPage, including:
a. All waters such as lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, wetlands, sloughs, wet meadows, or natural ponds.
b. All impoundments of waters not otherwise defined as waters of Cook under the definitions.
c. Tributaries of waters identified above.
d. Jurisdictional wetlands adjacent to waters identified above.
For clarification, water treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the CWA (other than cooling
ponds as defined in 40 CFR 123.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of Cook. It should also be noted that the following
waters are generally not considered to be waters of Cook. However, the administrator reserves the right on a case-by-case basis to determine that a
particular water body located within Cook County within these categories of waters is a water of Cook.
a. Drainage and irrigation ditches excavated on dry land.
b. Artificially irrigated areas that would revert to upland if the irrigation ceased.
c. Artificial lakes, ponds or wetlands created by excavating and/or diking dry land to collect and retain water and which are used exclusively for
such purposes as stormwater storage, stock watering, irrigation, settling basins or sediment traps.
d. Artificial bodies of water created by excavating and/or diking dry land to retain water for primarily aesthetic reasons.
e. Waterfilled depressions created in dry land incidental to construction activity and pits or quarries excavated in dry land for the purpose of
obtaining fill, stone, aggregate, sand or gravel unless and until the construction or excavation operation is abandoned for a period of five (5) years
or more and the resulting body of water located in Cook County meets the definition of waters of Cook.
Waters Of Kane: Waters of the United States as defined in federal regulations promulgated under the CWA that are located in Kane County and
which are not defined as waters of DuPage, including:
a. All waters such as lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, wetlands, sloughs, wet meadows, or natural ponds.
b. All impoundments of waters not otherwise defined as waters of Kane under the definitions.
c. Tributaries of waters identified above.
d. Jurisdictional wetlands adjacent to waters identified above.
The presence of farmed wetlands shall be determined by the national resources conservation service (the "NRCS") of the U.S. department of
agriculture.
For clarification, water treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the CWA (other than cooling
ponds as defined in 40 CFR 123.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of Kane. It should also be noted that the following
waters are generally not considered to be waters of Kane. However, the administrator in a partial waiver community reserves the right on a case-bycase
basis to determine that a particular water body located in Kane County within these categories of waters is a water of Kane.
a. Drainage and irrigation ditches excavated on dry land.
b. Artificially irrigated areas that would revert to upland if the irrigation ceased.
c. Artificial lakes, ponds or wetlands created by excavating and/or diking dry land to collect and retain water and which are used exclusively for
such purposes as stormwater storage, stock watering, irrigation, settling basins or sediment traps.
d. Artificial bodies of water created by excavating and/or diking dry land to retain water for primarily aesthetic reasons.
e. Waterfilled depressions created in dry land incidental to construction activity and pits or quarries excavated in dry land for the purpose of
obtaining fill, stone, aggregate, sand or gravel unless and until the construction or excavation operation is abandoned for a period of five (5) years
or more and the resulting body of water located in Kane County meets the definition of waters of Kane.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 553/702
B. The following enumerated sections of the DuPage County regulations are amended with respect to property within DuPage, Cook and/or Kane County,
or where stated otherwise to apply only with respect to property within Cook and/or Kane County, to clarify and supplement the DuPage County
regulations as applied to said property:
Article X of the DuPage County regulations entitled "Flood Plain Management" is amended to add new section 15-82.G.8. as follows:
15-82.G.8. In addition to the foregoing requirements for development within the regulatory flood plain set forth in this section 15-133, a special use
permit therefor shall have been issued by the corporate authorities of the village of Bartlett in accordance with chapter 24 of the Bartlett building
code.
Section 15-85.E.5. of the DuPage County regulations entitled "Wetlands" is amended and supplemented as follows:
15-85.E.5. If the wetland is identified as a critical wetland in the DuPage wetland inventory, or is a jurisdictional wetland in Cook County or a
jurisdictional wetland for Kane County, confirmation of the critical status shall be completed through evaluation of sections 15-85.E.1. through 15-
95.E.4. above. If the wetland evaluation does not confirm a critical status and it is not a jurisdictional wetland in Cook County or Kane County, the
wetland shall be considered "regulatory" for purposes of this ordinance.
Section 15-86.C.1. of the DuPage County regulations is amended as follows:
15-86.C.1. The director or administrator in a complete waiver community, or the village engineer in a partial waiver community as to wetlands in
Cook County and as to wetlands in Kane County shall waive the requirement for completion of an alternatives analysis or to provide mitigation for
developments in the aggregate 0.10 acre or less direct impact to wetlands provided:
15-86.C.1.a. The wetland(s) is regulatory; and
15-86.C.1.b. None of the wetland(s) to be impacted is over 0.1 acres in size; and
15-86.C.1.c. The wetland(s) to be impacted are not jurisdictional under the USACE; and
15-86.C.1.d. The wetland(s) to be impacted are located entirely within the development's platted lot(s), and
15-86.C.1.e. There will be no indirect impacts to remaining wetland area(s), and
15-86-C.1.f. The wetland(s) to be impacted are not part of a wetland mitigation development, and
15-86-C.1.g. Is in line with the basic development purpose.
Section 15-86. of the DuPage County regulations is amended to add new paragraphs F and G as follows:
15-86.F. Notwithstanding the foregoing, with respect to development within or affecting jurisdictional wetlands, ponds, lakes, streams or rivers that
are in Cook County and/or Kane County, in lieu of approvals from the director or the administrator in a complete waiver community, the approval of
the USACE under a section 401 and/or 404 permit of the clean water act ("CWA") and section 10 of the rivers and harbors act, if applicable, and
by the administrator in a partial waiver community shall be required.
15-86.G. In addition to the foregoing requirements for development within or affecting critical wetlands and/or regulatory wetlands in DuPage
County, or jurisdictional wetlands in Cook and/or Kane County, in this article X, a special use permit therefor shall have been issued by the
corporate authorities of the village of Bartlett in accordance with chapter 24 of the Bartlett building code, as amended.
Section 15-88. of the DuPage County regulations is amended to add a new subsection R as follows:
15-88.R. With respect to proposed or actual developments in Cook County and/or Kane County to the extent the standards and mitigation
requirements in the plan may not address the property sought to be developed or technical guidance from DuPage County may not be available,
such standards and mitigation requirements as may be imposed by the village engineer, upon consultation with the village engineer in accordance
with USACE guidelines and CWA regulations.
Section 15-89. of the DuPage County regulations entitled "Wetland Banking" is amended to add a new paragraph 8 as follows:
15-89. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section 15-89 for development affecting wetlands, for jurisdictional wetlands located in
Cook County and/or Kane County, wetland banking for development impacts within critical and/or regulatory wetlands in DuPage County, or
jurisdictional wetlands in Cook and/or Kane County, may take place within an established wetland banking project approved by the oversight
committee, and upon such conditions as imposed by the corporate authorities, consistent with those imposed on developments in DuPage County,
as set forth in a special use permit issued by the corporate authorities authorizing development which impacts wetlands.
Article XII of the DuPage County regulations entitled "Buffers" is amended to add section 15-94.K. as follows:
15-94.K. The provisions of article XII shall also be applicable to waters of Cook and to waters of Kane, except that the term "jurisdictional
wetlands" shall be substituted for the term "critical wetlands" as used therein, and the term "non-wetland waters of DuPage" shall include non6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 554/702
wetland waters of Cook and non-wetland waters of Kane.
Section 15-97.B. of article XIII of the DuPage County regulations entitled "Fee-In-Lieu Programs" is amended to read as follows:
15-97.B. All developments in the village or within its planning jurisdiction located in DuPage County shall participate in DuPage County's fee in lieu
program, and developments in the village or within the village's planning jurisdiction located in Cook County or Kane County shall pay site run off
storage variance fee-in-lieu to the village based on the criteria or schedule set forth or referenced in section 15-97.B.1, post construction BMP feein-
lieu payments and wetland mitigation fee-in-lieu payments to the village subject to the restrictions set forth in article XIII.
Section 15-110. of the DuPage County regulations entitled "Additional Remedies For Special Flood Hazard Area" is amended to add the following at
the end of section 110.A.:
For purposes of this section 15-110, for properties lying in Cook County and/or for developments affecting or impacting waters of Cook that are
within the corporate limits of the village or within 11/2 miles thereof that are not within the corporate limits of any other municipality, the village of
Bartlett and the county of Cook, or either of them, may petition the circuit court of Cook County for an order to remove any unauthorized fill placed
in a special flood hazard area and to restore the subject property to its natural elevation(s) in order to lessen or avoid imminent threat to public
health, safety or welfare and damage to property resulting from the accumulation of run off of stormwater or flood water. For purposes of this
section 15-110, for properties lying in Kane County and/or for developments affecting or impacting waters of Kane that are within the corporate
limits of the village or within 11/2 miles thereof that are not within the corporate limits of any other municipality, the village of Bartlett and the county
of Kane, or either of them, may petition the circuit court of the 16th judicial circuit, Kane County for an order to remove any unauthorized fill placed
in a special flood hazard area and to restore the subject property to its natural elevation(s) in order to lessen or avoid imminent threat to public
health, safety or welfare and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or run off of stormwater or flood water.
(Ord. 2013-59, 7-23-2013)
11-8-2: WATERSHED PLANS; INTERIM WATERSHED PLANS:
Watershed plans or interim watershed plans for the west branch DuPage River watershed and the Fox River tributaries, prepared and periodically updated
by the respective committees for each such watershed to identify management projects and establish criteria for development therein, are hereby adopted
by the village of Bartlett. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in article 2 of the DuPage County regulations are expressly incorporated herein by this reference. For purposes of interpreting this
chapter only, if there is any conflict between the definitions set forth in this title and the definitions set forth in article 2 of the DuPage County regulations,
the latter definitions shall be controlling. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-4: SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS:
Applications for stormwater management permits for development in any special management area shall be submitted to the "director" (at DuPage
County) for review and certification of compliance with the provisions of the DuPage County regulations. After the director certifies the application for
development in such special management area, the village of Bartlett may issue the stormwater management permit if the application meets the more
stringent of the requirements of the DuPage County regulations or this title, as applicable. Development of special management areas outside DuPage
County shall be approved by the Illinois department of transportation, division of water resources, the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Illinois
environmental protection agency. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Structures and land uses existing as of the effective date hereof except when redeveloped; and
B. Proposed developments that are listed on the official list of exempt developments submitted by the village to DuPage County. (See table 1 of this
section.)
TABLE 1
LIST OF DEVELOPMENTS EXEMPT FROM THE DUPAGE COUNTY
STORMWATER ORDINANCE
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT RESOLUTION 91-92R
Amber Grove unit 1 Silvercrest unit 8
Amber Grove unit 2 Silvercrest unit 9
Amber Grove unit 3 Tallgrass unit 1
Eastpointe Estates (commercial portion only) Tallgrass unit 2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 555/702
Fairfax Commons unit 1 Tallgrass unit 3
Fairfax Commons unit 2 Woodland Hills unit 1
Fairfax Commons unit 3 Woodland Hills unit 2
Fairfax Commons unit 4 Woodland Hills unit 3
Fairfax Crossings unit 4 Woodland Hills unit 4
Fairfax Crossings unit 5 Woodland Hills unit 5
Orchards Of Bartlett unit 1 Woodland Hills unit 6
Orchards Of Bartlett unit 2 Woodland Hills unit 7
Silvercrest unit 1 Woodland Hills unit 8
Silvercrest unit 2 Woodland Hills unit 9
Silvercrest unit 3 Woodland Hills unit 10
Silvercrest unit 4 Woodland Hills unit 11
Silvercrest unit 5 Woodland Hills unit 12
Silvercrest unit 6
Silvercrest unit 7
(Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-6: OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
The public works director, the director of community development, and the assistant village administrator are hereby appointed and designated as the
oversight committee for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-8-7: ADMINISTRATOR:
The village engineer is hereby appointed and designated as the "administrator" for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-8: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS:
All subdivisions and PUDs shall be so designed that streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds are so located and laid out as to preserve and
utilize natural streams, channels and detention basins, including, whenever possible, locating the largest streams and floodplains within proposed public
lands.
A. Channel And/Or Waterway Straightening: Meandering channels and/or waterways shall not be straightened or changed.
B. Channel And/Or Waterway Locations: Proposed channels and/or waterways shall generally be located along the rear property lines of lots. All lots shall
have a usable rear yard not less than thirty feet (30') (measured from the rear line of the principal structure to the near edge of any waterway
easement) deep plus an easement of such width as may be required to accommodate a waterway adequate to carry stormwater at the 100-year rainfall
intensity. For purposes of this paragraph only that portion of a rear yard shall be deemed "usable" which has slopes not less than one percent (1%) nor
more than ten percent (10%).
The proposed easement shall be centered on the rear lot lines of the lots in any block or entirely within the rear yards of a single row of lots or parcels.
Slopes along the waterway shall be no steeper than:
Four to one (4:1) for continuous flow defined channels.
Five to one (5:1) for waterways which carry flows on an intermittent basis.
In each of the foregoing cases, a waterway easement at least twenty feet (20') wide (10 feet on each side of the lot lines on adjoining lots, or 20 feet on
a single lot if no usable easement exists on the adjoining lot) shall be provided and shown on the plat/plan. The easement shall be sufficient in width to
permit necessary channel maintenance and improvement work by the village or other public agency having the responsibility for maintaining the
floodway, and access of vehicles and equipment thereon. The instrument creating such an easement shall prohibit any regrading thereon and the
placement of any buildings, trees, fences or other structures thereon.
Poorly defined drainage channels or swales forming the natural drainage system may be relocated or eliminated and incorporated into the planned
system of storm sewers and/or open channels for a subdivision upon a showing that the system is adequate and can safely handle the floodwater
runoff following the 100-year rainfall intensity storm.
C. Within Block Drainage: At least one continuous easement shall be provided along all rear and side lot lines in each block to accommodate utility lines
and drainage. No person or entity shall regrade any portion of any property subject to a drainage easement without written permission from the village
engineer. No accessory buildings may be built or located on any such easement. Such utility drainage easement shall be at least ten feet (10') wide
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 556/702
(typically 5 feet on each adjoining lot). All lots shall be so graded as to provide positive surface drainage. If proper surface drainage cannot be
accomplished by grading, an underground storm sewer must be provided.
D. Storm Sewer Outfalls: Storm sewer outfalls shall be so designed that when the receiving stream is in full flood stage, the storm sewer will continue to
drain the service area at its design capacity.
E. Streets Designed As Channels: Grades and cross sections of streets shall be designed and constructed as to convey stormwater runoff in excess of the
5-year rainfall intensity. Streets shall be so designed and constructed as to carry a 100-year intensity rainfall at a depth no greater than six inches (6")
at the centerline of the street. The storm sewer system shall be so designed and constructed as to convey rainfalls of lesser intensity. See subsection
G of this section regarding ponded areas over inlet structures.
F. Curb And Gutter Requirements: All street pavements in subdivisions shall be provided with integral curbs and gutters. Drainage structures shall be
provided in the curbs and gutters to receive drainage for discharge through the storm sewer system.
In subdivisions with lot areas of one acre (43,560 square feet) or larger, curbs and gutters with drainage structures may be waived by the corporate
authorities upon a request by the developer. Storm sewers may also be waived by the corporate authorities where an adequate alternative stormwater
management system has been provided.
G. Temporary Storage In Streets: Temporary stormwater storage will be permitted in public streets to accommodate the 100-year rainfall intensity. Such
storage shall not exceed six inches (6") in depth at the street centerline.
H. Street Pavement Crowns: Street pavement crowns shall not be lower than the established 100-year high water elevation of any stream, floodwater
runoff channel or detention basin to which its stormwater runoff is tributary, or two feet (2') above in the case of arterial streets. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-9: STORM SEWER DESIGN STANDARDS:
All storm sewers within subdivisions and PUDs shall comply with the following minimum design standards:
A. Method Of Calculation: Minor stormwater systems shall be sized to convey runoff from the tributary watershed under fully developed conditions
consistent with the design requirements of the village of Bartlett.
1. ILLUDUS,
2. Rational method,
3. TR-55 (SCS method).
B. Minimum Coefficients: Minimum coefficients for each method shall be as follows:
1. ILLUDUS:
Residential districts by average lot size:
1/8 acre or less 90
1/4 acre 83
1/3 acre 81
1/2 acre 80
1 acre 79
2 acres 77
Multi-family residential, including townhouses 90
Commercial, business, office/research, industrial, institutional and public buildings 94
2. Rational method:
Single-family =1 acre C = 0.30*
Single-family < 1 acre C = 0.40*
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 557/702
Multiple-family (including townhouses) C = 0.45*
Commercial, business, office/research, industrial, institutional and public buildings C = 0.85*
*Precedent rainfall condition not considered.
3. TR-55 (SCS method) (same as ILLUDUS): Coefficients for all drainage areas will be reviewed by the village engineer at the preliminary plat/plan
stage. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
C. Minimum Intensities: The minimum intensity for the design of storm sewers and inlets shall be a ten (10) year rainfall intensity with an initial
concentration time of twenty (20) minutes for the rational method or its equivalent. All stormwater management system designs shall be routed through
the entire subdivision/PUD. (Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
D. Capacity Of Drainage Structure Frames And Grates: Calculations shall be provided as part of the final engineering plans to assure that drainage
structure grates have adequate capacity to accommodate the design flows at the designed intensity and runoff coefficients. The design calculations
shall be performed and reviewed in accordance with the civil engineering standard C-35 to check grate capacity. The formula used shall be:
Q = AC 2gh
Q = Calculated grate capacity (CFS)
A = Area of frame opening (square feet)
C = Entrance coefficient
(0.8 for rounded edges)
(0.6 for sharp edges)
g = 32.2
h = Depth of water allowed over grate (feet)
The head (h) for calculating grate capacity shall never be considered greater than six inches (6") above the street centerline. At no time shall the water
depth over the inlet in a yard or parking area be less than one foot (1') below the lowest opening in an adjoining building where the water may have access
to or flood such building. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-10: STORM SEWER, PIPE CULVERT, STRUCTURE STANDARDS AND TESTING:
Materials permitted for use as storm sewers, pipe culverts and related structures shall meet the following minimum standards for materials and size:
A. Storm Sewer Materials: Storm sewer materials may be either:
1. Reinforced concrete culvert, storm drain and sewer pipe conforming to article 740.03 of the current Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", or
2. Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) conforming to article 740.14 of the current Illinois department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction".
3. Ductile iron pipe conforming to ANSI/AWWA C 150/A21.50 and A21.51.
The applicable table in article 542.03 of the referenced specification for the two (2) stated materials shall control the use of such material.
B. Structure Materials: Manholes, catch basins, frames, grates, end sections and headwalls shall conform to the following minimum standards:
1. Manholes and catch basins conforming to section 602 shall have offset cones,
2. End sections conforming to section 542.07,
3. Frames and grates may be gray iron or ductile iron conforming to section 604,
4. Headwalls using a six (6) bag concrete mix conforming to section 542.07, all as found in the current Illinois department of transportation "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
C. Pipe Culvert Materials: Pipe culvert materials shall be reinforced concrete culvert pipe conforming to article 740.03 of the current Illinois department of
transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
D. Storm Sewer Manholes: Storm sewer manholes shall have a closed lid marked "STORM". (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 558/702
E. Testing Storm Sewer Systems: All storm sewers shall be closed circuit television inspected prior to acceptance of the sewers by the village. The sewer
shall be cleaned throughout and all obstructions removed prior to televising. High quality VHS videotape (or other approved medium) and a written
report of all television inspections shall be submitted to the village. The report shall indicate all sags, connections, leaks and defects. All defects and
corrective work required as the result of such inspection shall be performed by the developer. Upon completion thereof, the sewer shall be retelevised
and taped by the developer. (Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-8-11: MINIMUM SIZED STORM SEWERS:
All storm sewers shall be no less than twelve inches (12") in diameter regardless of the size of area being served, except when the storm sewer is used as
a restrictor to control discharge from a detention/retention facility. Pipes used as underdrains shall be perforated pipes constructed with an open graded
stone backfill from a point four inches (4") below the invert of the underdrain to a point not less than six inches (6") from the surface of the ground (see
section 11-8-16 of this chapter on underdrains for more detailed information). (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-12: MINIMUM SIZED RESTRICTORS:
Restrictors for the control of release rates from detention/retention facilities in the various counties shall be as follows:
A. DuPage County: The restrictor shall be sized to restrict the discharge rate to conform to subsection 11-8-14B2 of this chapter.
B. Cook County: The restrictor shall be sized to restrict the discharge rate to conform to subsection 11-8-14B2 of this chapter, but in no case shall the
restrictor be less than four inches (4") in diameter.
C. Kane County: The restrictor shall be sized to restrict the discharge rate to conform to subsection 11-8-14B2 of this chapter, but in no case shall the
restrictor be less than four inches (4") in diameter. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-13: LOCATION OF STORM SEWER STRUCTURES:
Structures receiving stormwater shall be located in accordance with the following minimum standards. Quantities of runoff, slope of surface areas and
general configuration of drainage patterns may require additional structures.
A. Drainage structures in streets shall be located at all low points and at such other locations as may be required by the street gradient and area to be
served. Structures shall be so placed that in no case shall water flow exceed six hundred feet (600') for streets having a slope of three percent (3%) or
less, or four hundred feet (400') for streets having a slope greater than three percent (3%). Structures which are not located at low points shall be
equipped with vaned grates.
B. Drainage structures in parking or nongrassed areas shall be located so that stormwater runoff shall not service an area greater than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. Modifications to this requirement may be allowed depending on the configuration of the parking facility.
C. Drainage structures in open space grassed areas shall be so located in swales as to capture the stormwater runoff. Such structures shall be so located
in nonpaved areas that stormwater runoff will not exceed two hundred feet (200') for slopes of one percent (1%) to three percent (3%), or not more than
four hundred feet (400') for slopes in excess of three percent (3%).
D. Drainage structures in residential rear yard areas shall be so located within easements on or adjoining the rear lot lines of lots that stormwater runoff will
be intercepted by such drainage structures. Drainage structure locations shall meet the following criteria:
1. For rear lot line grades equal to or greater than one percent (1%) but less than or equal to 2.5 percent, a drainage structure shall be available on
every lot within twenty five feet (25') of one of its rear lot corners.
2. For rear lot line grades greater than 2.5 percent, drainage structures shall be so located that stormwater runoff will not be carried more than three
hundred feet (300') along such rear lot lines (or an adjoining easement) before being intercepted by a drainage structure.
Curb and gutter sections of a street shall be considered the same as a drainage structure regarding the interception of stormwater runoff. The distance
that stormwater runoff must flow in the gutter section is not considered as part of the maximum distance between drainage structures for rear lot line
drainage configurations.
Drainage structures shall be so located as to discourage rear to front lot drainage configurations. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-14: STORMWATER DETENTION:
Stormwater detention shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Areas Which Require Detention: Stormwater runoff from all developments shall comply with the site runoff storage requirements provided in section 15-
114 of the DuPage County regulations in which the parcels being developed meet or exceed the requirements of section 15-111.2.a through d of the
DuPage County regulations except as modified herein.
1. Replacement Language: Replace section 15-111.2.c of DuPage County regulations with: "All developments shall comply with the site runoff storage
requirements provided in section 15-114 of the DuPage County regulations in which the parcel(s) being developed total one acre or greater for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 559/702
multiple family and non-residential developments, and the new development only disturbs, either individually or in the aggregate after February 15,
1992, more than 25,000 square feet. If 25,000 or less square feet of the parcel(s) area is disturbed, then detention is not required".
2. Existing Detention Facilities: In the event that a developed area is serviced by an existing detention facility, the requirements for on site detention
may be waived by the corporate authorities upon payment of any fees that may be assessed against such developed area.
3. Term Defined: "Developed area" shall mean the total area of land owned or under the control of the subdivider/developer unless the
subdivider/developer can demonstrate that designated portions of such land will never be developed.
B. Rainfall Frequency: Detention requirements shall be calculated on the basis of a 100-year frequency rainfall as defined by the Illinois state water survey
bulletin 70. The detention volume required shall be equal to the runoff for a 100-year frequency rainfall, for the subdivision/PUD under consideration
and tributary to the reservoir, less the allowed discharge volume at the approved release rate.
1. Detention Volumes: Detention volumes shall be calculated considering precedent rainfall conditions.
2. DuPage County Developments: If no release rate, or a greater release rate than identified below, is specified in the applicable sections 15-119 and
15-122 of the DuPage County regulations, then sufficient storage shall be provided such that the probability of the postdevelopment release rate
exceeding 0.1 cfs/acre of development shall be less than one percent (1.0%) per year.
3. Cook And Kane County Developments: Sufficient storage shall be provided such that the probability of the postdevelopment release rate exceeding
0.1 cfs/acre of development, or that amount allowed to be discharged with a minimum four inch (4") diameter restrictor (with 4 feet of ponding), shall
be less than one percent (1.0%) per year.
Design runoff volumes for detention shall be calculated using the continuous event hydrograph method.
C. Method Of Detention Volume Calculations: Detention volume calculations shall be performed using one of the following methods for the proposed
project site in its developed state. Calculation methods are listed in order of preference and acceptability.
The event hydrograph methods used to calculate design runoff volumes must be either HEC-1 SCS runoff method with outlet routing option, TR-20
with outlet control routing option, or TR-55 tabular method. Event methods shall incorporate the following assumptions:
1. Antecedent moisture condition equals 2; and
2. Huff of SCS type II rainfall distribution; and
3. Twenty four (24) hour duration storm with a one percent (1.0%) probability of occurrence in any one year as specified by Illinois state water survey
bulletin 70 northeast sectional rainfall statistics.
In situations where a parcel is phased for development, the detention calculations shall be made for the entire parcel and not on each phase
separately. However, the engineering plans shall provide for detention for the first phase and each succeeding phase as it will be constructed. The
centralization of detention facilities in large open space areas such as park district sites, forest preserve sites, wetlands, common areas or other
municipal properties shall be encouraged, subject to the approval of the governmental entity having control thereof.
D. Bypass Flows: Stormwater management systems shall have adequate capacity to convey the flow from all upstream areas, whether developed or
undeveloped, for a 100-year rainfall intensity. The bypass flow rate shall be computed utilizing a runoff coefficient as approved by the village engineer,
but not less than 0.35 (rational method) or C = 77, TR 20, TR 55 or ILLUDUS methods. Allowances will be made for upstream detention when such
upstream detention and release rates have previously been approved by the village or are part of a village approved comprehensive plan. (Ord. 95-24,
4-4-1995)
11-8-15: DETENTION BASIN CONSTRUCTION:
Detention basins may be constructed adjacent to existing channels as separate basins or lakes, provided there is in place an adequate bypass channel for
such existing channel. Detention basins shall not be permitted directly "on line" with existing channels, creeks or streams. No detention shall be permitted
within any front or side yard, or the usable portion of a rear yard that is defined as being within thirty feet (30') of the residence/attached garage structure.
A. Release Structures: Release structures for basins more than two feet (2') deep shall be designed and constructed with sloped bar screens or grates
with access thereto so debris can be removed easily during the rain event. For basins less than two feet (2') deep with restrictor pipes twelve inches
(12") or less in diameter, a manhole shall be required on each end of the restrictor pipe so that it can be unplugged safely.
B. Detention Basin Bottom: Detention basins may be constructed with either a wet or dry bottom facility or as a wetland. Requirements for each type of
facility are as follows:
1. Dry bottom detention facilities shall be constructed with slopes not less than one percent (1%) and side slopes no steeper than four feet (4')
horizontal to one foot (1') vertical.
Underdrain systems shall be required on all dry bottom basins having a bottom slope of less than two percent (2%). The underdrain pipes shall be
perforated pipe no less than four inches (4") in diameter. The pipe shall be set in a trench at least two (2) pipe diameters wide with stone under the
pipe to a depth of at least one-half (1/2) the pipe diameter. Stones shall extend over the pipe no less than one pipe diameter with six inches (6") of
topsoil over the trench. Pipe material shall be in conformance with section 11-8-16 of this chapter.
2. Wet bottom detention facilities shall be not less than 4.0 acres in area and shall be permitted only where a park district, forest preserve district, the
village or other governmental entity agrees to assume maintenance responsibility thereof. A wet bottom detention facility shall have no less than
twenty five percent (25%) of its surface area at least ten feet (10') deep with the remaining portion being no less than five feet (5') deep. The
embankment slopes, from the normal water level down, shall be no less than three feet (3') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical and embankment
slopes above the normal water level shall be no less than four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical. Embankment protection shall be required
along the normal water line to reduce erosion and stabilize the embankment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 560/702
In all cases where another agency or public body (e.g., the Bartlett park district) will have future control over a detention facility, its standards and
rules shall supersede those set forth herein unless the standards herein are more restrictive.
In the event that existing ponds or lakes are to be used as wet bottom detention facilities, the requirements stated above will not be applicable. In the
event that any existing pond or lake is to be expanded to meet stormwater detention requirements, the DuPage County regulations for special
management areas shall be applicable.
The inlet and outlet structures from the pond or lake shall be protected with grating and rails for safety enhancement.
Wet bottom detention areas which do not have a continuous fresh water flow shall be treated either mechanically or chemically to control algae
growth.
3. Wetland detention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the DuPage County regulations.
C. Drain Down Time: All grassed areas of wet or dry bottom detention basins shall be so designed as to drain down within forty eight (48) hours after such
basins are filled to the 100-year flood level.
Calculations shall be submitted to show the drain down time. In the event that a detention basin (dry bottom, wet bottom or wetland area) discharges
directly into a receiving stream, or is influenced by the backwater of a receiving stream, data regarding the hydraulics on the receiving stream or its
impact on the drain down time of the detention facility shall be provided by the subdivider/developer. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-8-16: UNDERDRAINS:
Underdrains, when required on a site, shall meet the minimum requirements of the following specifications:
A. Size: Underdrains shall be not less than four inches (4") nor more than ten inches (10") in diameter.
B. Slope: Since it is the intent of the underdrain to act as a dewatering device, the minimum slope for an underdrain system is 0.1 percent. No maximum
slope is specified.
C. Trench: The trench depth shall extend to a minimum depth of one-half (1/2) the pipe diameter below the invert of the pipe. The trench width shall be two
(2) times the nominal pipe diameter and the minimum depth of the trench shall be eighteen inches (18") from the top of the pipe to the finished grade.
The trench shall be filled with an open graded aggregate material to a depth permitting a six inch (6") topsoil cover at finished grade. Prior to placing of
the aggregate in the trench a filter fabric shall be placed in the perimeter of the trench.
D. Backfill Aggregate: The aggregate used in the underdrain trench shall be a graded material with one hundred percent (100%) passing the five-eighths
inch (5/8") sieve, ninety percent (90%) (.10%) passing the one-half inch (1/2") sieve, eighty percent (80%) (.10%) passing the three-eighths inch (3/8")
sieve, thirty five percent (35%) (.15%) passing the no. 4 sieve, and three percent (3%) (.3%) passing the no. 16 sieve.
E. Trench Fabric: The trench shall be lined with an open fabric suitable for burial in the ground, permitting water to pass through while restricting soil
particles from entering the aggregate backfill. Trench fabric shall meet the standard detail shown in section 11-12-8, "Appendix H; Standard Details For
Public Improvements", of this title. The trench fabric shall be wrapped over the top of the backfill aggregate.
F. Underdrain Pipe Materials: Underdrain pipe materials shall be constructed of one of the following permitted materials:
1. Perforated polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe conforming to article 740.14 of the current Illinois department of transportation's "Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction".
2. Corrugated metal pipe conforming to article 706.01 of the current Illinois department of transportation's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction". (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
Chapter 9
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND GUARANTEES, CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE INSPECTIONS, ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND
MAINTENANCE PERIOD
11-9-1: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
The site grading and erosion control, water distribution system, sanitary sewer system, stormwater management system, street system, streetlights,
sidewalks, bicycle paths, driveway approaches, landscaping and tree planting ("public improvements") for every subdivision/PUD shall be constructed in
strict accordance with the approved engineering plans and specifications thereof, and the standards set forth in chapters 6, 7 and 8 of this title and all of
their subsections. The public improvements shall be so maintained by the subdivider/developer for a minimum period of fifteen (15) months and a
maximum period of twenty four (24) months after the village engineer has certified completion of the public improvements for the subdivision/PUD as to
comply with maintenance requirements set forth in this section. Security shall be posted to guarantee the completion of and payment for the public
improvements, and the procedures for their acceptance by the village are hereinafter set forth. Security shall be posted to guaranty maintenance and
payment for repairs to the public improvements in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 561/702
11-9-2: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
The public improvements for all subdivisions and PUDs shall be constructed in a good and workmanlike manner in strict accordance with the standards set
forth in chapters 6, 7 and 8 of this title and all of their subsections, as they may be amended from time to time, and the approved final engineering plans
and specifications thereof. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-9-3: GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION, PAYMENT AND CONSTRUCTION:
The president and board of trustees will not cause the final plat/plan of any subdivision/PUD to be signed and recorded unless and until the
subdivider/developer and the owner have: a) satisfied all the terms and conditions of the ordinance approving of the preliminary plat; b) executed and
delivered to the village clerk a public improvement completion agreement and have tendered cash or filed with the village clerk a performance and
payment bond or letter of credit to guarantee that all required public improvements, including, but not limited to, site grading and erosion control, water
distribution system, sanitary sewer system, stormwater management system, street system, streetlights, sidewalks, bicycle paths, driveway approaches,
landscaping and tree planting, will be completed in a good and workmanlike manner with materials of good quality in strict accordance with the
engineering plans and specifications (the "plans") for the public improvements approved by the village engineer within a reasonable time (the "time limits")
to be determined by the subdivider/developer with the approval of the president and board of trustees, on the recommendation of the village engineer, and
to further guarantee that the public improvements will be fully paid for and properly maintained in accordance with the requirements of this title; and c)
complied with all of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
A. To guarantee that the public improvements will be completed within the time limits, fully paid for and properly maintained, the owner(s) of property to be
subdivided (the "owners") and the developer of the subdivision or PUD (the "developer") (sometimes collectively referred to herein and throughout as
the "subdivider/developer"), shall file with the village:
1. A public improvements completion agreement in the form appended hereto in section 11-12-6 of this title as appendix F-1; and
2. One of the following forms of guaranty of performance, maintenance and payment (the "construction security") in an amount equal to: a) one
hundred fifteen percent (115%) (adjusted per subsection A4 of this section) of the estimated construction cost of the public improvements, as
approved by the village engineer; or b) one hundred ten percent (110%) of the bid amount for the public improvements based on executed contracts
for all of the public improvements on file with the village clerk:
a. 1) A subdivision performance bond in form appended hereto in section 11-12-6 of this title as appendix F-2; and 2) a subdivision labor and material
payment bond in form appended hereto in section 11-12-6 of this title as appendix F-3, each cosigned by a surety licensed by the Illinois
department of insurance to issue and execute surety bonds, and which has a financial strength rating ("FSR") of at least A- as rated by A.M. Best
Company, Inc., Moody's Investor Service, Standard & Poor's Corporation, or similar rating agency.
b. A standby letter of credit (performance and payment) issued by a bank or financial institution with assets of at least fifty million dollars
($50,000,000.00), and a capital asset ratio of at least six percent (6%), which is insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation or otherwise
federally insured, and which is governed by Illinois law and is subject to the international standby practices 1998 (ISP 98) (international chamber of
commerce publication no. 590), in the form appended hereto in section 11-12-6 of this title as appendix F-4.
c. Cash bond subject to the terms of an irrevocable cash deposit agreement in form appended hereto in section 11-12-6 of this title as appendix F-5.
Any deviations from the form of the subdivision performance bond, subdivision labor and material payment bond, standby letter of credit
(performance and payment) and/or irrevocable cash deposit agreement (sometimes collectively or individually referred to as the "construction
security") must be approved by the village attorney and it shall be the developer/subdivider's obligation to cause the bank or financial institution
from which it intends to furnish a letter of credit, if applicable, to furnish a current financial statement to the village so that the village treasurer is
able to determine whether the issuer meets the minimum standards of subsection A2b of this section.
3. Cost estimates for all of the public improvement work shall be prepared by the developer's engineer and submitted to the village engineer for
approval not less than thirty (30) days prior to a request for execution of a plat by the village. The village engineer shall review the estimates of the
cost to install and construct the public improvements by the developer's engineer, and if he determines said estimate is reasonable, he shall so
advise the developer or the developer's engineer. If he determines the estimates are deficient or otherwise unacceptable, the village engineer shall
so notify the developer or the developer's engineer. The subdivider/developer shall submit construction security in an amount equal to: a) not less
than one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the reasonably estimated cost of the public improvements approved by the village engineer plus such
additional amount as may be required under the following paragraph; or b) for public improvements that will take more than one year to complete, if
the public improvements have been bid separately from other private improvement work and are under separate contracts from any private
improvement work, then the subdivider/developer may alternatively elect to submit construction security equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of
the bid amount for the public improvement work based on copies of executed contracts for all of the public improvement work that have been
provided by the subdivider/developer and filed with the village clerk.
4. In the event the amount of the construction security is based on the developer's engineer's estimate of the cost of the public improvements rather
than the bid amount, if the scheduled completion date for any of the public improvements is more than one year after the date on which any
subdivision performance bond and subdivision payment bond (collectively, the "performance and payment bonds"), the standby letter of credit
(performance and payment) sometimes referred to as the "performance and payment letter of credit", or the cash bond is issued, the amount of such
construction security shall be increased by 1.25 percent for each month or fraction thereof by which such scheduled completion date exceeds one
year to allow for estimated construction cost increases and repairs to partially completed improvements, up to a maximum of one hundred fifty
percent (150%) of the estimated cost of the public improvements approved by the village engineer. For example, if parkway and open space
restoration is not scheduled for completion until two (2) years and six (6) months after the security deposit is made, the security shall be in an amount
equal to 137.5 percent of the estimated construction cost of parkway and open space restoration and one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the
estimated construction cost of the other public improvements, assuming the other public improvements are reasonably estimated to be completed
within one year. (Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
B. The village treasurer shall maintain a complete record of each cash deposit, bond or letter of credit established to guarantee completion of public
improvements, the name of the subdivision, the estimated cost of the public improvements, the scheduled completion dates and the date on which any
bond or letter of credit expires. The village treasurer shall report quarterly to the village administrator on the status of each such cash deposit,
completion bond and letter of credit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 562/702
C. The time limits may be extended up to one year by the village administrator upon the recommendation of the village engineer and the director of public
works, for good cause shown, provided the security shall be extended to cover the new completion date and adjusted for estimated increased costs.
The time limits may be extended beyond one year by the corporate authorities, in its sole discretion, provided the security shall be extended to cover
the new completion date and adjusted for increased costs.
D. Upon receipt of the notice of expiration of any letter of credit to the village treasurer, the village engineer shall issue a written status report to the village
treasurer indicating which, if any, of the public improvements are not complete, and either recommend the security be: 1) extended, and if extended,
whether the amount of the security must be increased to cover the incomplete work, or 2) collected such: a) that the cash deposit be forfeited, b) the
letter of credit drawn upon, or c) claim to be made on the bond, to cover the estimated cost of the incomplete work plus a sum equal to fifteen percent
(15%) of the engineer's original estimate of cost to satisfy the subdivider/developer's maintenance security obligation. In the event the
subdivider/developer fails to renew and/or extend the letter of credit upon request to do so, the village treasurer shall draw the entire amount available
under such letter of credit or make a claim on the performance labor and material payment bond before the time limits for filing suit on the said bond.
The village treasurer shall maintain the proceeds of any forfeited cash deposit, drawn on a letter of credit or monies paid by a surety bond company in
a separate fund to be used solely for payment of the cost of completion of the public improvements for that subdivision/PUD, including engineering fees
and any legal expenses incurred in connection with obtaining the proceeds of the letter of credit or bond.
E. If an engineer's estimate of cost is more than six (6) months old at the time the plat is recorded, a revised estimate of cost shall be provided, reviewed
and approved by the village engineer at the subdivider's/developer's expense. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
F. The subdivider/developer may request reduction in the balance of the construction security upon completion of each eligible category of public
improvement. The reduction will be up to ninety percent (90%) of the original estimated amount for each eligible category, but in no event shall any
reduction or series of reductions reduce the remaining balance of the construction security to less than one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the amount
certified by the developer's engineer of record for the subdivision or PUD, or by another licensed professional engineer familiar with the development,
as to the value of the remaining public improvement work, as confirmed by the village engineer. Also an additional fifteen percent (15%) of the original
approved estimate of the cost of construction of the public improvements shall be retained until the public improvements have been accepted by the
corporate authorities of the village and the maintenance guaranty as required under section 11-9-9 of this chapter has been posted with the village
clerk. Specific information regarding security reductions is available through the village engineer. (Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
11-9-4: PERMITS REQUIRED:
None of the work specified in this section shall be performed on any portion of the site of a subdivision/PUD until the following special permits thereof have
been issued by the village:
Early earthwork permit, if applicable,
Site development permit,
Demolition permit, if applicable,
Stormwater management permit, if applicable (see section 11-8-4 of this title). (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
A. Early Earthwork Permit: An early earthwork permit may be issued by the village only after all of the items listed in the early earthwork checklist have
been completed (see section 11-12-5 of this title, appendix E-1), the subdivider/developer has executed a hold harmless agreement for early
earthworks (see section 11-12-5 of this title, appendix E-2), and has posted a cash bond, performance bond and labor and material payment bond, or a
standby letter of credit in form approved by the village attorney, and if other than a cash bond, issued by a surety, bank or financial institution meeting
the minimum requirements to issue the applicable construction security set forth in subsection 11-9-3A2a or A2b of this chapter, in an amount sufficient
to perform said earthwork and to completely restore the property to its original condition if the project is not subsequently approved by the village, and a
motion approving the early earthwork request has been passed by the corporate authorities.
B. Site Development Permit: A site development permit may be issued by the village only after all of the items listed in the site development permit
checklist have been completed (see section 11-12-5 of this title, appendix E-3), and an ordinance approving the final subdivision plat/PUD plan has
been passed by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
C. Demolition Permits: Prior to the demolition of any structure on the land being improved as part of a subdivision/PUD, the subdivider/developer shall
apply for and secure a demolition permit in accordance with title 9, chapter 2 and sections 9-3-7 and 9-3-8 of the Bartlett municipal code. Permit
applications and procedures shall be as stated therein. Demolition permits shall also be required for abandoning private wells and septic systems after
presentation of a permit or other authorization from the department of public health or other agency having jurisdiction in the county in which the private
well or septic system is located. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-9-5: INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
The public improvements shall be subject to inspection by the village engineer both during the course of construction and after construction is completed.
The village engineer shall have authority over construction, materials, methods of construction and workmanship to ensure compliance with this title and
the plans. The subdivider/developer shall provide for reasonable tests and proof of quality of materials as reasonably requested by the village engineer.
The village engineer may require that work be suspended for due cause which shall include adverse weather conditions, questionable materials or
methods of construction or workmanship, or failure to adhere to this title or the plans.
A. Notification: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider/developer or its general contractor to notify the village engineer when work is to be started and
to request inspections. The initial notification that a particular improvement is to be started shall be in writing and every request for an inspection must
be received by the village engineer at least seventy two (72) hours in advance of the time that the requested inspection is to begin.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 563/702
B. Subdivider/Developer Responsible: Failure of any village employee, inspector, agent or official to detect construction work or materials which fail to
meet the requirements of this title and the plans, or either of them, shall in no way relieve the subdivider/developer of full responsibility for adherence
by it and all contractors and material suppliers to this title and the plans nor for failure to adhere to high standards of materials, methods and
workmanship.
C. Inspection And Approval: When all of the public improvements, including the public improvements of a separate phase or unit are completed in their
entirety, the developer/subdivider must formally request the village engineer in writing to certify completion of said public improvements. Upon receipt of
the letter of request, the village engineer, in conjunction with the village director of public works, will schedule a final inspection to take place as soon as
reasonably possible after receipt of this letter. Due to the inability to determine whether parkway trees are living during winter months, and the inability
to conduct certain other inspections when snow is on the ground, the village engineer will not certify completion or recommend acceptance by the
corporate authorities between November 1 and June 1. All deficient public improvements which do not totally conform to this title and the plans will be
put on a written punch list (the "construction punch list"). The construction punch list will be forwarded to the developer/subdivider for processing. When
the developer/subdivider has corrected the deficiencies on the construction punch list, the developer/subdivider shall request a second final inspection
of the village engineer. Scheduling of a second inspection shall be the same as for the final inspection. If the length of time between the initial final
inspection and the second final inspection is greater than four (4) months, or if the noted deficiencies have not been corrected at the time the second
final inspection is made, the request for certification of acceptance may be canceled by the village engineer. If canceled, a second request letter will be
required, and said certification will be subject to the following additional requirements:
1. The developer/subdivider shall be required to pay all costs incurred by the persons conducting the inspection, including, but not limited to, village
staff.
2. The construction punch list recorded during the initial final inspection will be voided and a complete reinspection will be required.
Neither acceptance or certification of completion by the village engineer or acceptance by any employee, inspector, agent or official of the village, nor
maintenance of the public improvements by the village shall be deemed acceptance by the village. No public improvements shall be accepted or
deemed to be accepted until the president and board of trustees enact an ordinance accepting such public improvements on the written
recommendation of the village engineer upon satisfaction of the conditions set forth in section 11-9-8 of this chapter.
D. Barricades Required: Once home construction activities have started, the subdivider/developer shall have on the project site at all times a minimum of
one dozen (12) type 2 barricades with lights, which can be erected as needed during repair activities to curb, pavement, sidewalk or other public
improvement, to protect the residents in the subdivision/PUD. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-9-6: PROTECTION AND REPAIR OF EXISTING PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider/developer and its contractors, subcontractors and material suppliers shall be jointly and severally responsible for protecting the existing
public improvements in the subdivision/PUD against damage resulting from their construction activities in the subdivision/PUD and assuring the village that
such existing public improvements and the property of the village are not damaged or rendered less useful or unsightly as a result of such construction
activities. This provision is intended to include any and all damages to, and any nuisance created upon, all public lands, improvements and landscaping of
the village or other governmental entities and public agencies; damage to existing streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, driveway approaches and
parkways, by the passage thereover of equipment or trucks, or by excavation for any purpose; the spilling or tracking of earth, sand or rock onto existing
streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or parkways; the erosion by stormwater of earth, gravel, sand or other debris onto streets, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters, drainage swales, manholes, valve vaults, inlets or catch basins; or the damage of water mains, sanitary sewer, culverts or storm sewers. To
reduce or localize the possibility of damage to streets by heavy trucks, the subdivider/developer shall cause its contractors, subcontractors and material
suppliers to follow instructions of the director of public works as to which streets may be used for access to the subdivision/PUD by their equipment and
trucks and the subdivider/developer shall be absolutely responsible for the enforcement of such instructions upon its contractors, subcontractors and their
suppliers. Where deemed advisable, the president and board of trustees, upon the recommendation of the director of public works, shall require, either
prior to commencement of construction or after construction is in progress, that the subdivider/developer post additional security in the form of a cash
bond, performance and payment bond or a letter of credit to guarantee the repair of any damages or abatement of any nuisance, caused, suffered or
permitted by the subdivider/developer, its contractors or material suppliers. Where the need for such assurance becomes apparent after construction is in
progress, the president and board of trustees, upon the recommendation of the director of public works, shall order construction discontinued until such
security has been posted. The village may draw upon such cash bond, performance and payment bond or letter of credit to pay for any expenses that
have been or may be incurred by the village for cleaning its streets, catch basins and sewers, regrading as landscaping drainage swales, and repairing
any damages to its public improvements. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-9-7: CONCLUSION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION:
The completion date of the public improvements shall be the first day of the next month following completion of the public improvements and all punch list
work certified by the village engineer based on the village engineer's determination that all of the conditions set forth in section 11-9-8 of this chapter have
been satisfied (the "completion date"). (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-9-8: ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURE FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Public improvements shall be accepted only by the enactment of an ordinance by the president and board of trustees upon the recommendation of the
village engineer. Such recommendation shall be contingent upon the following conditions being satisfied:
A. All of the public improvements shall have been completed in a good and workmanlike manner using materials of good quality and shall be maintained in
good repair by the subdivider/developer in accordance with the standards and requirements of this title as of a date certain, and no component part of
the public improvements shall be accepted until all of the component parts of the public improvements throughout the subdivision/PUD have been
completed in accordance with the plans thereof, and this title, and maintained by the subdivider/developer.
B. The developer/subdivider shall have furnished to the village engineer a sworn contractor's statement from each prime contractor with whom it
contracted for the construction, installation, repair and maintenance, and a final waiver of lien from every person and entity that furnished labor and/or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 564/702
material in connection with the public improvements, including final waivers from all subcontractors and material suppliers shown on first tier
subcontractor's waivers to assure the village of protection against mechanic's lien claims through the completion date.
C. Where required by this title, or reasonably deemed necessary by the village engineer, test reports indicating compliance with this title and the plans
must have been furnished to the village engineer.
D. The village attorney shall have given a written report to the corporate authorities that the developer/subdivider or owner, as the case may be, has or
have made all necessary conveyances and said village attorney has approved of the form of the maintenance guaranty posted by the
developer/subdivider.
E. The village clerk shall have acknowledged in writing her receipt of the original maintenance guaranty in form as approved by the village attorney.
F. A bill of sale, in form approved by the village attorney, transferring title of the public improvements to the village, shall have been delivered to the village
clerk.
G. Submit to the village engineer one reproducible Mylar set and two (2) sets of prints of the record drawings. The record drawings shall include service
location information for sanitary sewer and water for each lot, reflect all field changes regarding location and elevation for public improvements.
H. All sanitary sewers must be clean; must have been televised and the videotape thereof turned over to the village for its records; and must have passed
the required tests. All sanitary sewer and storm sewer manholes must be watertight and clean. All catch basins, inlets and storm sewer lines must be
free of dirt and debris. No manholes, valve vault frames and drainage structure frames located within roadways may protrude above the roadway
surface, but must be even with, or no more than one-half inch (1/2") below the roadway surface. A full stand of grass shall have been established on all
parkways and drainage swales. All dead parkway trees shall have been replaced. All domestic "buffalo" boxes shall have been adjusted to proper
grade, located and keyed by village public works personnel. All structurally cracked sidewalks shall have been replaced. Variations in roadway surfaces
shall not be greater than one-fourth inch (1/4") in ten feet (10') as checked using a ten foot (10') long straight edge in each wheel lane. All roadway
surface and base course thicknesses must be within substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications. The village shall have received
a set of "record drawings" showing the locations of all water and sanitary sewer service connections. All streetlights must provide the minimum light
levels specified in the lighting standards of this title. All failures must have been repaired and all defects corrected. The public improvements must have
been constructed in substantial compliance with the plans. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-9-9: GUARANTEE FOR MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider/developer shall post adequate security to guaranty the maintenance of the public improvements and every component part of the public
improvements in an acceptable condition for the maintenance period and to guaranty payment for all maintenance work. To guaranty that the public
improvements will be maintained, and any deficient or damaged public improvements discovered during the maintenance period are repaired, and to
guaranty payments for all labor and/or material in connection with any such maintenance, repair or replacement work discovered and as to which the
village notifies the developer during the maintenance period, the subdivider/developer shall file with the village clerk one of the following forms of security
to guaranty said obligations (the "maintenance guaranty") in an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the engineer's original estimate of construction
cost of the public improvements as approved by the village engineer, or if applicable, the total bid amount as determined by the amount of the security
originally posted with the village:
A. A maintenance bond cosigned by a surety licensed and authorized by the Illinois department of insurance to issue and execute surety bonds and which
surety company shall have a financial strength rating ("FSR") of at least an A- as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc., Moody's Investor Service,
Standard & Poor's Corporation, or similar rating agency in the form appended hereto in section 11-12-6 of this title as appendix F-6.
B. A standby letter of credit (maintenance) issued by a federally insured financial institution with assets of at least fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00) and
a capital asset ratio of at least six percent (6%), which shall be governed by Illinois law and shall be subject to the international standby practices 1998
(ISP 98) (international chamber of commerce publication no. 590), in the form appended hereto in section 11-12-6 of this title as appendix F-7.
C. Cash bond subject to the terms of an irrevocable cash deposit agreement in the form appended hereto in section 11-12-6 of this title as appendix F-5.
(Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
11-9-10: RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE:
The subdivider/developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all of the public improvements for its subdivision/PUD for the maintenance period,
and for the payment of all costs associated therewith.
A. The subdivider/developer shall be responsible for protecting the public improvements from any damage resulting from the subsequent construction
activities of its own contractors and subcontractors, and the construction activities of builders who purchase lots in the subdivision/PUD.
B. The subdivider/developer's maintenance responsibilities and obligations shall include, but are not limited to: 1) maintaining the public improvements, 2)
repairing any damage to the public improvements caused by the developer, its agents, servants, employees or its successors and assigns, or by any
contractor hired by the subdivider/developer, its agents, servants, employees, successors or assigns, or any subcontractor hired by such contractor, 3)
repairing or replacing any defective workmanship or material in the public improvements, 4) making good and protecting the village against the results
of any defective workmanship or materials appearing to have been incorporated in any part of the public improvements which shall have appeared or
been discovered within the maintenance period, and 5) paying for the cost of all such maintenance work. In the event that any such public
improvements are damaged, the burden shall be on the subdivider/developer to show that such damage was not caused by the subdivider/developer,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 565/702
its agents, servants, employees, successors or assigns, or by any contractor hired by the subdivider/developer, its agents, servants, employees,
successors or assigns, or any subcontractor hired by such contractor.
C. During such maintenance period, the village will provide its customary street sweeping and snowplowing services, and enforce its vehicle code, on the
public streets of a subdivision or PUD, but any and all other maintenance of the public improvements thereof shall be performed by the
subdivider/developer.
D. The maintenance period shall commence on the completion date as certified by the village engineer and continue for a minimum of fifteen (15) months
and a maximum of twenty four (24) months. The length of the maintenance period shall be established by the village engineer such that the expiration
date of the maintenance period occurs between June 1 and November 1. This schedule eliminates expiration during the winter months and allows
inspections and repairs to be made during favorable weather conditions. Notwithstanding the length of the maintenance period, the maintenance
guarantee shall in all cases be for twenty four (24) months. Approximately ninety (90) days before the expiration of the maintenance period, the village
engineer and village director of public works, or their designees, shall conduct a maintenance inspection. In the event said inspection reveals any
deficiencies in the public improvements, said deficiencies will be inventoried and placed on a maintenance punch list which the village engineer will
forward to the developer/subdivider to remedy. The village engineer shall also prepare an estimate of the approximate cost to correct all such
deficiencies on the maintenance punch list and forward said estimate to the village treasurer. The developer/subdivider shall then have forty five (45)
days from the date the maintenance punch list is mailed to correct and remedy all items listed thereon. The village engineer and village director of
public works shall then conduct a final maintenance inspection prior to expiration of the maintenance period to determine compliance. In the event
there remain any uncorrected deficiencies or any new deficiencies are discovered, the village engineer shall provide a written estimate of the cost to
correct said deficiencies to the village treasurer. Within thirty (30) days of the end of the maintenance period, the developer/subdivider shall furnish to
the village engineer a general contractor's sworn statement from each prime contractor with whom he, she or it contracted to perform any of the
maintenance work and final waivers of lien from all persons and entities that furnished labor and/or materials in connection with the maintenance work.
In the event there were any uncorrected deficiencies during the maintenance period and/or missing waivers of lien, the village treasurer shall either: 1)
deduct from the cash deposit an amount sufficient to correct said deficiencies, including all estimated engineering, legal and other expenses to cover
the cost of preparing specifications, bid documents (if applicable) and contract(s) to perform such corrective work, and to cover any potential lien claims
based on missing waivers of lien, 2) deliver a notice to the surety demanding performance of its obligations under the maintenance bond, 3) deliver a
site draft to the issuer of the maintenance letter of credit in an amount sufficient to correct said deficiencies, including estimated engineer, legal and
other expenses to cover the cost of preparing specifications, bid documents (if applicable) and contract(s) to perform such corrective work, and to cover
any potential lien claims based on missing waivers of lien, all before the expiration of the twenty four (24) month maintenance guaranty. The end of the
maintenance period shall be set by the village engineer such that it will not expire between November 1 and June 1. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
E. In the event the village notifies the subdivider/developer, and in the case of a maintenance bond also notifies the surety, within the maintenance period
as to any deficient maintenance work or damage or deficiency as to any of the public improvements discovered during the maintenance period, but the
repair, correction or replacement of the deficient or damaged public improvement(s) has not been completed within the maintenance period, and/or if
the subdivider/developer fails to furnish to the village sworn owner's statements, contractor's sworn statements from each general contractor, or if more
than one contractor hired by the owner and/or the developer, then from each prime contractor and final waivers of lien from all subcontractors and
material suppliers that furnished labor and/or material to maintain, correct, repair, or replace any deficient or damaged public improvements covering
work performed during the maintenance period, the maintenance period shall be extended for up to two (2) additional six (6) month periods to complete
the work and to submit the necessary documentation regarding full payment. (Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
Chapter 10
LAND AND CASH DONATIONS BY DEVELOPERS
11-10-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter is to provide for land and cash donations by developers and may be referred to as the BARTLETT DONATION ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2017-
101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-2: PREAMBLES:
The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Bartlett have made findings of fact as follows:
A. The Village of Bartlett ("Bartlett" or "the Village") is a home rule Municipality under the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and in exercise of its home
rule powers, desires to reenact and amend that portion of this title providing for land and cash donations by developers.
B. Bartlett is located in the heart of one of the fastest growing regions in the Chicago metropolitan area. Between 1975 and 2010, Bartlett's population has
grown from approximately five thousand five hundred fifty (5,550) people to an estimated forty one thousand two hundred eight (41,208) people.
C. A dramatic increase in the construction of residential buildings in Bartlett began in 1983, and continued until the start of the economic recession in late
2007, but housing construction starts have begun to pick up under the present economic recovery, and are projected to increase due to pent up
demand for new housing and to continue as long as affordable mortgage money remains available.
D. Bartlett has grown to more than fourteen thousand seventy three (14,073) households.
E. Bartlett is currently located in the U-46 School District ("U-46" or the "school district"), the second largest school district in Illinois, which is currently
experiencing financial difficulties due in part to the failure of the State's legislature to pass a State budget for over two (2) years.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 566/702
F. Healthy, productive and responsible community life depends, in part, on the availability of adequate school facilities for the Village's residents. School
facilities to provide for the educational needs of the children who will reside in the Village as a direct result of the developmental activities of residential
developers cannot be provided without land donations and financial contributions from such developers roughly proportional to the nature and extent of
the impact caused by such developments.
G. The location and improvement of school sites to serve the immediate and future needs of residents and children residing in each new subdivision,
planned development ("PD"), planned unit development ("PUD"), or development is just as essential to proper land development as are streets, water,
sewers, sidewalks and other residential Municipal services. Unless land and cash donations are charged to and paid by developers of new residential
subdivisions, PDs, PUDs or developments in the Village, roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impact of such developments, it will result
in serious financial problems for the Village and U-46. Accordingly, the dedication of land for school sites (or, in certain circumstances, as hereinafter
more fully set forth, a cash contribution in lieu of a land dedication) and a cash contribution for the improvement of school grounds, which include
school building or other infrastructure, including technological infrastructure, necessitated and specifically and uniquely attributed to the new residential
subdivision, PD, PUD, or development, so as to enable the school district to provide for the immediate and future educational needs of the school age
children who will be generated by the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development and, concomitantly, to protect the health, welfare and safety
of the public.
H. Reliable and proven demographic analyses have been conducted in a scientific and accurate manner to determine the number of elementary,
secondary and high school age children that will be generated by a new residential subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development which contains new
residential housing. Such demographic analyses are widely accepted and employed by municipalities and school districts within and outside the State
of Illinois for the aforesaid purpose.
I. The most recent official Census of the Village conducted in 2010 determined that the median age of Bartlett's population is 34.48 and that 27.3 percent
of Bartlett's population is under eighteen (18) years of age.
J. There are reliable and proven mathematical methods available for calculating the requisite amount of land needed for school sites to service the
elementary, middle and high school educational needs of a proposed residential subdivision, PD, PUD or development. Such methods are widely
accepted and employed by municipalities and school districts within and outside the State of Illinois for the aforesaid purpose.
K. The Bartlett Park District (the "park district") lack sufficient resources to finance the acquisition of new park sites and development of new playgrounds
thereon in the new subdivision PDs, PUDs and developments that are expected within the next several years unless the developers thereof donate
land therefor, or cash in lieu of land where the Corporate Authorities deem it appropriate, and donate cash to improve the parks, including for
playground or other recreational improvements thereon that are necessitate and specifically and uniquely attributed to the new residential development.
L. The Village lacks sufficient funds in its police budget to provide adequate police protection while infrastructure and homes are being constructed and for
new Village residents once they move in, due in part to the fact that the Village provides police protection for over two (2) years before Real Estate Tax
revenues are extended and received by it based on fully assessed property commensurate with the police services actually provided by the Village.
The Village lacks sufficient funds to provide additional policemen, and squad cars necessary to provide police services for new developments before
said tax revenues are received.
M. The Bartlett Fire Protection District (the "fire district") lacks the equipment, facilities and personnel to provide adequate fire protection services to new
developments in the two (2) years before Real Estate Tax revenues from said new developments are extended and received by it based on fully
assessed property commensurate with the fire protection services actually provided by the Fire District to said new developments.
N. The Bartlett Public Library District and the Gail Borden Public Library District (the "library districts") lack sufficient books and personnel to provide library
services to residents of newly constructed developments for over one and one-half (11/2) years before Real Estate Tax revenues are extended and
received by it based on fully assessed property commensurate with the services provided by the applicable library district.
O. It is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the residents of Bartlett that adequate land and facilities be available to provide educational, fire
protection, recreational and library facilities and services.
P. It is essential to the public health, welfare and safety that school sites be provided within Bartlett in accordance with the criteria hereinafter set forth:
1. Six hundred (600) capacity elementary schools (Grades K - 6) on eleven (11) acres of land;
2. One thousand two hundred (1,200) capacity middle schools (Grades 7 - 8) on thirty two (32) acres of land;
3. Two thousand five hundred (2,500) capacity high schools (Grades 9 - 12) on sixty five (65) acres of land.
Q. It is essential to the public health, welfare and safety that park sites be provided within Bartlett in accordance with the standards hereinafter set forth,
which are consistent with the criteria for park land requirements as recommended by the National Recreation and Park Association, now and as
amended in the future.
R. It is essential to the public health, welfare and safety that funds be provided to Bartlett to help defray the increased cost of providing police protection in
areas which are in the process of development with unfinished streets that cause extraordinary wear and tear to emergency vehicles, and increased
patrol requirements that will strain the Police Department's manpower and vehicular resources, and a new building to house the Bartlett Police
Department.
S. The Village, the fire district, the park district and the applicable library district are required to provide facilities and services to new residents of new
developments for one and one-half (11/2) to two (2) years before Real Estate Tax revenues from taxes levied against said new developments
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 567/702
commensurate with the cost of providing said services are received from such new developments and the residents thereof. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-
2017)
11-10-3: PROJECTED SCHOOL POPULATION CALCULATIONS:
For purposes of computing the amount of land or cash contributions in lieu of land, that will be required of each subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development
to enable the community to provide facilities and services to meet the needs of such subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development, its projected population
density shall be computed in accordance with section 11-10-16, table 1 of this chapter, which is generally indicative of current and short range projected
trends in family size by age groups, unless a written objection thereto is filed by the subdivider or developer. In the event a subdivider or developer files a
written objection to the statistics set forth in section 11-10-16, table 1 of this chapter, it shall submit its own demographic study showing the estimated
additional population to be generated from the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development, and in that event final determination of the density
formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the Corporate Authorities based upon such demographic information submitted by the subdivider
or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the Corporate Authorities by the park district, U-46, fire district, library districts, Village
staff, or others. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the specific formula for the
dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if necessary. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-
2017)
11-10-4: SCHOOL LAND DONATIONS:
School sites shall be dedicated in accordance with the following criteria:
The ultimate number of students that will be generated by a proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development shall be determined in accordance with
section 11-10-16, table 1 of this chapter.
A. Criteria For Requiring School Site Dedication: The amount of land required to be dedicated for school grounds shall be that which is necessitated and
specifically and uniquely attributable to the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or the development, and shall be directly related to the ultimate number
of students to be generated by the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by
dividing: 1) the estimated number of children in each of the school age classifications set forth in section 11-10-16, table 1 of this chapter that will be
generated by the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development, by 2) the recommended maximum number of students that can be served in the
type of school which corresponds to the particular school age classification, as set forth in subsection B, table 2 of this section, and then multiplying the
foregoing derived quotient by 3) the recommended minimum number of acres for a school site for each school age classification, as set forth in
subsection B, table 2 of this section. The product derived by the immediately foregoing multiplication calculation shall constitute the number of acres for
elementary, middle and high school purposes in order to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated number of increased children in
each school age classification as a result of the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development.
B. School Classification And Size Of School Site: School classifications and size of school sites within Bartlett shall be determined in accordance with the
following criteria:
TABLE 2
School
Classification By Grade
Maximum Number Of Students For Each Such School
Classification
Minimum Number Of Acres Of Land
For
Each School Site Of
Such Classification
Elementary schools:
Grades Kindergarten through 6 600 students 11
Secondary schools:
Middle schools - Grades 7 and 8
1,200 students 32
High schools - Grades 9 through
12
2,500 students 65
C. Location: School sites shall be located in the Village in accordance with plans theretofore or hereafter adopted by U-46. If U-46 has not planned a
school site within the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development, or in the neighborhood in which such subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or
development is located, the school site shall be located in the Village and so as to be readily accessible to the greatest number of children projected for
such neighborhood. For purposes of any cash contribution in lieu of land and for the development of school grounds under this chapter, schools located
within the corporate limits of the Village, or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village (the "Village's planning
jurisdiction"), shall be considered to be in the Village, provided that any such schools must actually serve Village students, and to the extent practicable
used for land acquisition or to improve school grounds of schools that will serve the proposed development.
D. Site Suitability: The subdivider or developer, at its own cost or expense, shall provide U-46 soil boring data, soil compaction test results and such other
engineering studies, data and information pertaining to the proposed school site which U-46 may request to enable it to determine the suitability of the
proposed to-be-dedicated land for school site purposes without extraordinary improvement costs. U-46 shall have the right to reject any site which the
school district determines, in accordance with sound engineering practice, is not suitable to school site purposes.
E. Improvements: Each school site shall be located on a fully improved street with curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, storm sewer, electricity, gas and
telephone available at the property lines. Sanitary sewer and water mains shall be extended to the furthest boundary line of each school site within
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 568/702
right-of-way or easement designated by the Village. Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontages. The site shall have direct access to such a
fully improved street across at least twenty percent (20%) of the distance of its perimeter. At least two (2) access routes or easements shall be
provided. Any pedestrian access route shall be at least thirty feet (30') wide and any vehicular access route or easement shall be at least sixty six feet
(66') wide. Any pedestrian access route less than fifty feet (50') wide shall be fenced with fencing material approved by the school district. The site shall
be developed to the standards set forth in subsections 11-10-7A, D, E and F of this chapter, except that the references to park site and park district
approval or notice in such subsections shall be read to mean school sites and approval or notice by the school district.
F. Cash Contribution: When the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical, or when the Corporate Authorities determine that
the available land is inappropriate for a school site, the Village shall require the developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication in
accordance with section 11-10-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-5: CASH DONATIONS FOR SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION:
A. Criteria And Formula: The amount of cash required to be donated to provide the necessary funds for the development of school grounds, including land
or site improvements, which includes school building or other infrastructure, including technological infrastructure necessitated and specifically and
uniquely attributed to the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development for the construction or expansion of elementary school facilities, middle
school facilities and high school facilities in the Village for the use of the children who will be generated by a proposed subdivision, PD, PUD and/or
development, shall be determined by: 1) multiplying the estimated ultimate number of elementary school age children to be generated by the proposed
subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development determined on the basis of the demographic information set forth in section 11-10-16, table 1 of this
chapter, times two thousand eight hundred thirty seven dollars fifty four cents ($2,837.54); plus 2) multiplying the estimated ultimate number of middle
school age children to be generated by the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development determined on the basis of demographic information
set forth in section 11-10-16, table 1 of this chapter, times four thousand three hundred eight dollars thirty one cents ($4,308.31); plus 3) multiplying the
estimated ultimate number of high school age children to be generated by the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development, determined on the
basis of demographic information set forth in section 11-10-16, table 1 of this chapter, times five thousand six hundred eighty five dollars ninety one
cents ($5,685.91). The two thousand eight hundred thirty seven dollars fifty four cents ($2,837.54), the four thousand three hundred eight dollars thirty
one cents ($4,308.31), and the five thousand six hundred eighty five dollars ninety one cents ($5,685.91) are school construction donation factors
based on the most recent costs incurred by the U-46 School District in building an elementary, middle or high school, respectively that it has furnished
to the Village. These costs shall be adjusted for inflation and divided by the total capacity. The resulting per student cost shall be reduced according to
three (3) factors: 1) the proportion of school revenue attributable to property taxes; 2) the proportion of property taxes attributable to residential
property; and 3) an equity adjustment factor. These figures shall be reviewed, and if warranted by said review, adjusted on a regular basis. The
amounts set forth above by which the number of school age children from section 11-10-16, table 1 of this chapter have been multiplied by, and which
are then added together, are figures derived from section 11-10-16, table 3 of this chapter (the "2017 Donation Table").
B. Restrictions: All funds collected by the Village pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be used solely for construction or improvement of schools in
the Village of Bartlett, whether by the Village or U-46, and only for elementary, middle and/or high school purposes and not for pre-school or
administrative purposes. "Construction or improvement of schools" shall mean and include: 1) school site improvements, 2) new building design and
construction, 3) design and construction of building additions and improvements, 4) on site and off site school infrastructure improvements located in
the Village, including monies to provide or improve water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and adjacent roadways to serve schools located in the Village of
Bartlett, and 5) instructional and classroom equipment incorporated into the school buildings or grounds so as to become fixtures. "Fixture" shall mean
such instructional and classroom equipment which is permanently affixed or attached to a school building, or imbedded in school grounds, by means of
cement, plaster, nails, bolts, screws, or other similar method, such that said equipment is not removable without damage to the building or land.
"Schools located within the Village of Bartlett" shall mean elementary, middle and/or high school buildings and grounds which are physically located
within the Village of Bartlett or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village of Bartlett, except that as to the latter, any
monies collected hereunder shall be subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth in this subsection B. In no event shall such funds be used for
salaries, personnel expenses, operating expenses, furniture, books or equipment (unless such equipment is incorporated into the school buildings or
grounds so as to become a fixture) or for improvements of schools located outside of the Village of Bartlett. If any portion of such funds is not expended
for the purposes set forth in this paragraph within ten (10) years from the date of their receipt, then they shall be refunded to the subdivider or
developer who donated them. Any developer donation requested by U-46 to be used for expenditures permitted under this subsection B at any school
outside, but within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village, shall be limited to an amount determined by multiplying the full
amount of the donation by the number of students with Bartlett addresses in attendance at such a school divided by the official enrollment of the school
as of the date closest to the date on which the school district makes application for release of the donation. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-6: PROCEDURES FOR PAYING DONATIONS TO SCHOOL DISTRICT:
Funds contributed by a subdivider or developer for school purposes, including cash donations for school construction paid pursuant to section 11-10-5 of
this chapter, cash donations in lieu of land paid pursuant to section 11-10-9 of this chapter, or cash donations paid in combination with the dedication of
land pursuant to section 11-10-10 of this chapter, shall be deposited with the Village Treasurer to be held in the Developer Donation Fund and paid to U-
46, only upon the occurrence or satisfaction of the following conditions precedent to payment:
A. Indemnification For Past Payments: U-46 shall have executed and delivered to the Village a written agreement agreeing to indemnify, defend and hold
the Village harmless from any costs and expenses incurred by the Village related to said school district's use of developer donations previously paid to
U-46 by the Village under prior Village of Bartlett donation ordinances.
B. Indemnification Against Claims Arising Out Of This Chapter: U-46 shall have executed and delivered to the Village an Indemnification Agreement, in
form shown on Exhibit A on file in the Village agreeing to indemnify and hold the Village harmless from any causes of action brought against the Village
as a result of the passage or enforcement of this chapter, and/or Village ordinances 1996-63, 1998-40, 2000-57, 2000-129, 2001-143, 2003-72, 2007-
50, 2013-69, and 2017-101, including, but not limited to, challenges to the use of said funds paid to U-46.
C. Village Approval: The Corporate Authorities of the Village of Bartlett shall approve the requested payment of said donation funds to U-46 within sixty
(60) days after receipt of the school district's request based on its determination, made in the Village Board's reasonable discretion, that the school
district has sufficiently demonstrated that the funds have been used only for the limited purposes allowed in, and otherwise in accordance with, this
chapter. Each request for donation funds shall be accompanied by documentation evidencing the amount of such expenditure, the nature of each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 569/702
expenditure (e.g., land improvements, construction, repair, type of equipment, etc.) and the specific school for which the expenditure was made. The
60-day period for the Village to approve a request for funds shall begin to run when the school district has furnished such documentation to the Village.
Within thirty (30) days of such request, the Village may require, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, the school district to submit additional
documentation to assist the Village in determining that the school district has used the funds for the limited purposes allowed in, and in accordance
with, this chapter. If additional documentation is required, the Village shall make its final determination within sixty (60) days after receipt of the
additional documentation from the school district. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-7: CRITERIA FOR PARK AND SCHOOL LAND DEDICATION:
A. Philosophy Of Acceptance: The land or site for park and recreation land dedication must be suitable for the purpose for which it is intended. Land set
aside by developers for parks, recreation, and conservation purposes shall not be what has been left over after residential, commercial and industrial
development, or contain or include any floodplain, floodway, riparian ways, wet bottom detention basin, retention pond, or wetland.
B. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for dedication.
The total requirement shall be ten (10) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population dedicated to active use in accordance with the
following classification:
Types Of Recreation Area Size Range
Minimum Acres
Per 1,000 People
Play lot Minimum 1 acre 0.5
Neighborhood park Minimum 5 acres 2.0
Community wide recreation park Minimum 15 acres 7.5
Total 10.0 acres of land per 1,000 people
"Active park areas" shall be defined as those areas specifically adapted and planned for a wide range of physical activity such as group games, physical
education, sports, and athletics. Facilities usually include, but are not limited to, playfields, game courts, rinks, ball diamonds, pools, tennis courts,
community centers, and play apparatus. Active areas shall not include any areas designated for water management, such as floodplain, floodway,
retention, detention or "wetland" areas.
C. Location: The Bartlett Park District Comprehensive Master Plan (the "park plan") as amended from time to time, shall be used as a guideline in locating
sites, or if none, as determined by the applicable park district on a case by case basis. A central location which will serve equally the entire
development is most desirable and whenever feasible, the site shall be in close proximity to elementary school sites. In large developments, these sites
can be located throughout the development according to established standards for park area distance.
D. Improvements: Each park site shall be located on a fully improved street with curbs, gutters, street lights, storm sewer, electricity, and gas available at
the property lines. Sanitary sewer and water mains shall be extended to the furthest boundary line of each park site within the right-of-way or easement
designated by the Village. Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontages. The site shall have direct access to a fully improved street across at
least twenty percent (20%) of the distance of the perimeter. At least two (2) access routes or easements shall be provided. Any pedestrian access route
shall be at least thirty feet (30') wide and any vehicular access route or easement shall be at least sixty six feet (66') wide. Any pedestrian access route
less than fifty feet (50') wide shall be fenced along both sides with fencing material approved by the park district. Off street parking of three (3) spaces
per one thousand (1,000) people projected to be generated by the proposed development up to a maximum of four (4) spaces, shall be constructed for
any neighborhood park (including 1 handicapped space) and four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) people shall be constructed for any community
wide park including one handicapped space.
E. Topography And Grading: Each park site designated on the park plan as an "active park area" shall have sufficient level areas, uninterrupted by
streams and drainage ditches, to permit its development for football and baseball fields without the infields overlapping the football fields.
1. Slope:
a. Should not vary greatly in appearance from existing and adjacent slopes.
b. Optimum slopes range from two percent (2%) minimum to five percent (5%) maximum. No less than two percent (2%) slope is acceptable under
any circumstances.
c. Maximum allowable slope is ten percent (10%), except under special conditions where greater slopes are desirable to enhance recreation and
leisure utilization (i.e., sled hill).
d. That on-site drainage patterns be designated and constructed to:
(1) Insure flow toward swales.
(2) Insure drainage away from active recreation areas.
2. Grading:
a. Rough grading shall be completed at time of rough grading of adjacent contiguous areas.
b. Grading shall comply with Village and park district approved plans.
c. Subgrade shall be graded and compacted so it will be parallel to the finished grade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 570/702
d. Subgrade material shall be loosened and fine graded to a depth of two inches (2") to four inches (4"). All stones over four inches (4") in size,
sticks, rubbish, and other foreign substances shall be removed.
e. Finished grades should be uniform in slope between points for which elevations have been established.
3. Soils:
a. Soils shall not differ from those occurring naturally.
b. Soils shall not offer any restriction to proposed recreation and leisure utilization.
c. Topsoil shall be spread evenly and lightly compacted to a minimum depth of six inches (6") over the entire site.
d. Topsoil will be good, friable soil, with good tillage, and shall be without any admixture of subsoil, gravel, stones, refuse, sand or other subsurface
elements.
e. Topsoil shall not be placed in a muddy or frozen condition.
f. Topsoil shall contain no toxic substances which may be harmful to plant growth.
g. Topsoil shall be spread no later than the placement of topsoil on the first lot adjacent to the park site.
4. Seeding:
a. All proposed park areas shall be seeded and an acceptable stand of grass established prior to dedication of the area to the park district.
b. Seeding to utilize Village and park district approved ground covers and grasses.
c. Seeding to be completed during desirable fall and spring planting times, dependent upon recommended seed planting specification for seed.
d. Seeding to be done on moderately dry soil on a seed bed which will easily accept and nurture germination of seeds.
e. Developer will be responsible for making necessary reparations to the site caused by erosion. Reparations will be completed prior to acceptance
by the park district.
5. Soil Conditions: Soil conditions shall meet the following requirements:
a. On sites (or those portions of the sites) not requiring fill, the soils shall have a bearing of no less than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square
foot for building areas, parking lot areas and other areas that will be required to support structures. All open space areas that will be used for sport
fields, dry bottom detention facilities or other open space uses, the soils shall have a bearing of no less than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
pounds per square foot. No minimum soil support values are required for areas that will accommodate wetlands, floodplains, riparian ways or wet
bottom detention facilities.
b. On sites (or portions of the sites) requiring fills, only clean clay soil materials with an unconfined compression strength of two thousand five
hundred (2,500) pounds per square inch (prior to compaction) ("clean clay fill") shall be placed in compacted layers of not more than twelve inches
(12") each within five feet (5') of the approved subgrade for the site as determined by the final engineering plans therefor approved by the Village
Engineer. For fill below said five feet (5') of compacted clay, only clean clay fill or "clean construction or demolition debris" as defined in section
3.160 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act1 may be used to fill the said site, except that in no event shall reclaimed asphalt materials be
used as fill material. The fill materials shall be compacted to a minimum of:
(1) Ninety five percent (95%) of modified proctor for those areas of the site that will support buildings, parking lots and other structures,
(2) Ninety percent (90%) of modified proctor for sport fields, dry bottom detention facilities or other open space uses,
(3) Fills shall be placed in lifts no greater than twelve inches (12") thick,
(4) One compaction test will be required for each twelve inch (12") lift of fill and for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet of surface area filled,
(5) The Village shall receive copies of the compaction tests for each lift prior to the placement of the next lift, and
(6) The filled area shall be graded in a uniform manner in order to provide a surface that will drain freely and not pocket water.
The park district shall notify the Village within sixty (60) days of the park district's receipt of notice of the location of the park site on the
preliminary plat of the areas to be improved in accordance with these compaction requirements.
F. Term Defined: Water management areas shall be defined as those properties set aside as retention, detention, or wetland. The park district shall have
no obligation to accept the donation of said parcels, or any parcels lying in a floodplain or floodway as determined by the latest applicable County FIRM
or DFIRM maps. The park district may determine on a case by case basis whether or not any water management area should be accepted by the
district, in addition to the active park area described within subsection B of this section.
G. Cash Contribution: When the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be practical, or when the Corporate Authorities determine that
the available land is inappropriate for a park site, the Village shall require the developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication in
accordance with section 11-10-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-8: SCHOOL AND PARK PLAT REVIEW:
Copies of each subdivision plat, PD, PUD plan, boundary survey and topographical survey shall be transmitted to U-46, the park district, the fire protection
district, and the appropriate library district for their written recommendations at the same time as they are transmitted to the Bartlett Plan Commission, but
nothing therein contained shall be construed as requiring receipt of a recommendation prior to action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village. (Ord.
2017-101, 8-15-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 571/702
11-10-9: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU OF LAND DONATIONS:
A. Park Donations: Whenever the land dedication required by this chapter is determined by the Corporate Authorities to be unsuitable on the basis of:
1. Size;
2. Usefulness for park, recreation or open space purposes;
3. Inability to meet the requirements of section 11-10-7 of this chapter; or
4. Incompatibility with implementation of the park plan;
the Village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required.
B. School Donations: Whenever the land dedication required by this chapter is determined by the Corporate Authorities to be unsuitable on the basis of:
1. Size;
2. Usefulness for school purposes;
3. Inability to meet the requirements of section 11-10-4 of this chapter and/or the applicable provisions of section 11-10-7 of this chapter; or
4. Incompatibility with implementation of the school plans;
the Village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required calculated using the fair market
value set forth in subsection F of this section.
C. Use Of Funds: All funds collected by the Village for school land acquisition purposes, and any and all interest earned thereon, shall be used by U-46
solely for the purchase of a school site or sites in the Village of Bartlett to serve the immediate or future needs of the children from the proposed
subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development, and for the improvement of such sites, whether by the Village or U-46. For purposes of any cash
contribution under this chapter, schools located within the corporate limits of the Village or within the Village's planning jurisdiction shall be considered
to be in the Village, provided that any such schools must actually serve Village students.
D. Use Of Cash Contribution: The cash contribution to be paid in lieu of land donations for school sites shall be held by the Village or other public body
designated by the Village, solely for use in the acquisition of a school site in the Village to serve the immediate or future needs of children from the
proposed subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development, or for the improvement of any existing school site in the Village which predominantly serve such
needs.
E. Refund: If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of: 1) park or recreational land donations is not expended for the purposes set forth in subsection A
of this section, or 2) school site donations are not expended for the purposes set forth in subsection B of this section, within ten (10) years from the
date of its receipt, it shall be refunded to the subdivider or developer who made such contribution, upon the written request of said subdivider or
developer.
F. Fair Market Value: The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the "fair market value" of the acres of land in the area that otherwise would
have been dedicated as park and recreation and school sites and improved as provided in subsection 11-10-4E of this chapter with respect to school
sites and subsections 11-10-7D, E, and F of this chapter with respect to park sites. It has been determined that the present "fair market value" of such
vacant, improved and graded land in the Village is one hundred twenty five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) per acre based on the "Appraisal Report &
Real Estate Market Study for the Village of Bartlett Developer Land & Cash Donation Ordinance" with an effective date of April 28, 2017, prepared by
McCann Appraisal & Consulting, LLC, incorporated herein by this reference (the "McCann Report"), in which Illinois State certified general real estate
appraisers Michael McCann and James P. Foley opined that the fair market value of one acre of vacant subdivision tract in Bartlett, with all off-site
infrastructure and utilities extended to the property line of the tract, is presently one hundred twenty five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) per acre. In the
event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the "fair market value", the developer shall submit an appraisal showing the "fair market
value" of such land in the area of his development or other evidence thereof, and final determination of said "fair market value" per acre of such
improved land shall be made by the Corporate Authorities based upon such information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other
sources which the Village may procure or which may be submitted to the Corporate Authorities by the park district, U-46, or others. Submittal by a
developer or subdivider of the raw land cost of the development tract shall not be sufficient to establish the fair market value of one acre.
G. Cash Donation Restriction: Nothing contained in this section shall allow the developer to elect to make a cash donation in lieu of land if the Corporate
Authorities reasonably determine, based on the criteria set forth in subsections A and B of this section, that a land donation or land donations are made
necessary for school and/or park purposes by the development and the development will receive a direct and material benefit therefrom, and the land
donation requirement is necessitated by and specifically and uniquely attributable to the proposed subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development. (Ord.
2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-10: COMBINED LAND AND CASH DONATIONS:
There may be situations with respect to proposed subdivisions, PDs, PUDs, and/or developments when the Corporate Authorities may determine that a
combination of land dedication and a cash donation in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions may arise when:
A. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a park or school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling
within a planned park or school site shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and a cash donation in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional
land that would have been required to be dedicated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 572/702
B. A major part of the park or school site which will serve the residents of the proposed development has already been acquired (or will be acquired by
other developers) and only a small parcel of land is needed from the development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be donated by
other developers, and a cash donation equal to the difference between the fair market value of the land donated and the fair market value of the land
required to be donated under sections 11-10-4 and 11-10-7 of this chapter shall be made. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-11: CONVEYANCE OF LAND:
A. Environmental Audit And Indemnification: Prior to conveyance to the Village, park district, U-46 of any land, the intended grantee shall be furnished with
an environmental risk audit prepared by an environmental professional meeting the minimum requirements of 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)
(E)(iii) certified to and acceptable to the grantee assuring the grantee that there are no "hazardous substances" (as hereinafter defined) on, under, to or
from the property. Said environmental audit shall be what is commonly referred to as a Phase I environmental audit, which shall meet the minimum
requirements for a pre-acquisition audit as set forth in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(v) (the "Phase I audit"). In the event the Phase I
audit does not conclude that there is no presence or likely presence of a release or substantial threat of a release of hazardous substance(s) or
pesticide on, under, to or from the property, the developer shall furnish a Phase II environmental audit which meets the minimum requirements for a
pre-acquisition Phase II environmental audit as set forth in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(vi), including a soil toxicity analysis and
recommendation from said environmental professional meeting the minimum requirements of 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii) which
concludes that there is no presence or likely presence of a release or substantial threat of a release of hazardous substances on, under, to or from the
subject property, and certifying that in the judgment of said environmental professional there is no reasonable probability that the land contains any
hazardous substances in violation of any Federal or State environmental standards. In the event said Phase II environmental audit and/or soil toxicity
analysis discloses the presence or likely presence of a release or a substantial threat of a release of any hazardous substances at, on, under, to or
from the land to be conveyed, the developer shall first cause all such hazardous substances to be removed at its sole cost and expense in accordance
with all Federal, State and local environmental laws, rules and regulations and furnish the intended grantee with an unconditional "No Further
Remediation Letter" (i.e., without restriction or reference to a site safety plan for future excavation and/or construction of and removing soil
contamination on the site) from the governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the clean up prior to conveyance of any of the land to the intended
grantee. Prior to the conveyance of the land, the subdivider or developer, as the case may be, and the owner of the land to be conveyed, shall execute
and deliver to the intended grantee an Environmental Indemnification Agreement in form approved by the Village Attorney, agreeing to defend,
indemnify and hold the Village, its President and Board of Trustees, officers, officials, employees, agents, successors and assigns, and the park district
and/or U-46, as the case may be, and their respective officers, officials, employees, agents, successors and assigns, harmless from and against any
and all liability, claims, damages, causes of action and expenses arising out of the presence of any hazardous substances (hereinafter defined) in,
under or upon said land to be conveyed prior to the date of conveyance.
The term "hazardous substance" includes, without limitation:
1. Those substances included in the definitions of "hazardous substances", "extremely hazardous substances", "hazardous materials", "toxic
substances", "toxic chemicals", "toxic wastes", "hazardous chemicals", "hazardous wastes", "solid waste", or "pesticides" in CERCLA, RCRA, SARA,
HSWA, TSCA, OSHA, FWPCA, Illinois Pesticides Act, Illinois Responsible Property Transfer Act, and the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act,
49 USC section 1801, et seq., as amended and as they may be amended in the future, and in the regulations promulgated pursuant to said laws.
2. Those substances defined in section 1003 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and in the regulations promulgated pursuant to said Act or
other Illinois laws pertaining thereto.
3. Those substances listed in the United States Department of Transportation table (49 CFR 172.101 and amendments thereto) or by the
Environmental Protection Agency (or any successor agency) as hazardous substances (40 CFR part 302 and amendments thereto).
4. Such other substances, materials, and wastes which are or become regulated under applicable local, State, or Federal law, or the United States
government, or which are classified as hazardous or toxic under Federal, State or local laws, ordinances or regulations.
5. Any material waste or substance which is: a) asbestos, b) polychlorinated biphenols, c) designated as a "hazardous substance" pursuant to section
311 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC section 1251 et seq. (33 USC section 1321) or listed pursuant to section 307 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC
section 1317), d) explosives, or e) radioactive materials.
B. Title Insurance, Survey, Assessment Plats: Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the Village, the school district or the park district shall be
accompanied by: 1) a written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do business in Illinois to insure the grantee's title to such real estate in an
amount equal to its value computed pursuant to subsection 11-10-9F of this chapter, with extended coverage over the general exceptions to title and
subject only to: a) Real Estate Taxes not yet due and payable, b) covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not prohibit the use of the subject real
estate for school or park use, c) utility easements located within twenty feet (20') of the boundary lines of the subject real estate (except where
approved in the final engineering plans approved by the Village Engineer), d) drainage ditches, feeders, and laterals, and e) acts done or suffered by or
judgments against the grantees (collectively, the "permitted exceptions"); 2) a current plat of survey meeting the minimum standard detail requirements
update for ALTA/NSPS land title surveys effective February 23, 2016 with the following optional survey responsibilities and specifications from table A
thereto: Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7a, 8, 9 and 21, certified to the grantee by a licensed Illinois land surveyor to be in compliance with said standards and
specifications, showing no encroachments; and 3) except in instances where the real estate is to be conveyed is a separate lot in a recorded
subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in form acceptable to the appropriate County authorities so that the land to be conveyed can
be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for exemption purposes. In addition, monuments must be established and the land staked
immediately prior to dedication or conveyance of the property. The subdivider or developer shall pay for the cost of: a) owner's title insurance in an
amount calculated by multiplying the acreage of the parcel to be dedicated or conveyed times one hundred twenty five thousand dollars ($125,000.00)
per acre, b) the ALTA/NSPS land title survey, c) the assessment plat if required hereunder, and d) any and all costs in connection with the tax division if
required hereunder.
C. Real Estate Tax Escrow: The developer shall pay the general Real Estate Taxes on the land not yet due and payable as of the date of transfer, and
shall deposit a sum of money in escrow with the intended grantee's attorney or a title company licensed to do business in Illinois prorated as of the date
of transfer, on the basis of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the Tax Assessor's latest assessed valuation, the latest known equalization factors and
the latest known tax rate on the land. In the event that the previous tax information or the previous tax bill includes other property, then the amount to
be deposited in escrow shall be adjusted ratably based on the net acreage of the land compared to the net acreage of other parcels covered by said
tax bills. After the land has been divided for Real Estate Tax purposes and has been conveyed to the intended grantee, the grantee shall proceed with
due diligence to apply for Real Estate Tax exemption on the land. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-12: FIRE PROTECTION, LIBRARY AND VILLAGE CASH DONATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 573/702
A. On the basis of demographic and fiscal impact analyses set forth above, the Corporate Authorities have determined that in order to provide the Village
with funds to defray the increased cost of providing police protection and the Village services, the fire district to provide fire protection services, during
the development and home building process of the subdivision, PD, PUD and/or development, and police protection and other Village services, fire
protection services, and to provide library facilities and services to residences after an occupancy permit has been granted, but before proportionate tax
revenues are generated by such new subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development, a cash donation is required to be made by the developers based on
the following standards:
Fire protection district $199.78 per capita
Police Department 332.10 per capita
Village service 710.54 per capita
Library district 144.50 per capita
B. Funds contributed by a subdivider or developer for these purposes shall be deposited in accordance with the developer cash equivalents table in
section 11-10-16, table 3 of this chapter, and expressly made a part hereof, with the Village Treasurer to be held in the Developer Donation Fund and
paid without interest to the above districts on a semi-annual basis, except for payments to the school district, which shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of subsection 11-10-6C of this chapter.
C. These donations will be adjusted periodically to reflect increases or decreases in the cost of providing services, based upon changes in the budget
expenditures in each taxing body's most recently approved budget furnished to the Village. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-13: PAYMENT OF DONATIONS:
All cash donations, including cash in lieu of land, shall be prorated on a per building unit cost and paid prior to issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 2017-
101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-14: ANNEXATIONS:
The donation of land and/or cash donations as required by this chapter shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the Village
and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any annexation or preannexation agreements governing such land. Whenever land is annexed to the
Village, if not already within a park district, library district or fire district, the landowner shall prepare the necessary plats, petitions for annexation and
documents, at his/her/its expense, for annexation to the Bartlett Park District, the Bartlett Fire Protection District, (or the South Elgin Fire Protection District
in Kane County), and either the Bartlett Library District or the Gail Borden Public Library District, as the case may be; provided said property is then
contiguous to each said district. In the event a parcel is contiguous to both the Bartlett Library District and the Gail Borden Public Library District, the
property sought to be annexed shall be annexed to the Bartlett Library District. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-15: SUCCESSORS:
In the event the Village, U-46, the Bartlett Park District, the Bartlett Fire Protection District and the Bartlett Library District, or any of them, shall cease
being in existence, then this chapter shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the successor municipality, school district, park district, fire district or
library district, as the case may be, whose boundaries include the applicable subdivision, PD, PUD, and/or development. (Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
11-10-16:TABLES:
TABLE 1
TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT DATA BY TYPE AND BEDROOM
Preschool
<5 Years Old
Elementary
5 - 10
Years Old
Jr. High
11 - 13
Years Old
High School
14 - 17
Years Old
Total
Children
Total
<5 - 17
Years Old
Adults
>18
Years Old Total Household
Single family:
2 bedroom 0.22 0.33 0.20 0.20 0.95 0.73 2.15 3.10
3 bedroom 0.25 0.40 0.25 0.25 1.15 0.90 2.12 3.27
4 bedroom 0.32 0.50 0.30 0.35 1.47 1.15 2.29 3.76
5 bedroom 0.32 0.55 0.35 0.40 1.62 1.30 2.54 4.16
6 bedroom 0.32 0.55 0.35 0.40 1.62 1.30 2.54 4.16
Apartment:
1 bedroom 0.10 0.10 0.04 0.04 0.28 0.18 1.49 1.77
2 bedroom 0.20 0.16 0.06 0.07 0.49 0.29 1.75 2.24
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 574/702
3 bedroom 0.21 0.29 0.20 0.25 0.95 0.74 2.07 3.02
Condominium:
1 bedroom 0.10 0.10 0.04 0.04 0.28 0.18 1.49 1.77
2 bedroom 0.20 0.16 0.06 0.07 0.49 0.29 1.75 2.24
3 bedroom 0.21 0.29 0.20 0.25 0.95 0.74 2.07 3.02
Townhome:
1 bedroom 0.16 0.18 0.02 0.02 0.38 0.22 1.58 1.96
2 bedroom 0.15 0.10 0.05 0.05 0.35 0.20 1.61 1.96
3 bedroom 0.24 0.24 0.10 0.17 0.75 0.51 1.96 2.71
4 bedroom 0.04 0.50 0.21 0.21 0.96 0.92 2.33 3.29
Duplex, triplex, quad:
1 bedroom 0.16 0.18 0.02 0.02 0.38 0.22 1.58 1.96
2 bedroom 0.15 0.10 0.05 0.05 0.35 0.20 1.61 1.96
3 bedroom 0.24 0.24 0.10 0.17 0.75 0.51 1.96 2.71
TABLE 3
2017 DONATION TABLE
DEVELOPER DONATION CASH EQUIVALENTS
Estimated population per dwelling unit data provided by NIU Center for Governmental Studies
Cash equivalents for donation - For 1 unit of a dwelling type
Village Police Fire Park Library School Land School Cash Total
Single family:
2 bedroom $2,202.67 $1,029.51 $619.32 $3,875.00 $447.95 $2,025.00 $2,935.23 $13,134.68
3 bedroom 2,323.47 1,085.97 653.28 4,087.50 472.52 2,437.50 3,633.57 14,693.81
4 bedroom 2,671.63 1,248.70 751.17 4,400.00 543.32 3,275.00 4,701.33 17,591.15
5 bedroom 2,955.85 1,381.54 831.08 5,200.00 601.12 3,675.00 5,342.92 19,987.51
6 bedroom 2,955.85 1,381.54 831.08 5,200.00 601.12 3,675.00 5,342.92 19,987.51
Apartment:
1 bedroom 1,257.66 587.82 353.61 2,212.50 255.77 480.00 683.52 5,830.88
2 bedroom 1,591.61 743.90 447.51 2,800.00 323.68 790.00 1,110.52 7,807.22
3 bedroom 2,145.83 1,002.94 603.34 3,775.00 436.39 2,137.50 3,106.03 13,207.03
Condominium:
1 bedroom 1,257.66 587.82 353.61 2,212.50 255.77 480.00 683.52 5,830.88
2 bedroom 1,591.61 743.90 447.51 2,800.00 323.68 790.00 1,110.52 7,807.22
3 bedroom 2,145.83 1,002.94 603.34 3,775.00 436.39 2,137.50 3,106.03 13,207.03
Townhome:
1 bedroom 1,392.66 650.92 391.57 2,450.00 283.22 540.00 710.64 6,419.01
2 bedroom 1,392.66 650.92 391.57 2,450.00 283.22 550.00 783.47 6,501.84
3 bedroom 1,925.56 899.99 541.40 3,387.50 391.60 1,440.00 2,078.45 10,664.50
4 bedroom 2,337.68 1,092.61 657.28 4,112.50 475.41 2,537.50 3,517.56 14,730.54
Duplex, triplex, quad:
1 bedroom 1,392.66 650.92 391.57 2,450.00 283.22 540.00 710.64 6,419.01
2 bedroom 1,392.66 650.92 391.57 2,450.00 283.22 550.00 783.47 6,501.84
3 bedroom 1,925.56 899.99 541.40 3,387.50 391.60 1,440.00 2,078.45 10,664.50
Village = $710.54 per capita School cash = $4,308.31 per jr. high student
Police = $332.10 per capita School cash = $5,685.91 per HS student
Fire = $199.78 per capita Land market value = $125,000.00 per acre
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 575/702
Park = 10 acres per capita School land = 0.018333 acre per elementary student
Library = $144.50 per capita School land = 0.026667 acre per jr. high student
School cash = $2,837.54 per elementary student School land = 0.026 acre per HS student
(Ord. 2017-101, 8-15-2017)
Chapter 11
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-11-1: REIMBURSEMENT FOR CONSULTANT FEES:
The subdivider/developer shall be required to reimburse the village for all engineering, planning and legal consultant fees, costs and expenses incurred by
the village in connection with review, approval and recording of any subdivision or PUD plan/plat in addition to the fees stipulated in chapter 5, "Fees", of
this title.
A. The subdivider/developer shall reimburse the village for any and all expenses incurred by it for attorney fees in connection with the subdivision plat/PUD
plan review and approval process, including the cost of preparing or examining the public improvements completion agreement, bonds, letters of credit
and any other agreements, securities and guarantees provided for in this title, furnishing legal opinions, the preparation of bills of sale, deeds or other
instruments of conveyance, or easement grants and agreements, the enforcement of the public improvements completion agreement, and any other
legal expense that may be incurred by the village in connection with the subdivision plat/PUD plan review and approval process.
B. The president and board of trustees may, at their discretion, obtain from its engineering, planning and legal consultants estimates of the cost of the
services they will provide in connection with the review and approval of a subdivision plat/PUD plan, and require a cash deposit from the
subdivider/developer in the amount of such estimate before incurring any such expenses. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-11-2: MODIFICATIONS:
The plan commission may recommend modifications from the requirements of this title in specific cases of hardship which, in its opinion, do not affect the
general plan or the spirit of this title. Such recommendations shall be communicated to the village board in writing with the reasons thereof. The village
board may grant modifications from the requirements of this title in such cases. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-11-3: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
No permit for the occupancy or use of any structure in a subdivision/PUD shall be issued unless and until all of the public improvements for that
subdivision/PUD except the "second lift" of street pavement, parkway tree planting and restoration, driveway approaches and streetlights have been
completed. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-11-4: ENFORCEMENT:
No plat of subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds (or registered in the office of the registrar of titles for Cook County property
registered under the Torrens System) or have any validity until it shall have been approved by the president and board of trustees in the manner
prescribed by this title. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-11-5: RECORDING; REGISTRATION:
The village clerk shall cause all approved final plats of subdivision and final PUD plans to be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds (or registered
in the office of the registrar of titles for Cook County property registered under the Torrens System) of the county in which such subdivision/PUD is
situated. After it has been so recorded or registered, the original copy of such plat/plan shall be returned to the village and filed and kept by the village
clerk among the official records of the village of Bartlett. The village clerk shall invoice the developer for the cost of recording and all required copies
accompanying. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-11-6: OTHER REGULATIONS PREVAIL:
None of the provisions of this title pertaining to permits, bonds, letters of credit, fees, acceptance and approval of public improvements shall be construed
as exempting subdividers, general contractors, sidewalk contractors, cement contractors, paving contractors, building contractors, plumbing contractors or
plumbers, sewer contractors, sewer builders, drain layers, electrical contractors or electricians, or any other contractor or craftsman from any other
ordinance or regulation of the village with respect to licenses, fees, surety, inspection or other control. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-11-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person or entity who or which subdivides or develops any real estate under the jurisdiction of the village of Bartlett or constructs any public
improvement thereon, or on any portion thereof, in violation of the provisions of this title shall be, upon conviction, fined in such amount not less than
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 576/702
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), as the court shall determine, for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
Chapter 12
APPENDICES
11-12-1: APPENDIX A; PLAT CERTIFICATES:
A. Owner's And School District Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 1
OWNER'S AND SCHOOL DISTRICT CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE UNDERSIGNED IS (ARE) THE LEGAL OWNER(S) OF THE LAND DESCRIBED ON THE SUBJECT PLAT, AND
HAS (HAVE) CAUSED THE SAME TO BE SURVEYED AND SUBDIVIDED AS INDICATED THEREON, FOR THE USES AND PURPOSES HEREIN
SET FORTH.
ALSO, THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE PROPERTY BEING SUBDIVIDED AFORESAID AND, TO THE BEST OF OWNER'S KNOWLEDGE AND
BELIEF, SAID SUBDIVISION LIES ENTIRELY WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE U-46 SCHOOL DISTRICT.
DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
OWNER(S)
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
NOTARY'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF)
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT , WHOSE NAME(S) IS (ARE) SUBSCRIBED IN THE FOREGOING CERTIFICATE IS (ARE) KNOWN TO ME
AS SUCH OWNER(S).
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL THIS DAY OF 20 .
NOTARY PUBLIC
SEAL
MY COMMISSION EXPIRES:
B. Owner's Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 2
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE (TRUST)
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT (and) , AS TRUSTEE(S) UNDER TRUST AGREEMENT NO. DATED , AND NOT
PERSONALLY, IS (ARE) THE OWNER(S) OF THE PROPERTY DESCRIBED ON THE SUBJECT PLAT AND HAS CAUSED THE SAME TO BE
SURVEYED AND SUBDIVIDED AS INDICATED THEREON, FOR THE USES AND PURPOSES HEREIN SET FORTH, AND DOES (DO) HEREBY
ACKNOWLEDGE AND ADOPT THE SAME UNDER THE STYLE AND TITLE THEREON INDICATED. DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
BY: (and)
NAME & TITLE NAME & TITLE
ATTEST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 577/702
NAME & TITLE
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF)
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT (and) PERSONALLY KNOWN TO ME TO BE THE SAME PERSON(S) WHOSE NAME(S) IS (ARE)
SUBSCRIBED TO THE AFORESAID INSTRUMENT, ACKNOWLEDGED THAT HE/SHE (THEY) SIGNED AND DELIVERED THE INSTRUMENT AS
OF SAID .
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL THIS DAY OF 20 .
NOTARY PUBLIC
SEAL
MY COMMISSION EXPIRES:
C. Village Of Bartlett Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 3
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, COOK, DUPAGE AND
KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, THIS DAY OF 20 .
BY:
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
ATTEST:
VILLAGE CLERK
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
D. Plan Commission Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 4
PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
REVIEWED BY THE PLAN COMMISSION OF THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, COOK, DUPAGE, AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS THIS DAY
OF 20 .
BY:
PLAN COMMISSION CHAIRMAN
ATTEST:
PLAN COMMISSION SECRETARY
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
E. Village Treasurer Certificate:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 578/702
CERTIFICATE NO. 5
VILLAGE TREASURER CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
I, , TREASURER FOR THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, COOK, DUPAGE AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT
THERE ARE NO DELINQUENT OR UNPAID CURRENT OR FORFEITED SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS OR ANY DEFERRED INSTALLMENTS
THEREOF THAT HAVE BEEN APPORTIONED AGAINST THE TRACT OF LAND INCLUDED ON THE SUBJECT PLAT.
DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
BY:
VILLAGE TREASURER
* COOK, DUPAGE AND KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
F. Village Engineer's Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 6
VILLAGE ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
I, , VILLAGE ENGINEER OF THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, COOK, DUPAGE AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, CERTIFY THAT THE LAND
IMPROVEMENTS FOR THE SUBJECT PLATTED AREA AS DESCRIBED IN THE PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS
TITLED:** DATED**
LAST REVISED*** ,PREPARED BY:** ,
MEET THE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS OF THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT.
DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
BY:
VILLAGE ENGINEER
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION.
** TO BE FILLED IN BY THE PLAT PREPARER
*** TO BE FILLED IN BY THE VILLAGE
G. Illinois Department Of Transportation Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 7
ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION CERTIFICATE
THIS PLAT HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION WITH RESPECT TO ROADWAY ACCESS
PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 2 OF "AN ACT TO REVISE THE LAW IN RELATION TO PLATS", AS AMENDED. A PLAN THAT MEETS THE
DEPARTMENT'S "POLICY ON PERMITS FOR ACCESS DRIVEWAYS TO STATE HIGHWAYS" WILL BE REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT.
DISTRICT ENGINEER DATE
H. County Highway Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 8
COUNTY HIGHWAY CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 579/702
THIS PLAT HAS BEEN APPROVED BY THE * COUNTY ** WITH RESPECT TO ROADWAY ACCESS TO COUNTY HIGHWAY
(Number) , (Street Name)
PURSUANT TO 765 ILCS 205/2; HOWEVER, A HIGHWAY PERMIT FOR ACCESS IS REQUIRED OF THE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY PRIOR
TO CONSTRUCTION WITHIN THE COUNTY RIGHT OF WAY.
DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
BY:
COUNTY ENGINEER
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
** HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT (COOK COUNTY) or DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION (DUPAGE & KANE COUNTIES)
I. Surveyor's Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 9
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT I, , AN ILLINOIS PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR HAVE SURVEYED, SUBDIVIDED AND PLATTED FOR
THE OWNERS THEREOF THAT PART OF THE QUARTER(S) OF SECTION, TOWNSHIP NORTH, RANGE EAST OF THE
THIRD PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN, DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
(LEGAL DESCRIPTION)
CONTAINING . ACRES MORE OR LESS.
I FURTHER CERTIFY THAT IRON STAKES HAVE BEEN SET AT ALL LOT CORNERS, POINTS OF CURVATURE AND TANGENCY, EXCEPT
WHERE CONCRETE MONUMENTS ARE INDICATED, AND THAT THE PLAT HEREON DRAWN CORRECTLY REPRESENTS SAID SURVEY AND
SUBDIVISION. DIMENSIONS ARE GIVEN IN FEET AND DECIMAL PARTS THEREOF.
I FURTHER CERTIFY THAT THE FOREGOING PROPERTY FALLS WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, AND I
FURTHER CERTIFY THAT NO PART OF SAID PROPERTY IS SITUATED WITHIN A FLOOD HAZARD AREA, AS PER NATIONAL FLOOD
INSURANCE PROGRAM, FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP, COMMUNITY PANEL NUMBER , EFFECTIVE DATE .
DATED AT , ILLINOIS, THIS DAY OF 20 .
SURVEYOR COMPANY NAME
SEAL
(With City Name of Office Location)
ILLINOIS LAND SURVEYOR (NUMBER)
* AS PER LOCATION OF SURVEYOR
J. County Clerk Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 10
COUNTY CLERK CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
I, , COUNTY CLERK OF* COUNTY, ILLINOIS, DO HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THERE ARE NO DELINQUENT GENERAL TAXES, NO
UNPAID CURRENT GENERAL TAXES, NO UNPAID FORFEITED TAXES, AND NO REDEEMABLE TAX SALES AGAINST ANY OF THE LAND
INCLUDED IN THE SUBJECT PLAT.
I FURTHER CERTIFY THAT I HAVE RECEIVED ALL STATUTORY FEES IN CONNECTION WITH THE SUBJECT PLAT.
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL AT** , * COUNTY, ILLINOIS THIS DAY OF 20 .
BY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 580/702
COUNTY CLERK
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
** CHICAGO, WHEATON OR GENEVA
K. Recorder's Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 11
RECORDER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
THIS INSTRUMENT WAS FILED FOR RECORD IN THE RECORDER'S OFFICE OF * COUNTY, ILLINOIS, THIS DAY OF 20 AT
O'CLOCK .M. AND RECORDED IN MAP BOOK , PAGE , AS DOCUMENT NO. .
BY:
COUNTY RECORDER
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
L. Special Service Area Notice:
CERTIFICATE NO. 12
SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NOTICE
NOTICE THAT A SPECIAL SERVICE AREA HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED FOR THE PROPERTY DESCRIBED ON THE SUBJECT PLAT FOR THE
PURPOSES OF, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PERFORMING MAINTENANCE AND OPERATIONS OF STORMWATER, DETENTION OR RETENTION
FACILITIES, WETLANDS AND OTHER STORMWATER CONTROL OR WETLAND AREAS SERVED BY THE SPECIAL SERVICE AREA, AS
SHOWN ON ENGINEERING PLANS PREPARED BY: * , DATED * , LAST REVISED ON ** , AND APPROVED BY THE VILLAGE
ENGINEER ON .
* TO BE FILLED IN BY THE PLAT PREPARER
** TO BE FILLED IN BY THE VILLAGE
M. Utility Easements Approved And Accepted:
CERTIFICATE NO. 13
UTILITY EASEMENTS APPROVED AND ACCEPTED
COMMONWEALTH EDISON
SIGNATURE:
DATE
PRINTED NAME:
TITLE
SBC
SIGNATURE:
DATE
PRINTED NAME:
TITLE
NICOR
SIGNATURE:
DATE
PRINTED NAME:
TITLE
COMCAST
SIGNATURE:
DATE
PRINTED NAME:
TITLE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 581/702
N. Public Utility Easement Provisions:
CERTIFICATE NO. 14
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT
PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT PROVISIONS
A PERPETUAL EASEMENT IS HEREBY GRANTED TO THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, COOK, DUPAGE AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, ITS
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, OVER, UPON, ACROSS, THROUGH AND UNDER THOSE PORTIONS OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED REAL
ESTATE DESIGNATED PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT ON THIS PLAT, FOR THE PURPOSE OF INSTALLING, LAYING, CONSTRUCTING,
OPERATING, MAINTAINING, REPAIRING, RENEWING AND REPLACING: WATERMAINS, SANITARY SEWER LINES, STORM SEWER LINES,
STREET LIGHT CABLES AND ANY OTHER VILLAGE UTILITIES, TOGETHER WITH ALL APPURTENANT STRUCTURES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO: MANHOLES, WET WELLS, LIFT STATIONS, FIRE HYDRANTS, VALVE VAULTS, STREET LIGHTS AND ANY AND ALL OTHER
FIXTURES AND EQUIPMENT REQUIRED FOR THE PURPOSE OF SERVING THE ABOVE DESCRIBED REAL ESTATE WITH WATER SERVICE,
SANITARY SEWER SERVICE, STORM WATER COLLECTION, STREET LIGHTING AND OTHER MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND FOR THE
PURPOSE OF PROVIDING INGRESS TO AND EGRESS FROM THE PROPERTY SHOWN HEREON FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES OF ANY AND
ALL TYPES WHATSOEVER. IN NO EVENT SHALL ANY PERMANENT BUILDING(S) BE PLACED UPON THE SAID EASEMENT AREAS, BUT THE
EASEMENT AREAS MAY BE USED FOR GARDENS, SHRUBS, LANDSCAPING AND OTHER SUCH PURPOSES THAT DO NOT, AND WILL NOT
IN THE FUTURE, INTERFERE UNREASONABLY WITH THE EASEMENT RIGHTS HEREIN GRANTED TO THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT.
O. Surface Water Statement:
CERTIFICATE NO. 15
SURFACE WATER STATEMENT
(GRADING PLAN ONLY)
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
SS
COUNTY OF *)
WE HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE TOPOGRAPHICAL AND PROFILE STUDIES REQUIRED BY THE ILLINOIS PLAT ACT, ILLINOIS REVISED
STATUTES, CHAPTER 109, 2 ET SEQ., AS NOW OR HEREAFTER AMENDED, HAVE BEEN FILED WITH THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, COOK,
DUPAGE AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, AND TO THE BEST OF OUR KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF THE DRAINAGE OR SURFACE WATERS
WILL NOT BE CHANGED BY THE CONSTRUCTION OF SUCH SUBDIVISION OR ANY PART THEREOF, OR, THAT IF SUCH SURFACE WATER
DRAINAGE WILL BE CHANGED, REASONABLE PROVISION HAS BEEN MADE FOR COLLECTION AND DIVERSION OF SUCH SURFACE
WATERS INTO PUBLIC AREAS, OR DRAINS WHICH THE SUBDIVIDER HAS A RIGHT TO USE, AND THAT SUCH SURFACE WATERS WILL BE
PLANNED FOR IN ACCORDANCE WITH GENERALLY ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICES SO AS TO REDUCE THE LIKELIHOOD OF
DAMAGE TO THE ADJOINING PROPERTIES BECAUSE OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE SUBDIVISION.
DATED AT , ILLINOIS, THIS DAY OF 20 .
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER
OWNER(S) OR DULY AUTHORIZED ATTORNEY
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF PROPERTY
(Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-12-2: APPENDIX B; TYPICAL LOT DIAGRAM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 582/702
(Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-12-3: APPENDIX C; EASEMENT ABROGATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Abrogation Requirements:
ABROGATION REQUIREMENTS
I. Four (4) copies of the Plat of Abrogation shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review. The Plat must include all items
listed in the Plat of Abrogation Checklist.
II. Proof of Ownership in the form of a copy of a current title insurance commitment or policy issued by a title insurance company licensed to transact
business in Illinois must be submitted.
III. The application fee is $150. The petitioner will be responsible for expenses generated by the Village's Engineering consultants (if required).
IV. Contact J.U.L.I.E. (1-800-892-0123) to locate the existing utilities on the property.
V. The approved mylar signed by the owner and utility companies (if required) shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for the
Village President's and Village Engineer's signatures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 583/702
VI. The petitioner is responsible for recording the approved Plat of Abrogation and any and all expenses associated with its recording.
NOTE:The Village of Bartlett reserves the right to make review comments and may require revisions to the Plat of Abrogation.
B. Plat Of Abrogation Checklist:
Plat of Abrogation Checklist
Title: "Plat of Abrogation"
Legal description of area to be abrogated
Date plat prepared and all subsequent revision dates
Scale of plat (1 "=20')
North arrow
PIN (Parcel Identification Number)
Property address
Subdivision Name
Lot number
Label adjacent street(s) and dimension right(s) of way
Dimension lot lines
Identify and dimension all easements
Label and dimension the front setback line
Identify, dimension, and highlight the area to be abrogated
Dimension the remaining portion of the existing easement
County Recorder's Certificate #11
Surveyor's Certificate (abrogation/vacation) #20
Village Certificate (abrogation/vacation) #17
Village Engineer's Certificate (abrogation/vacation) #18
Owner's Certificate (abrogation/vacation) #16
Abrogation of Utility Easements Approved and Accepted Certificate #19
(This certificate is only required if the area being abrogated is a public utility easement)
C. Recorder's Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 11
RECORDER'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
THIS INSTRUMENT WAS FILED FOR RECORD IN THE RECORDER'S OFFICE OF * COUNTY, ILLINOIS, THIS DAY OF 20 AT
O'CLOCK .M. AND RECORDED IN MAP BOOK , PAGE , AS DOCUMENT NO. .
BY:
COUNTY RECORDER
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
D. Owner's Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 16
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE
(ABROGATION/VACATION)
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 584/702
SS
COUNTY OF *)
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE UNDERSIGNED IS (ARE) THE LEGAL OWNER(S) OF THE LAND DESCRIBED ON THE SUBJECT PLAT, AND
HAS (HAVE) CAUSED THE SAME TO BE SURVEYED AND ABROGATED AS INDICATED THEREON, FOR THE USES AND PURPOSES HEREIN
SET FORTH.
DATED THIS DAY OF 20 .
OWNER(S)
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE AS PER LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
NOTARY'S CERTIFICATE
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF)
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT , WHOSE NAME(S) IS (ARE) SUBSCRIBED IN THE FOREGOING CERTIFICATE IS (ARE) KNOWN TO ME AS
SUCH OWNER(S).
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND NOTARIAL SEAL THIS DAY OF 20 .
NOTARY PUBLIC
SEAL
MY COMMISSION EXPIRES:
E. Village Of Bartlett Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 17
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT CERTIFICATE
(ABROGATION/VACATION)
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
THIS PLAT OF ** IS ACCEPTED BY THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, COOK, DUPAGE AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, THIS DAY OF
20 .
BY: ATTEST:
VILLAGE PRESIDENT VILLAGE CLERK
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF PROPERTY
** ABROGATION OR VACATION
F. Village Engineer's Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 18
VILLAGE ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATE
(ABROGATION/VACATION)
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
THIS PLAT OF ** IS APPROVED BY THE VILLAGE ENGINEER OF THE VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, COOK, DUPAGE AND KANE COUNTIES,
ILLINOIS, THIS DAY OF 20 .
VILLAGE ENGINEER
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 585/702
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF PROPERTY
** ABROGATION OR VACATION
G. Abrogation Of Utility Easements Approved And Accepted:
CERTIFICATE NO. 19
ABROGATION OF UTILITY EASEMENTS APPROVED AND ACCEPTED
COMMONWEALTH EDISON
SIGNATURE:
DATE
PRINTED NAME:
TITLE
SBC
SIGNATURE:
DATE
PRINTED NAME:
TITLE
NICOR
SIGNATURE:
DATE
PRINTED NAME:
TITLE
COMCAST
SIGNATURE:
DATE
PRINTED NAME:
TITLE
H. Surveyor's Certificate:
CERTIFICATE NO. 20
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
(ABROGATION/VACATION)
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
SS
COUNTY OF *)
I, , AN ILLINOIS PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR, HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE PLAT HEREON DRAWN HAS BEEN PREPARED
UNDER MY DIRECTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF ** AND THAT IT IS A CORRECT REPRESENTATION OF THE AREA DESCRIBED
HEREON.
DATED AT , ILLINOIS, THIS DAY OF 20 .
SURVEYOR COMPANY NAME
SEAL
ILLINOIS PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR(With City Name of Office Location)
* COOK, DUPAGE OR KANE, AS PER LOCATION OF PROPERTY
** ABROGATING AN EASEMENT OR VACATING A RIGHT-OF-WAY
(Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
11-12-4: APPENDIX D; TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE:
A. Purpose And Intent: This section is enacted pursuant to the Illinois municipal code and the zoning regulatory authority granted to the village of Bartlett,
Illinois, by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1, for the purposes of lessening or avoiding traffic congestion, delay and safety hazards arising from
the traffic generated by new developments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 586/702
In the implementation of this section, the following objectives are established for the protection of the safety of the motoring public, and for the
lessening of traffic congestion on public streets and highways:
1. Incorporating the traffic generation of committed developments within the village of Bartlett, Illinois, into the analysis of traffic impacts.
2. Promoting and protecting the safety and efficiency of public streets and highways.
3. Balancing the traffic demand generated by new developments with the capacity of the external street and highway system.
4. Protecting existing residential streets from the undesirable effects of increased through traffic.
5. Establishing level of service standards for critical intersection operation and performance.
The regulations as set forth herein are deemed the minimum necessary to accomplish the above objectives.
B. Rules And Definitions:
1. Rules: The language as set forth herein shall be interpreted in accordance with the rules of construction as stipulated in chapter 2 of this title.
2. Definitions: The following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth herein, except where otherwise specifically indicated in chapter 2 of this
title. Words and terms not defined herein shall have the meaning indicated by common dictionary definition.
APPROPRIATE HIGHWAY AGENCY: The highway authority having jurisdiction for the operation of a street or highway.
BASELINE LEVEL OF SERVICE: The level of service evaluated under baseline traffic conditions assigned to the existing and committed highway
network.
BASELINE TRAFFIC: Nonsite traffic consisting of existing traffic at the time of development plus projected traffic from committed developments
within the study area.
COMMITTED DEVELOPMENT: A development which has: a) received final plat or building permit approval, or is reasonably close to attaining same;
or b) is under construction or nearly completed, but which may not be fully occupied and generating traffic at the time of development application
under this section.
CRITICAL INTERSECTION: The intersection of any of the following: major arterial streets, minor arterial streets, collector streets, and other
intersections impacted by the proposed development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or expansion of building(s) or structure(s), or any changes in the use of any building(s) or structure(s) or land use
that will generate additional vehicular traffic; or any application for subdivision, zoning variation, zoning amendment, planned unit development,
special use, or building permit within the corporate limits of the village of Bartlett.
EXISTING AND COMMITTED HIGHWAY NETWORK: That system of highway improvements which exist, or are included in an annual capital
improvement program, to be let for construction within the current year, or subsequent calendar or fiscal year.
FLOOR AREA (GROSS): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of such building or buildings, as measured from the exterior
faces of exterior walls, or from the centerline of party walls separating two (2) buildings.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor area of a building, or buildings, by the total area of the lot or
parcels of land on which the building or buildings are located.
GROSS RESIDENTIAL ACRES: The total acreage of land proposed and available for residential development, including the land area designated
for schools, parks, floodplain storage compensation, stormwater management facilities, streets, etc.
GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY: The ratio of total existing or planned residential units within a development divided by the gross residential
acreage of the proposed development.
IMPACT FEE PROGRAM HIGHWAY NETWORK: The existing and committed highway network plus those highway improvements anticipated to be
wholly or partially funded with impact fees as authorized by the Illinois road improvement impact fee law within five (5) years from the payment of an
impact fee by the developer.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: The measurement of highway intersection performance based on capacity utilization and delay.
LONG RANGE TRANSPORTATION PLANS: The advisory long range street and highway plans adopted by the Chicago area transportation study,
DuPage County, and other appropriate highway agencies as amended or updated.
PEAK HOUR (A.M.): The one hour period in the morning representing the highest hourly volume of traffic flow on the adjacent public street system.
PEAK HOUR (P.M.): The one hour period in the evening representing the highest hourly volume of traffic flow on the adjacent public street system.
PROGRAMMED HIGHWAY NETWORK: The existing and committed highway network plus those improvements funded in the current five (5) year
capital improvement program for streets and highways as prepared by the Illinois department of transportation, the DuPage County department of
transportation, Illinois state toll highway authority, other appropriate highway agencies and municipalities in DuPage County.
RESIDENTIAL STREET: A street primarily providing land access to adjacent residential land uses and typically classified as a cul-de-sac, local
street, or subdivision collector street.
SITE RELATED IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements necessary for direct ingress/egress to the development in question, and include the following:
a. Site driveways and public/private streets,
b. Right and left turn lanes leading to such access,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 587/702
c. Traffic signal and other control for such access,
d. Acceleration/deceleration lanes or tapers,
e. Median openings/closings,
f. Landscaping, sidewalks, lighting, utilities, berms and other highway appurtenances.
SITE TRAFFIC: Existing or projected vehicular traffic generated by the development.
STUDY AREA: The geographic area containing those critical intersections and connecting highway segments which are impacted by the site traffic
generated by the development.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: Added lanes, signal improvements, and other roadway improvements not considered as site related improvements.
TRAFFIC IMPACT: The adverse impact of a development on intersection level of service and/or street and highway safety and operations as
determined by the criteria and procedures set forth in subsection D of this section.
TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS: The analysis of the effect of site traffic generated by a development on intersection level of service and the safety and
operation of the public street and highway system.
TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION MEASURE: Any measure or improvement taken by, or required of, the developer in order to lessen, abate or reduce
the traffic impact of the development on the public street and highway system.
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT: Any of several different operational or management strategies for reducing the peak hour traffic
demand generated by a development, including, but not limited to, carpooling, vanpooling, flex time, staggered work hours and mass transportation.
C. Administration And General Provisions:
1. Traffic Management Ordinance Administration: The authority for administration of this section is hereby vested in the village engineer.
2. Duties Of The Village Engineer: The village engineer shall be responsible for the general administration of this section, and should:
a. Review all proposed development projects to assess their compliance with the provisions of this section.
b. Maintain information on committed developments within the municipality for use in estimating baseline traffic generation in the traffic impact study.
c. Cooperate with state, county and other municipalities and other agencies to facilitate the administration of this section.
d. Maintain for public inspection copies of traffic studies and related documents and records for all developments approved subject to this section.
e. Receive and process all applications for variations, appeals and text amendments.
In the performance of those duties, the village engineer may utilize the professional technical assistance of engineering, planning or other staff to
ensure that reasonable engineering and planning practices and standards are utilized in the review of applications for approval of development
plans. Where, in the opinion of the village engineer, outside professional assistance is required, a professional engineer registered in the state of
Illinois may be retained by the village engineer for the purpose of reviewing a traffic impact analysis for the development. The actual costs incurred
for the services of such professional assistance shall be assigned to the developer.
3. Administrative Review And Appeal Process: If the village engineer reviews a proposed subdivision plat of PUD plan and determines that traffic
impact mitigation is required under subsection D3b of this section, an applicant who disagrees with that determination may appeal the decision to the
zoning board, plan commission, zoning board of appeals, or other committee or board as determined by the corporate authorities. Such appeal shall
be processed on an expedited basis.
4. Review By Plan Commission Or Zoning Board Of Appeals: Consideration of the criteria for traffic impact and traffic impact mitigation as contained in
subsections D and E of this section shall be used to expand upon the zoning review standards utilized by the plan commission or zoning board of
appeals, whichever has jurisdiction, in their review and deliberation of all requests for:
a. Planned unit developments,
b. Special or conditional use,
c. Zoning variation,
d. Zoning amendment.
No additional traffic impact review under subsection D3a of this section shall be required within one year after the adoption of the ordinance granting
a zoning change or a special use permit for a development.
For developments which are to be constructed in phases, no additional traffic impact review under subsection D3a of this section shall be required as
long as construction of the development proceeds in accordance with the phase completion schedule set forth in the ordinance granting a zoning
change or a special use permit for the development.
5. Subdivisions: All developments which involve the subdivision of land and which create a "traffic impact" as defined and determined by this section,
shall be considered and reviewed procedurally as planned unit developments, and shall meet the requirements of subsection C4 of this section.
6. Other Development: All other development of lots of record, including those which may have received previous approval as planned unit
developments, special or conditional uses, zoning variations, or zoning amendments, but which create a "traffic impact", as defined and determined
by this section, shall be considered and reviewed procedurally as a special or conditional use and shall meet the requirements of subsection C4 of
this section.
7. Determination Of Traffic Generation: In the determination of whether a development shall be covered by subsection C5 or C6 of this section, traffic
generation, and resultant traffic impact, shall be based on the maximum allowable floor area ratio or gross residential density and intensity of use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 588/702
permitted by the underlying zoning. A lower density or intensity shall be used for traffic impact evaluation if the developer agrees to such density
and/or intensity of use as a condition to the issuance of a building permit by the village.
8. Findings: Upon conducting the required public hearing on an appeal, the planning commission or zoning board of appeals, whichever has
jurisdiction, shall set forth to the board of trustees, their recommendation(s) on the development and their findings as they relate to the requirements
and provisions of this section, in addition to other standards for review which may include: a) the desirability of the development as regards physical
development and neighborhood compatibility; b) tax base; and c) the economic well being and general welfare of the community.
9. Conditions And Guarantees: As a condition to the approval of a planned unit development, special or conditional use, zoning variation or zoning
amendment, the plan commission or zoning board of appeals, whichever has jurisdiction, may recommend and the board of trustees may stipulate
such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, density, construction and operation of the development as may be
necessary for the mitigation of traffic impact of the development.
In all cases in which developments are approved with traffic impact mitigation measures as conditions, the board of trustees shall require such
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in the connection therewith are being and will be complied
with.
10. Relationship To Other Planning And Zoning Ordinances: The application of this section does not relieve, alter, or otherwise modify the need for the
development to comply with other applicable village ordinances and the official comprehensive plan of the village.
11. Intergovernmental Coordination And Cooperation: In reviewing the traffic impact of developments under this section, the village should coordinate
with other public and private agencies on the implementation of transportation/land use goals and objectives as may be determined by the long
range transportation plans, local and regional land use plans, the local, regional and metropolitan planning process, or other plans and/or programs.
12. Review Of Public Development Plans: All plans for development activities to be undertaken by governmental entities, or public utilities, including
those regulated by the Illinois commerce commission, shall be reviewed by the village engineer for compliance with the provisions and intent of this
section.
D. Traffic Impact Analysis:
1. Overview Of Traffic Impact Analysis: The following criteria shall be used to determine the traffic impact for a development, and to identify the traffic
impact mitigation measures which may be approved by the village as conditions or restrictions on the development for the purpose of lessening or
avoiding traffic impact on the public street and highway system.
Evaluation of the traffic impact of a development with respect to these criteria is dependent on the baseline traffic volume and the geometry of the
public street and highway system in the study area as well as the site traffic generation of the development itself. The extent of traffic impact, and the
resultant traffic impact mitigation, will therefore vary by the particular development proposed at a particular location.
2. Guidelines For Traffic Impact Analysis: Traffic impact analysis required for developments under this section shall be based on the traffic impact
analysis report guidelines as adopted and set forth in subsection G of this section.
In the establishment of intersection level of service, and in the review of traffic impact analysis, as determined below, the village shall consider the
degree of highway capacity utilization by the development and the extent to which capacity is available for future traffic growth.
When future highway improvements, as might be included on either the impact fee program network or programmed highway network (as may be
permitted under subsection E2f of this section) are utilized for traffic impact analysis, the analysis shall include a five (5) year estimate of traffic
growth on streets and highways within the study area to reflect traffic generated by land use development outside the study area.
3. Traffic Impact Criteria: The following criteria are established as the minimum threshold criteria for identification of traffic impact under this section:
a. Level Of Service For Critical Intersections: For developments with site traffic generation greater than one hundred (100) peak hour vehicle trips
(inbound plus outbound) in either of the A.M. or P.M. peak hours, and the Saturday peak hour for certain developments, the traffic impact on level
of service shall be as determined below, for critical intersections where:
(1) Baseline Level Of Service Better Than C: The development causes one or more critical intersections to operate at worse than level of service C
under baseline plus site traffic conditions as assigned to the existing and committed highway network; or
(2) Baseline Level Of Service Worse Than C: The development causes the level of service for one or more critical intersections to worsen by more
than five percent (5%) (as measured by the average delay per vehicle or critical lane volume for signalized intersections, by reserve capacity for
unsignalized intersections under baseline traffic plus site traffic conditions as assigned to the existing and committed highway network).
b. Operational Or Safety Considerations: Traffic impact mitigation shall be required of all developments, regardless of site traffic volume, which might
reasonably be anticipated to create or worsen traffic safety or operational problems related to site access and traffic generation as based on, but
not limited to, the following criteria:
(1) Lack of adequate gaps for site traffic to enter/exit the external highway vehicle stream.
(2) The proposed use involves a drive-through, carryout or other automobile service oriented operation, where automobile stacking or queuing may
affect highway operations.
(3) The development is anticipated to create or worsen safety or operational problems due to "through" traffic increases on residential streets
within the village.
(4) The parking generation and on street or off street parking design characteristics of the development create or worsen conflicts between nonsite
traffic and parked vehicles.
(5) Internal site circulation and access design and related site access improvements deviate from applicable standards and policies for sight
distance, left turn lanes and other design features.
In determining the extent and specific nature of traffic impact related to the general safety and operational criteria listed above, the standards and
policies currently adopted by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, the Institute of Transportation Engineers, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 589/702
the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", may apply where they are more restrictive than the standards of the appropriate highway
agency.
E. Traffic Impact Mitigation:
1. Requirement For Public Hearing And Review: Developments which create a traffic impact, as determined by the criteria set forth in subsection D3 of
this section, and which are appealed, shall require a public hearing before the plan commission or zoning board of appeals, whichever has
jurisdiction, as provided for in subsections C4 through C6 of this section, to review and consider traffic impact mitigation measures.
2. Traffic Impact Mitigation Measures: Traffic impacts shall be lessened or reduced through the application of one or more of the traffic mitigation
measures that follow:
a. Reduction In Development Density: Reductions in trip generation and resultant traffic impacts can be realized by lowering the density of
development as measured by floor area ratio or gross residential density.
The village may take the following action to reduce traffic impact of the development as it relates to density:
(1) Reduce the allowable floor area ratio or gross residential density for the development otherwise permitted in the existing or proposed zoning for
the property.
(2) Deny or modify a zoning variation or amendment that would increase the floor area ratio or gross residential density of the project.
b. Change To A Less Traffic Intensive Land Use: Reductions in traffic generation and resultant traffic impact can be realized by restricting the
permitted land uses for the property to those which have lower traffic generating characteristics.
The village may take the following actions to reduce the traffic impact of a development as it relates to intensity:
(1) Deny or amend a request for a special or conditional use.
(2) Deny or amend a requested zoning amendment or zoning variations to a higher and more traffic intensive zoning classification for the proposed
development.
(3) Limit or otherwise specify the permitted land uses that may be developed under the existing zoning classification for the proposed development
based on the traffic generating character of those land uses.
c. Transportation Management Strategies: Traffic impact may be mitigated by reducing the number of auto trips, or increasing the occupancy of
automobile trips through the use of operating improvements such as flex hours, carpooling or vanpooling programs, transit related project or
programs, subject to the approval of the village provided that:
(1) The parameters and requirements of the operating program shall be specified in an agreement between the developer and the village recorded
as a restrictive covenant running with the land binding all future owners, providing for annual inspection and monitoring by the village and
penalties for noncompliance, and injunctive relief.
d. Development Phasing: A development may be approved in phases so that site traffic added by the development can be accommodated by site or
system highway improvements included in the traffic impact analysis as mitigation measures. Subsequent phases of the development, however,
shall each be required to comply with the provisions of this section.
e. Site Related Highway Access Improvements: Site related highway access improvements may be utilized to mitigate the traffic impact of a
development subject to criterion listed below, and with the approval of the village and the appropriate highway agency:
(1) Site Improvements: Construction of site related highway improvements which improve the level of service or safety of the public street and
highway system impacted by the development, provided that such improvements are approved by the appropriate highway agency.
f. System Improvements: Developments required to pay an impact fee under the road improvement impact fee law of the state of Illinois shall receive
credit for highway improvements contained on the impact fee highway network as traffic impact mitigation measures.
The village may, however, require that the development be staged or phased over a period of time, that the timing of improvement completion
bears a reasonable relationship to the timing (phasing) of traffic generation from the development.
Construction or funding of system related highway improvements over and above those delineated in the impact fee program highway network
may be used for traffic impact mitigation provided that each of the following criteria are met:
(1) The highway improvements are included on the programmed highway network and the timing of improvement completion bears a reasonable
relationship to the timing of traffic generation from the development.
(2) System improvements over and above the programmed highway network may be approved for traffic impact mitigation provided that such
improvements are consistent with the long range transportation plan for DuPage County and are approved by the appropriate highway agency.
g. Other Methods: Other methods proposed for traffic impact mitigation by the developer, which have been documented and proven to be effective in
mitigating the traffic impacts of development, may be considered by the village.
F. Variations: If the standards imposed by this section place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village for
a variation. The zoning board of appeals shall review the applicant's request for a variation and shall submit its recommendation to the village board of
trustees.
1. Standards For Considering Variations: No variation shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
a. The traffic impact mitigation measures contained in subsection E of this section are not practicable, feasible or effective in accomplishing the
stated objectives.
b. An exceptional hardship would result if the variances were not granted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 590/702
c. The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
d. There will be no additional threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
e. There will be no additional public expense or relief for improvement to streets and highways.
f. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem.
G. Traffic Impact Analysis Report Guidelines: The following outline is offered as a guideline for the preparation of traffic impact studies prepared to fulfill
the requirements of this section:
1. Introduction:
a. Letter of transmittal identifying the name of the development, purpose of the report and who prepared the report.
b. Description of proposed land use and operating characteristics, zoning (and requested change in zoning if appropriate), building floor space
(specify gross leasable or gross floor area) and floor area ratio or gross residential density of the development.
c. Location and type of proposed access points (site plan should show all existing driveways or streets within 200 feet of proposed drives or within
the limits of proposed highway improvements, whichever is greater).
d. Description and map of study area.
e. Identification of peak hours, and whether weekday and/or Saturday peaks are to be used in the analysis.
f. List specific issues to be addressed by the traffic impact study, based on discussion with local officials and highway agency representatives.
2. Baseline Traffic Conditions:
a. Description of road network and critical intersections in the vicinity of the site (number of lanes, jurisdiction, speed limit, and other pertinent
information).
b. Turning movement counts during the peak hour(s).
c. Prepare gap, queue length of other studies, where appropriate.
3. Site Traffic Generation:
a. Use the Institute of Transportation Engineers' "Trip Generation Manual" (fifth edition as updated). Other rates must be documented based on
local/regional uses of comparable location and characteristics.
All trip generation rates below the level provided in table 1 of this subsection, and all retail "pass-by" factors that exceed the level provided in table
1 of this subsection, must be documented (ITE or local studies are acceptable).
TABLE 1
TYPICAL ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS AND TRIP GENERATION RATES
Zoning
Category Description
Typical Density Range (Units
Per Gross Acre)
Peak Hour Traffic
Generation
A.M. P.M.
In
Out
In
Out
ITE Trip Generation
Category
E-1 and E-
2
Estates (large lots) (20,000 - 40,000+ square foot
lots)
1.0 - 1.8 0.26
0.71
0.33
0.54
210 - (adj) SF
detached
R-1 Low density single-family detached (11,000 -
20,000 square foot lots)
1.9 - 3.0 0.20
0.55
0.65
0.35
210 - SF detached
R-2 Medium density single-family residential (9,000 -
11,000 square foot lots)
3.1 - 4.0 0.20
0.55
0.65
0.35
210 - SF detached
R-3 High density single-family detached (4,000 -
9,000 square foot lots)
4.1 - 8.0 0.16
0.49
0.47
0.35
231 - low rise condo
R-4 Low to medium density multi-family (garden
apartments, 6 flats, etc.)
8.1 - 15.0 0.11
0.40
0.41
0.22
221 - low rise
apartment
R-5 High density multiple-family (3 or more story
building)
15.1 - 25 0.06
0.35
0.32
0.17
220 - apartments
(post-1973)
Trip Rate Per DU
Trip Rate Per 1,000 Square Feet
ORI/LI Industrial park 0.28
0.06
0.09
0.29
DuPage County trip
generation study1
O/ORI General office (<100,000 gross square feet) 1.71
0.26
0.32
1.65
710 - general office
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 591/702
O/ORI General office (100,000 - 200,000 gross square feet) 1.52
0.23
0.28
1.47
710 - general office
O/ORI General office (>200,000 gross square feet) 1.42
0.21
0.34
1.37
710 - general office
B-1 and B-
3
Shopping center (<50,000 gross land area)2 1.62
0.70
4.34
4.34
820 - shopping center
B-2 Shopping center (50,000 - 100,000 gross land area)3 1.22
0.53
3.11
3.11
820 - shopping center
B-3 Shopping center (100,000 - 200,000 gross land area)4 0.92
0.30
2.25
2.25
820 - shopping center
Notes:
1. ITE rates are higher.
2. B-1/neighborhood SC/pass-by factor = 45 percent.
3. B-2/community SC/pass-by factor = 40 percent.
4. B-3/strip (arterial) SC/pass-by factor = 35 percent.
The ITE "Trip Generation Manual" provides a more detailed breakdown of trip generation by square footage for nonresidential uses.
Traffic generation rates used in this report (from ITE or DuPage County studies) assume a base (low intensity) level of bus service (fixed route or
demand responsive) open to the general public. Express bus service or subscription transit service (including carpooling and vanpooling) may be
relocated in adjusted trip generation rates with the appropriate mode split analysis documentation.
b. Traffic generation (inbound and outbound) during the peak impact hours should be based on the maximum allowable density of development
permitted by the underlying zoning, unless lower densities are agreed to by the developer.
c. Average daily traffic generation (and assignments) may be required for pavement structural design purposes.
4. Nonsite Traffic Projections:
a. Define design year (opening of proposed development or other agreed upon point in time).
b. Identify committed developments in the study area which impact critical intersections, and incorporate nonsite traffic into the baseline traffic
volume.
c. Use an appropriate growth rate or other forecasting method to adjust nonsite through traffic volumes where a significant through traffic component
exists (e.g., intercounty trips or trips generated beyond the development).
d. For large scale developments (greater than 500 peak direction trips per hour) traffic assignments from subarea transportation models or
countywide long range traffic assignments should be reviewed.
5. Traffic Assignments:
a. Discuss method for traffic assignment and assumptions used for assignment of traffic to the network.
b. Assign peak period traffic to intersections and access points. Include figures for:
(1) Baseline traffic,
(2) Site traffic,
(3) Total traffic (baseline plus site).
6. Baseline And Future Capacity And Operations Analysis:
a. Minimum Number Of Critical Intersections: The minimum number of critical intersections to be included in the traffic impact study shall be based
on the schematic illustrations contained on figure 1 of this subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 592/702
The village engineer may determine that additional critical intersections be included in the analysis based on review of the trip generation and
distribution parameters of the development, as well as the specific configuration of the affected highway network.
b. Level Of Service Analysis: A level of service analysis should be prepared for every new development which generates one hundred (100) or more
peak hour, peak direction vehicle trips.
The level of service for critical intersections shall be calculated using the "critical movement analysis" procedures of the national cooperative
highway research program special report 210.
The computerized procedures for signalized intersection analysis contained in the highway capacity manual special report 209 may be utilized if
the village engineer believes its use may be more appropriate for analysis of existing or improved signalized intersection conditions.
(1) Baseline Level Of Service: Level of service should be calculated using baseline traffic data and the existing and committed highway network.
(2) Development Generating Five Hundred Or More Vehicles Per Hour: Any development which generates five hundred (500) or more vehicles per
hour during the A.M. or P.M. peak hour shall be considered a large scale development, and shall evaluate traffic conditions projected for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 593/702
design period used by the appropriate highway agency (normally 20 years) based on traffic assignments approved by the village engineer, and
based on the approved long range plan highway network.
7. Operation Problems: Identify operation problems.
8. Recommended Access Location And Design: Use of arterial corridor development policies and standards or other adopted criteria (where more
restrictive) is recommended.
a. Review site plan:
(1) Internal reservoir at access points.
(2) Parking layout.
(3) Loading dock locations and access, including design truck uses.
(4) Evaluate transit accessibility using the "pace development guidelines".
(5) Recommend changes to site plan.
9. Proposed Traffic Mitigation Measures:
a. Identify proposed traffic impact mitigation measures, including, but not limited to, street and highway widening, intersection traffic control, change
in land use intensity (floor area ratio or use), change in site plan, alternative work schedules, ride sharing, etc.
10. Summary: Summary of findings and recommendations (may be listed in outline form at the beginning of the report). (Ord. 95-24, 4-4-1995)
11-12-5: APPENDIX E; SITE DEVELOPMENT AND EARLY EARTHWORK CHECKLISTS AND HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT:
A. Appendix E-1; Subdivision Checklist For Early Earthwork Permit:
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT
SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST FOR EARLY EARTHWORK PERMIT
Project Name: Case #:
1. * Application for Final Plat of Subdivision Submitted to CD
2. * Letter of Request for Early Earthworks Submitted to CD
3. * Final Plat of Subdivision Approved by VB
4. * Early Earthworks Request Approved by VB
5. * Grading Plan Approval Letter Issued by Village Engineer
6. * Cash Bond, Surety Bond, or Standby Letter of Credit Form sent to Petitioner
7. * Letter of Credit Approved by Village Attorney
8. * Hold Harmless Agreement Form Sent to Petitioner
9. * Hold Harmless Agreement Approved by Village Attorney
10. * Outstanding Bills Paid
11. * Erosion Control/Tree Preservation Fence Permit (if applicable)
12. * Early Earthworks and/or Construction/Sales Trailer App. Completed (Bldg. Dept)
B. Appendix E-2; Hold Harmless Agreement For Early Earthworks:
HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT FOR EARLY EARTHWORKS
(ON COMPANY LETTERHEAD)
[Insert Date]
Village of Bartlett
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, IL 60103
RE: [Insert Name of Subdivision or PUD]
[Insert Name of Petitioner] (the "Petitioner") hereby requests the Village of Bartlett (the "Village") to permit the Petitioner to proceed with early
earthwork/rough grading (the "Grading Work") for the [Insert Name of Subdivision or PUD] (the "Subdivision") prior to approval by the Village Board of
Trustees (the "Village Board") of the Final Subdivision Plat and/or the Final Planned Unit Development Plan (the "Plan") and/or the execution of the Plat
by the Village President, in accordance with the grading plan therefor prepared by [Insert Name of Engineer] dated , last revised (sheets of sheets),
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 594/702
and approved by the Village Engineer (the "Grading Plans") for the Subdivision with the understanding that the granting of such permission by the
Village does not in any way relieve Petitioner of its responsibilities to complete the Plan and/or Plat approval process in compliance with the Village
ordinances, and that Petitioner is proceeding at its own peril and risk in performing the Grading Work for the Subdivision, and that Petitioner may be
ordered to cease such grading work activities even after Petitioner has incurred substantial expenses in connection with the Grading Work, and in the
event that the Final Plat or PUD Plan for the Subdivision and/or PUD is not approved by the Village Board and/or signed by the Village President.
Petitioner shall complete the Plat/PUD Plan approval process in accordance with the Village ordinances, including, without limitation the submission
of all plans, materials and information requested by the Village staff.
In consideration of the granting of such permission and accommodation, Petitioner acknowledges and agrees that nothing contained in the Early
Earthworks Permit, if granted by the Village, authorizes it, or any of its contractors or subcontractors, to install or construct any public or private
improvements on or to the Subdivision property. Petitioner, personally and individually, and jointly and severally, agree to defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the Village of Bartlett, its Village President, Village Board of Trustees, officers, employees, attorneys, consultants and agents from and
against any and all liability arising out of the Grading Work for the Subdivision, including, but not limited to, claims for bodily injuries, death, personal
injuries, property damages, mechanic's liens, and for the cost to restore said property to its original condition in the event the Plat is not approved
within six (6) months of the date of this Agreement, except for good cause shown, and unless said time period is extended by the Corporate Authorities
of the Village in its sole discretion.
In no event will the Petitioner or [insert name of Owner if other than Petitioner] proceed or permit any contractor or subcontractor to proceed with any
Grading Work of the Subdivision until there has been deposited with the Village Clerk a Cash Bond, performance bond and labor and material payment
bond, or a standby letter of credit in form approved by the Village Attorney, in an amount equal to 150% of the cost to perform the Grading Work and
the cost to restore the said property to its original condition, based on estimates therefor submitted by a licensed engineer retained by Petitioner and
approved by the Village Engineer.
[Insert name of Petitioner if company]
By:
Name:
Title:
[Insert name of Petitioner, if individual]
Signature
Personally and individually
C. Appendix E-3; Subdivision Checklist For Site Development Permit:
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT
SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST FOR A SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
Project Name:
Case #:
1. * Application for Final Plat of Subdivision Submitted to Com Dev
2. * List of Street Names Submitted to Com Dev for Approval (If Applicable)
3. * Special Service Area Proposing Establishment Approved by VB (If Applicable)
4. * Special Service Area Established by Village Board (If Applicable)
5. * Final Plat Approved by Village Board (Date: )
6. * Addressing of Plat Completed by Community Development
7. * Subdivision Street Signs Paid (Public Works to calculate fees)
8. * Monotony Code Meeting with Building Director (Petitioner to Schedule)
9. * Final Engineering Approval Letter Issued by the Village Engineer
10. * PICA and alternate Construction Security Forms sent to Petitioner (Appendices F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4 and F-5 to the Subdivision
Ordinance)
11. * Public Improvement Completion Agreement Approved by Village Board
12. * Construction Security Approved by Village Attorney (Original & 1 Copy)
13. * Engineering Review Fees Paid (11/2% of Engineer's Approved Estimate)
14. * Homeowner Assoc. Covenants Approved by Village Attorney (Original & 1 Copy)
15. * 5 Sets of Approved Engineering Plans Submitted to Village Engineer
16. * Grading Mylar Submitted to CD (Surface Water Statement, Certified & Sealed)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 595/702
17. * Pre-Construction Meeting with Village Engineer (Petitioner to Schedule)
18. * Site Development and/or Construction/Sales Trailer App. Completed (Bldg. Dept.)
19. * Building Department Sign-Off Sheet Completed
20. * Subdivision Mylar given to Com Dev to obtain Signatures and Recording
(Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
11-12-6: APPENDIX F; COMPLETION AGREEMENT, BONDS AND LETTERS OF CREDIT:
A. Appendix F-1; Public Improvements Completion Agreement:
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETION AGREEMENT
MADE AND ENTERED into , 20 , by and among (the "Owner"), (the "Developer"), and the Village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage and Kane Counties,
Illinois ("the Village").
RECITALS:
a. The Owner is the owner of the real estate located in the Village legally described on Exhibit A appended hereto and made part hereof (the
"Property").
b. The Developer has applied for approval of [a final plat of subdivision of the real estate to be known as (the "Subdivision")] or [a final planned unit
development plan (the "PUD Plan") for the Property to be known as (the "PUD")]. [Delete one]
c. The Owner and the Developer jointly and severally bind and obligate themselves to the obligations of the other as stated herein, but they are,
nevertheless, sometimes hereinafter referred to collectively as the "Owner/Developer".
d. The Developer has submitted to the Village for its approval the engineering plans and specifications for the on-site and any off-site public
improvements for the subdivision, including, but not limited to, site grading and erosion control, water distribution system, sanitary sewer system, storm
water management and storm sewer system, street system, street lights, sidewalks, bicycle paths, driveway approaches, landscaping and tree planting
(the "Public Improvements") for the Subdivision [or PUD] prepared by dated last revised (the "Plans") and the Village Engineer has approved the Plans.
[ALTERNATE - STRIKE ONE PARAGRAPH e.]
e. The Developer will act as general contractor to construct and install the Public Improvements and will hire various subcontractors and material
suppliers to furnish labor and material in connection with the Public Improvements.
OR [DELETE ONE]
e. The Owner and/or Developer has hired [Insert name of general contractor(s) or construction managers if other than Developer] (the "Contractor")
to act as its general contractor to construct and install the Public Improvements.
f. The Village is willing to execute the plat of subdivision or approve the PUD Plan only upon the condition that the Owner and the Developer agree
to cause the Public Improvements for such Subdivision or PUD to be installed and completed in a good and workmanlike manner with materials of
good quality in strict accordance with the Plans and the Bartlett Subdivision & PUD Ordinance (the "Subdivision Ordinance"), will be fully paid for, and
will be maintained by the Developer for a period of from 15 months to 24 months after their completion as determined by the Village Engineer, and such
obligations, and those set forth herein, and/or in the Ordinances of the Village, will be properly secured.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises hereinafter set forth, and for other good and valuable considerations, the receipt and
sufficiency whereof is expressly acknowledged, it is agreed by and among the parties as follows:
1. The Village agrees to approve the final PUD Plan or cause the final plat of the Subdivision to be executed by its President, attested by its Clerk,
signed by the Chairman of its Plan Commission, and, provided the Owner and/or the Developer shall secure all other necessary plat approvals and
paid tax bills, recorded by the Recorder of Deeds of the appropriate county.
2. The Owner and the Developer jointly and severally promise and agree: (i) to construct the Public Improvements, or cause them to be constructed,
in a good and workmanlike manner with materials of good quality in strict accordance with the Plans and the Subdivision Ordinance and to complete
each of the eight categories of construction set forth in paragraph 3 on or before the completion dates therein specified; and (ii) to pay to the
Contractor, all prime contractors, subcontractors and material suppliers who furnish labor or material, or both, for the installation and construction of the
Public Improvements the full amounts due them for such labor and materials; (iii) to maintain the Public Improvements for the Maintenance Period
(between 15 and 24 months as determined by the Village Engineer), after the date certified by the Village Engineer as the date on which the last of the
Public Improvements were completed, in strict accordance with the Plans therefor and the Subdivision Ordinance (the "Completion Date"). The
Developer's maintenance obligations shall include, but are not limited to: (a) maintaining the Public Improvements, (b) repairing any damage to the
Public Improvements caused by the Developer, its agents, servants, employees or its successors and assigns, or by any contractor hired by the
Developer, its agents, servants, employees, successors or assigns, or any subcontractor hired by such contractor, (c) repairing or replacing any
defective workmanship or materials in the Public Improvements, (d) making good and protecting the Village against the results of any defective
workmanship or materials appearing to have been incorporated in any part of the Public Improvements which shall have appeared or been discovered
within the Maintenance Period or any extension thereof, and (e) paying for the cost of all such maintenance and/or repair work. In the event that any of
the Public Improvements are damaged, the burden shall be on the Developer to show that such damage was not caused by the Developer, its agents,
servants, employees, successors or assigns, or by any contractor hired by the Developer, its agents, servants, employees, successors or assigns or
any subcontractor hired by such contractor.
3. Completion Dates. The Public Improvements shall be completed in accordance with the following Schedule for each of the following categories:
(i) Site grading, including grading of rights-of-way, detention basins and/or retention ponds, lots and open space areas shall be completed on or
before [Insert completion date].
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 596/702
(ii) Underground improvements, including water mains, vaults and valve vaults, sanitary sewer mains and manholes and any required force main,
shall be completed on or before [Insert completion date].
(iii) Storm water facilities, including underground items, detention items, wetland/riparian areas and erosion control, shall be completed on or before
[Insert completion date].
(iv) Curbs and street base, including "first lift" of pavement shall be completed on or before [Insert completion date].
(v) Street lighting shall be completed on or before [Insert completion date].
(vi) Sidewalks and bicycle paths shall be completed on or before [Insert completion date].
(vii) Parkway and open space restoration (including removal of all material, overburden and soil stock piles, and repairs to catch basins, manholes
and other structures located in parkways and open space areas), landscaping, sidewalks and street lights shall be completed on or before [Insert
completion date].
(viii) Final street surface ("second lift"), including necessary repairs to street base "first lift", catch basins, manholes and other structures located
between curb lines shall be completed on or before [Insert completion date].
4. The Owner and Developer further agree to furnish and cause to be maintained at all times proper construction security to guaranty the completion
of, payment for, and maintenance of the Public Improvements, and as security for its obligations hereunder and under the Subdivision Ordinance in the
amount of $ [insert amount equal to the lesser of (a) 115% of the reasonably estimated cost of the Public Improvements adjusted for Public
Improvements scheduled to be completed more than one (1) year after the date of this Agreement by adding 1.25% per month for each month or
fraction thereof by which such scheduled completion date, as determined by the latest date set forth in paragraph 3 hereof exceeds one (1) year up to
a maximum of 150% of the estimated cost; or (b) 110% of the bid amount for the Public Improvements based upon executed contracts for the
installation and construction of all of the Public Improvements on file with the Village Clerk.] Such construction security shall be in the form of (i) a (1)
Subdivision Performance Bond, and (2) a Subdivision Labor and Material Payment Bond, hereinafter sometimes collectively referred to as
"Performance and Payment Bonds"; or (ii) a Standby Letter of Credit (Performance and Payment), hereinafter sometimes referred to as a
"Performance and Payment Letter of Credit", or (iii) a cash bond held pursuant to an Irrevocable Cash Deposit Agreement, hereinafter sometimes
referred to as a "Cash Bond", each in form as set forth in the Subdivision Ordinance, except for such deviations and modifications therefrom as
approved by the Village Attorney.
5. The Owner shall furnish an Owner's Sworn Statement(s) and the Developer (or the Contractor and all other prime contractor(s) hired by the
Owner to perform the Public Improvement work) shall each furnish to the Village Contractor's Sworn Statement(s), and each shall furnish such final
waivers of lien from all subcontractors and material suppliers that furnished labor and/or material for or in connection with the Public Improvements as
shall be necessary to insure the Village against mechanic's lien claims under Section 23 of the Mechanic's Lien Act (770 ILCS 60/23) and against
claims for lien under the Public Construction Bond Act (30 ILCS 550/1, et seq.) (West 2008) (the "Bond Act") on any Subdivision Performance Bond,
Subdivision Labor and Material Payment Bond, Maintenance Bond, Standby Letter of Credit (Performance and Payment), Standby Letter of Credit
(Maintenance) (hereinafter sometimes referred to as a "Maintenance Letter of Credit"), Irrevocable Cash Deposit Agreement, or other security that the
Owner and the Developer, or either of them, has/have caused to be posted with the Village to secure their respective and mutual obligations under this
Agreement and under the Subdivision Ordinance.
6. Construction and Maintenance Security.
A. Surety Bonds.
i. The Subdivision Performance Bond and the Subdivision Labor and Material Payment Bond shall be maintained and renewed by the
Owner/Developer and shall be held in escrow by the Village until the posting of the Maintenance Bond and satisfaction of the Owner/Developer's other
obligations required for acceptance of the Public Improvements by the Corporate Authorities under the Subdivision Ordinance. After the posting of the
Maintenance Bond and subsequent acceptance of the Public Improvements by the Corporate Authorities, the Village shall release the Performance
and Payment Bond.
ii. Maintenance Bonds. Prior to the acceptance by the Village of the Public Improvements pursuant to this Agreement and the Subdivision
Ordinance, the Owner/Developer shall post a Maintenance Bond in the amount of 15% of actual total cost of the Public Improvements based on
contracts on file with the Village Clerk, otherwise 15% of the original penal sum on the Subdivision Performance Bond (the "Maintenance Amount") as
security for the performance of the Owner's/Developer's maintenance obligations under this Agreement and the Subdivision Ordinance. The
Maintenance Bond shall be held by the Village in escrow until the last to occur of (a) the date that is the end of the Maintenance Period as determined
by the Village Engineer, or (b) the date that is one (1) year after the proper correction of any defect or deficiency in the Public Improvements of which
defect or deficiency the Village notifies the Developer within the Maintenance Period pursuant to this Agreement and payment of the cost of correction.
If the Village is required to draw, make a claim on and/or to bring suit to collect on the Maintenance Bond by reason of the Owner's/Developer's failure
to fulfill its maintenance obligations under this Agreement and/or the Subdivision Bond, then the Owner/Developer shall within ten days thereafter
cause the Maintenance Bond to be increased to its full original amount.
iii. Form of Surety Bonds. The Subdivision Performance Bond, Subdivision Labor and Material Payment Bond and the Maintenance Bond
(sometimes collectively referred to herein as the "Surety Bonds"), shall each be in a form prescribed in the Subdivision Ordinance, except for such
deviations and modifications therefrom that are satisfactory to the Village Attorney, and each shall be issued by a surety company licensed by the
Illinois Department of Insurance authorizing it to issue and execute surety bonds and the surety company shall have a financial strength rating ("FSR")
of at least A- as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc., Moody's Investor Service, Standard & Poor's Corporation, or similar rating agency. As required
under the Public Construction Bond Act (30 ILCS 550/0.01, et seq.), each of the Surety Bonds shall be deemed to substantially contain the following
provisions whether such provisions are inserted in such bond or not:
(a) "The Principal and Sureties on this Bond agree that all the undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions and agreements of the contract or
contracts entered into between the Principal and the State or any political subdivision thereof will be performed and fulfilled and to pay all persons,
firms and corporations having contracts with the Principal or with subcontractors, all just claims due them under the provisions of such contracts for
labor performed or materials furnished in the performance of the contract on account of which this Bond is given, when such claims are not satisfied out
of the contract price of the contract on account of which this Bond is given (which in this instance is none), after final settlement between the officers,
board, commission or agent of the State or of any political subdivision thereof and the Principal has been made.";
and
(b) "Upon the default of the Principal with respect to undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions, and agreements, the termination of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 597/702
contractor's right to proceed with the work, and written notice of that default and termination by the State or any political subdivision to the Surety
("Notice"), the Surety shall promptly remedy the default by taking one of the following actions:
(1) "The Surety shall complete the work pursuant to a written takeover agreement, using a completing contractor jointly selected by the Surety and
the State or any political subdivision; or
(2) "The Surety shall pay a sum of money to the obligee, up to the penal sum of the bond, that represents the reasonable cost to complete the work
that exceeds the unpaid balance of the contract sum.
"The Surety shall respond to the Notice within 15 working days of receipt indicating the course of action that it intends to take or advising that it
requires more time to investigate the default and select a course of action. If the Surety requires more than 15 working days to investigate the default
and select a course of action or if the surety elects to complete the work with a completing contractor that is not prepared to commence performance
within 15 working days after receipt of Notice, and if the State or any political subdivision determines it is in the best interest of the State to maintain the
progress of the work, the State or any political subdivision may continue to work until the completing contractor is prepared to commence performance.
Unless otherwise agreed to by the procuring agency, in no case may the surety take longer than 30 working days to advise the State or political
subdivision on the course of action it intends to take. The Surety shall be liable for reasonable costs incurred by the State or any political subdivision to
maintain the progress to the extent the costs exceed the unpaid balance of the contract sum, subject to the penal sum of the bond."
Each Surety Bond shall (a) be construed under the laws of Illinois, (b) provide for exclusive jurisdiction in the circuit courts of Illinois and venue in the
Circuit Court for the 18th Judicial Circuit of DuPage County, Illinois, and (c) if at any time it will expire within 60 days or any lesser number of days, and
if it has not been renewed, or if it has not been replaced by a suitable Surety Bond from a different surety company meeting the minimum requirements
set forth in paragraph 6Aiii, and if any applicable obligation of the Owner/Developer for which it is security remains uncompleted or unsatisfactory to the
Village, then the Village may, without notice and without being required to take any further action of any nature whatsoever, make a demand on the
Subdivision Performance Bond and file suit on said Bond, and thereafter either hold all damages awarded or proceeds paid as security for the
satisfactory completion of the obligations or employ the proceeds to complete the obligations and reimburse the Village for any and all costs and
expenses, including without limitation legal fees and administrative costs incurred by the Village, as the Village shall determine, and thereafter use the
remaining proceeds, if any, for the payment of subcontractors and/or material suppliers that have furnished labor and/or materials for the Public
Improvements that have timely filed and perfected their respective lien rights under Section 23 of the Mechanic's Lien Act (770 ILCS 60/23) (if
applicable) and under the Public Construction Bond Act (30 ILCS 550/et seq.) and that have not collected under the Subdivision Payment Bond. The
aggregate amount of the Subdivision Performance Bond and Subdivision Labor and Material Payment bond may only be reduced to reflect a reduction
in the total amount of the deposit required pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Agreement to 110% of the bid amount based on executed contracts on file
with the Village Clerk. No Surety Bond shall be released until the Public Improvement work is satisfactorily completed and all of the
Owner's/Developer's obligations under this Agreement, the Subdivision Ordinance and Ordinance [insert ordinance number and insert title of ordinance
approving of the Subdivision] (collectively, the "Village Approvals") have been satisfied, and the corporate authorities of the Village have passed an
ordinance accepting the Public Improvements for the Subdivision. Further, none of the Surety Bonds shall be released unless and until the
Owner/Developer has presented to the Village Attorney owner's sworn statements, contractors' sworn statements, and final waivers of lien, as may be
appropriate, and any additional documentation that the Village Attorney may reasonably request to demonstrate full payment of the Public
Improvements and full payment to all contractors, subcontractors, and material suppliers performing such work or furnishing such materials.
iv. Replenishment of Surety Bonds. If at any time the Village determines that the penal sum on each of the Performance and Payment Bonds is not,
or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the remaining unpaid cost of all Public Improvements and all unpaid Village fees, or that the funds remaining in
the Maintenance Bond are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay all unpaid costs of correcting any and all defects and deficiencies in the Public
Improvements, then, within ten days after a demand by the Village, the Owner/Developer shall cause the Surety to increase the penal sum of the
appropriate Surety Bond(s) to an amount determined by the Village to be sufficient to cover said deficiency and pay the unpaid costs and fees, or shall
deposit said sum with the Village pursuant to an Irrevocable Cash Deposit Agreement in form as set forth in the Subdivision Ordinance, otherwise the
Village may make demand upon the Principal and the Surety for the penal sum of the applicable Surety Bond(s) and pursue all remedies available to
the Village under the applicable Surety Bond(s) and pursue any deficiency from such Owner/Developer.
v. Replacement Surety Bonds. In the event the surety on the Performance and Payment Bonds has issued a notice of expiration of the applicable
bond as provided in the underlying Surety Bond, and/or in the event (i) the Owner/Developer has not performed all of its obligations under this
Agreement, the Subdivision Ordinance and the other Village Approvals as determined by the Village in its sole discretion prior to the date by which the
Village must bring suit on the Performance and Payment Bonds, or either of them to enforce it; and (ii) either (a) the issuer of the Performance and
Payment Bond has not issued an extension or retraction of its notice of expiration more than 30 days prior to its expiration date, or (b) the
Owner/Developer has not caused another surety company that meets the minimum requirements set forth in paragraph 6Aiii above to issue a
replacement surety bond in form as prescribed in the Subdivision Ordinance with such deviations and modifications therefrom that are satisfactory to
the Village Attorney within said 30 days prior to its expiration date, the Village may make a demand on the Principal and Surety on the Performance
and Payment bond and pursue all of its remedies thereunder. If at any time the Village determines that the Surety is no longer licensed by the Illinois
Department of Insurance and authorized to issue and execute sureties in Illinois or its FSR has dropped below an A- on any of the specific rating
agencies listed in paragraph 6Aiii, is insolvent, or is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is otherwise in danger of being unable to honor the
appropriate bond obligations at any time during its term, or if the Village otherwise reasonably deems itself to be insecure, then the Village shall have
the right to demand that the Owner/Developer provide replacement surety bonds from a surety that meets said requirements and which is satisfactory
to the Village. The replacement surety bonds shall be deposited with the Village not later than 30 days after the demand. After deposit of the
replacement surety bonds meeting said requirements, the Village shall surrender the original surety bonds to the Surety that issued them.
B. Letters Of Credit.
i. The Performance and Payment Letter of Credit shall be maintained and renewed by the Owner/Developer and shall be held in escrow by the
Village until the posting of a Maintenance Letter of Credit and satisfaction of the Owner/Developer's other obligations required for acceptance of the
Public Improvements by the Corporate Authorities under the Subdivision Ordinance. After the posting of the Maintenance Letter of Credit and
subsequent acceptance of the Public Improvements by the Corporate Authorities, the Village shall release the Performance and Payment Letter of
Credit.
ii. Maintenance Letter of Credit. Prior to any required acceptance by the Village of the Public Improvements pursuant to this Agreement and the
Subdivision Ordinance, the Owner/Developer shall post a new standby letter of credit in the amount of 15% of the actual total cost of the Public
Improvements based on contracts on file with the Village Clerk, otherwise 15% of the original amount of the Performance and Payment Letter of Credit
as security for the performance of the Owner's/Developer's maintenance obligations under this Agreement and the Subdivision Ordinance (the
"Maintenance Letter of Credit"). The Maintenance Letter of Credit shall be held by the Village in escrow until the last to occur of (a) the date that is the
end of the Maintenance Period set forth in this Agreement, or (b) the date that is one (1) year after the proper correction of any defect or deficiency in
the Public Improvements of which the defect or deficiency the Village notified the Developer within the Maintenance Period and proof of full payment of
the cost of correction. If the Village is required to draw on the Maintenance Letter of Credit by reason of the Owner's/Developer's failure to fulfill its
obligations under this Agreement, then the Owner/Developer shall within ten days thereafter cause the Maintenance Letter of Credit to be increased to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 598/702
its full original amount.
iii. Form of Letters of Credit. The Performance and Payment Letter of Credit and the Maintenance Letter of Credit shall be in a form prescribed in the
Subdivision Ordinance except for such deviations and modifications therefrom that are satisfactory to the Village Attorney, and each shall be issued
from a bank or financial institution (a) acceptable to the Village, (b) having capital assets of at least $50,000,000 and a capital asset ratio of at least 6%,
and (c) insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or otherwise federally insured. Each letter of credit (a) shall be irrevocable and shall not
be cancelled without the prior consent of the Village, (b) shall not require the consent of the Owner/Developer prior to any draw on it by the Village, (c)
shall not allow for any right of set off by the issuer thereof as to any amounts due from the Owner/Developer to the issuer, (d) shall be construed under
the laws of Illinois, and (e) if at any time it will expire within 60 days or any lesser number of days, and if it has not been renewed, or if it has not been
replaced by a suitable Standby Letter of Credit from a different issuer meeting the minimum requirements set forth in Section 11-9-9B of the
Subdivision Ordinance, and if any applicable obligation of the Owner/Developer for which it is security remains uncompleted or unsatisfactory to the
Village, then the Village may, without notice and without being required to take any further action of any nature whatsoever, (i) call and draw down the
letter of credit and thereafter either hold all proceeds as security for the satisfactory completion of the obligations or employ the proceeds to complete
the obligations and reimburse the Village for any and all costs and expenses, including without limitation legal fees and administrative costs incurred by
the Village, as the Village shall determine, and thereafter use the remaining proceeds, if any (ii) for the payment of subcontractors and/or material
suppliers that have furnished labor and/or materials for the Public Improvements that have timely filed and perfected their respective lien rights under
Section 23 of the Mechanic's Lien Act (770 ILCS 60/23) (if applicable) and under the Public Construction Bond Act (30 ILCS 550/et seq.). The
aggregate amount of the letter of credit may be reduced only for completed categories of the Public Improvements work as those categories and time
schedule are described in subparagraphs (i) through (viii) inclusive of paragraph 3 of this Agreement, but only after joint direction by the Developer and
the Village, either to reflect a reduction in the total amount of the deposit required pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Agreement to 110% of the bid amount
based on executed contracts on file with the Village Clerk, or to reimburse the Owner/Developer for payment of Public Improvement work satisfactorily
completed, but in no event shall any such reduction cause remaining balance of the Performance and Payment Letter of Credit be reduced below
150% of the amount certified by a licensed engineer retained by the Developer as to the value of the remaining work as confirmed by the Village
Engineer, and in no event below the Maintenance Amount, and further provided that all work that has been completed for which a reduction is sought
has been fully paid for based on said engineer's review of owner's sworn statement(s), general contractor's sworn statement(s) and applicable lien
waivers, or have been paid through a construction escrow established at an Illinois title company, with copies of interim endorsements issued by the
title company and supporting documents furnished to the Village. No reduction for payment of Public Improvement work satisfactorily completed shall
be allowed, except after presentation by the Owner/Developer to the Village Attorney of proper owner's sworn statements, contractors' sworn
statements, partial or final waivers of lien, as may be appropriate, and any additional documentation that the Village Attorney may reasonably request
to demonstrate satisfactory completion of the Public Improvement(s) in question and full payment therefor of all contractors, subcontractors, and
material suppliers performing such work or furnishing such materials. The Maintenance Letter of Credit shall not be reduced by reason of any cost
incurred by the Owner/Developer to satisfy its obligations under this Agreement.
iv. Replenishment of Letters of Credit. If at any time the Village determines that the Performance and Payment Letter of Credit is not, or may not be,
sufficient to pay in full the remaining unpaid cost of all Public Improvements and all unpaid Village fees, or that the funds remaining in the Maintenance
Letter of Credit are not, or may not be, sufficient to pay all unpaid costs of correcting any and all defects and deficiencies in the Public Improvements,
then, within ten days after a demand by the Village, the Owner/Developer shall cause the issuer to increase the amount of the appropriate letter of
credit to an amount determined by the Village to be sufficient to cover said deficiency and pay the unpaid costs and fees, or shall deposit said sum with
the Village pursuant to an Irrevocable Cash Deposit agreement in form as set forth in the Subdivision Ordinance, otherwise the Village may draw down
the entire remaining balance of the applicable letters of credit and pursue any deficiency from such Owner/Developer.
v. Replacement Letter of Credit. In the event the issuer of the Performance and Payment Letter of Credit has issued a notice of non-extension, and
(i) the Owner/Developer has not performed all of its obligations under this Agreement and the Subdivision Ordinance as determined by the Village in its
sole discretion; and (ii) either (a) the issuer of the Performance and Payment Letter of Credit has not issued a retraction of its notice of non-extension
more than 30 days prior to its expiration date, or (b) the Owner/Developer has not caused another financial institution that meets the minimum
requirements set forth in Section 11-9-9B of the Subdivision Ordinance to issue a replacement standby letter of credit in form as prescribed in the
Subdivision Ordinance with such deviations and modifications therefrom that are satisfactory to the Village Attorney within said 30 days prior to its
expiration date, the Village may draw on the Performance and Payment Letter of Credit. If at any time the Village determines that the bank issuing
either the Performance and Payment Letter of Credit or the Maintenance Letter of Credit is without capital assets of at least $50,000,000 and a capital
to asset ratio of not less than 6%, is unable to meet any federal or state requirement for reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the
foregoing, or is otherwise in danger of being unable to honor the appropriate letter of credit at any time during its term, or if the Village otherwise
reasonably deems itself to be insecure, then the Village shall have the right to demand that the Owner/Developer provide a replacement letter of credit
from a bank satisfactory to the Village. The replacement letter of credit shall be deposited with the Village not later than 30 days after the demand. After
deposit of the replacement letter of credit meeting said requirements, the Village shall surrender the original letter of credit to the issuer of the original
Letter of Credit.
C. Cash Bonds.
i. A cash bond paid by the Owner/Developer pursuant to an Irrevocable Cash Deposit Agreement shall be held by the Village Treasurer in escrow by
the Village to guaranty the Owner's/Developer's obligations under this Agreement, the Subdivision Ordinance, and the Village Approvals, including the
Owner's/Developer's Maintenance Obligations. Upon satisfaction of the Owner's/Developer's other obligations required for acceptance of the Public
Improvements by the Corporate Authorities under the Subdivision Ordinance, the Cash Bond may be reduced to 15% of the actual total cost of the
Public Improvements based on contracts on file with the Village Clerk, otherwise 15% of the original Cash Bond amount (the "Maintenance Amount")
as security for the performance of the Owner's/Developer's maintenance obligations under this Agreement and the Subdivision Ordinance (the
"Maintenance Cash Bond"). The Maintenance Cash Bond shall continue to be held by the Village in escrow until the last to occur of (a) the date that is
the end of the Maintenance Period set forth in this Agreement, or (b) the date that is one (1) year after the proper correction of any defect or deficiency
in the Public Improvements pursuant to this Agreement and payment of the cost of correction. If the Village is required to draw on the Maintenance
Cash Bond by reason of the Owner's/Developer's failure to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement, then the Owner/Developer shall within ten (10)
days thereafter cause the Maintenance Cash Bond to be increased to is full original amount. In the event the Owner/Developer has posted a Cash
Bond and the Owner and the Developer, or either of them, fails to perform each of their respective or joint and/or several obligations under this
Agreement, the Subdivision Ordinance and the Village Approvals, or under any of them, the Village shall provide a notice of such default to the
Owner/Developer, and the Owner/Developer shall have thirty (30) days (the "Cure Period") to cure any such default. In the event any and all defaults
set forth in the notice of default are not cured within the Cure Period, the Village may use the funds held pursuant to the Irrevocable Cash Deposit
Agreement to pay for the completion and maintenance of the Public Improvements, and after completion thereof, for the payment of labor and material
provided by contractors other than the Developer, subcontractors and material suppliers with respect to the Public Improvements.
ii. Form of Cash Bond. The Cash Bond shall be paid and held pursuant to the terms of the Irrevocable Cash Deposit Agreement and shall be in a
form prescribed in the Subdivision Ordinance except for such deviations and modifications therefrom that are satisfactory to the Village Attorney. The
Cash Bond (a) shall be irrevocably pledged as security to the Village to secure the Owner's/Developer's joint and several obligations and shall not be
cancelled or subject to withdrawal without the prior consent of the Village, (b) shall not require the consent of the Owner/Developer prior to any draw on
it by the Village, (c) shall not be subject to claims of any creditor of the Owner/Developer or either of them, or to levy, garnishment or hypothecation. If
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 599/702
any applicable obligation of the Owner/Developer for which it is security remains uncompleted or unsatisfactory to the Village, then the Village may,
without notice other than the notice of default and without being required to take any further action of any nature whatsoever, (i) draw down the cash
bond and use the proceeds as security for the satisfactory completion of the obligations or employ the proceeds to complete the obligations and
reimburse the Village for any and all costs and expenses, including without limitation legal fees and administrative costs incurred by the Village, as the
Village shall determine, and thereafter use the remaining proceeds, if any (ii) for the payment of contractors other than the Developer, subcontractors
and/or material suppliers that have furnished labor and/or materials for the Public Improvements that have timely filed and perfected their respective
lien rights under the Public Construction Bond Act (30 ILCS 550/et seq.). The aggregate amount of the Cash Bond may be reduced only for completed
categories of the Public Improvements work as those categories and time schedule are described in subparagraphs (i) through (viii) inclusive of
paragraph 3 of this Agreement, but only after joint direction by the Developer and the Village, either to reflect a reduction in the total amount of the
deposit required pursuant to paragraph 4 of this Agreement to 110% of the bid amount based on executed contracts on file with the Village Clerk, or to
reimburse the Owner/Developer for payment of Public Improvement work satisfactorily completed, but in no event shall any such reduction cause
remaining balance of the Cash Bond be reduced below 150% of the amount certified by a licensed engineer as to the value of the remaining work as
confirmed by the Village Engineer, or below the Maintenance Amount, and further provided that all work that has been completed for which a reduction
is sought has been fully paid for based on said engineer's review of owner's sworn statements, general contractor's sworn statements and applicable
lien waivers, or have been paid through a construction escrow established at an Illinois title company, with interim title endorsements issued by said
title company for each draw covering both private improvements and Public Improvements, with copies of documents furnished to the Village. No
reduction for payment of Public Improvement work satisfactorily completed shall be allowed, except after presentation by the Owner/Developer to the
Village Attorney of proper owner's sworn statements, contractors' sworn statements, partial or final waivers of lien, as may be appropriate, and any
additional documentation that the Village Attorney may reasonably request to demonstrate satisfactory completion of the Public Improvement(s) in
question and full payment therefor and of all contractors, subcontractors, and material suppliers of every tier performing such work or furnishing such
materials. After acceptance of the Public Improvements by the Corporate Authorities and reduction of the Cash Bond to the Maintenance Amount, the
Maintenance Cash Bond shall not be reduced by reason of any cost incurred by the Owner/Developer to satisfy its obligations under this Agreement.
iii. Replenishment of Cash Bond. If at any time the Village determines that the Cash Bond is not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the remaining
unpaid cost of all Public Improvements and all unpaid Village fees, or that the funds remaining in the Maintenance Cash Bond are not, or may not be,
sufficient to pay all unpaid costs of correcting any and all defects and deficiencies in the Public Improvements, then, within ten (10) days after a
demand by the Village, the Owner/Developer shall deposit additional funds with the Village to increase the amount of the Cash Bond to an amount
determined by the Village to be sufficient to cover said deficiency and pay the unpaid costs and fees, otherwise the Village may draw down the entire
remaining balance of the Cash Bond and pursue any deficiency from such Owner/Developer.
7. The Owner/Developer shall pay all costs, permit fees, engineering fees, testing fees, consulting fees, attorney's fees, connection fees, and other
fees, costs and expenses required to be paid by the Owner and Developer, or either of them, to the Village under this Agreement, any Annexation
Agreement, the ordinance approving the underlying subdivision, the Bartlett Municipal Code, and any other ordinance of the Village, or any of them,
concerning the development of the Property.
8. The Owner/Developer shall provide, perform and complete properly, and in the manner specified herein and in the Subdivision Ordinance, all
necessary work, labor, services, transportation, equipment, materials, apparatus, machinery, tools, fuels, gas, electric, water, waste disposal,
information, data and other means and items necessary for the construction, installation and completion of the Public Improvements.
9. Owner/Developer shall procure and furnish and pay for all permits, licenses and other governmental approvals and authorizations necessary to
construct, install and complete the Public Improvements and all costs incidental thereto.
10. Owner/Developer shall pay all applicable federal, state, county and local taxes, and shall pay prevailing wages, if applicable.
11. The Owner agrees to, and does hereby grant the Village of Bartlett and to the Bartlett Fire Protection District a non-exclusive license to go upon
any part of the Property for the purpose of providing police and fire protection and enforcing the Illinois Vehicle Code and the Bartlett Vehicle Code on
the streets and other areas of the Subdivision or PUD, except on individual lots conveyed to homeowners.
12. After the "first lift" of the street pavement for streets in the Subdivision/PUD has been placed by the Developer in strict accordance with the
approved engineering plans therefor and the Subdivision Ordinance, the Village agrees to provide regular police protection for homes in the
Subdivision/PUD and to provide snowplowing service for the public streets serving such homes, without in any way accepting responsibility for the
maintenance of such streets, or any other Public Improvements until the adoption of an ordinance by the Village President and Village Board of
Trustees (the "Corporate Authorities") formally accepting such Public Improvements.
13. The streets in the Subdivision/PUD shall remain the property of the Owner/Developer until the adoption of an ordinance by the Corporate
Authorities formally accepting such Public Improvements, and title to all underground improvements and other personal property required by the
Subdivision Ordinance has been transferred to the Village by appropriate Bill of Sale. The Owner/Developer shall remain responsible for the
maintenance of all of the Public Improvements in the Subdivision/PUD, including, but not limited to, any manholes, vaults, curbs or other structures
which project above the pavement and which are damaged as the result of the Village's snow-plowing activities, until the expiration of the Maintenance
Period and any extension thereof as provided in this Agreement, unless the Maintenance Period and the maintenance security requirement is waived
by the Corporate Authorities in its sole and absolute discretion on the recommendation of the Village Engineer, in which event the Owner/Developer
shall maintain the Public Improvements until they (or such portion thereof) have been accepted by the Corporate Authorities.
14. In the event that it becomes necessary, as determined by the Village Administrator, in her sole discretion, to perform any emergency repair work
on the Public Improvements in the Subdivision/PUD to protect the health, welfare and safety of the Public, Village may perform such repairs, and the
Owner/ Developer shall reimburse the Village promptly for the costs so incurred.
15. License to Village to Complete Public Improvements. In the event of a default and the election by the Village (and/or the Surety in the case of a
Subdivision Performance Bond) to take over and complete the Public Improvements, the Owner, for itself and for its successors in interest and assigns
hereby grants a non-exclusive license to the Village (and if applicable to the Surety) and their respective employees, engineers, consultants,
contractors, subcontractors, material suppliers, agents and anyone hired by or on behalf of either of them, to complete the Public Improvements (the
"Village Designees") in, upon, across, through and under the Property, and hereby assigns such right, and interest if any off-site easements or licenses
granted to the Owner and the Developer, or either of them, to install or construct any off-site Public Improvements to serve the Subdivision
development, to the Village and/or the Surety. In the event of such take over of the Public Improvements, the Village will endeavor to require any
contractor it hires to procure liability insurance in similar types, coverages, and amounts as required of the "Contractor" in paragraph 16 of this
Agreement.
16. Insurance. The Developer (if it will act as the general contractor), or the Contractor (if the Owner and Developer hire a single general contractor
or construction manager), or each prime contractor (if the Owner and Developer hire more than one contractor to construct and install the Public
Improvements), each referred to for purposes of this paragraph as "Contractor", shall obtain and maintain insurance of the types and in the amounts
listed as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 600/702
A. Commercial General and Umbrella Liability Insurance.
Contractor shall maintain commercial general liability (CGL) and, if necessary, commercial umbrella insurance with a limit of not less than
$1,000,000 each occurrence. If such CGL insurance contains a general aggregate limit, it shall apply separately to this Subdivision development.
CGL insurance shall be written on Insurance Services Office (ISO) occurrence form CG 00 01 10 93, or a substitute form providing equivalent
coverage, and shall cover liability arising from premises, operations, independent contractors, products-completed operations, personal injury and
advertising injury, and liability assumed under an insured contract (including the tort liability of another assumed in a business contract).
The Village shall be included as an insured under the CGL, using ISO additional insured endorsement CG 20 10 or a substitute providing equivalent
coverage, and under the commercial umbrella, if any. This insurance shall apply as primary insurance with respect to any other insurance or selfinsurance
afforded to the Village. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the Village shall be in excess of the Contractor's insurance and shall
not contribute with it.
There shall be no endorsement or modification of the CGL limiting the scope of coverage for liability arising from pollution, explosion, collapse, or
underground property damage.
B. Continuing Completed Operations Liability Insurance.
Contractor shall maintain commercial general liability (CGL) and, if necessary, commercial umbrella liability insurance with a limit of not less than
$1,000,000 for each occurrence for at least three years following substantial completion of the work.
Continuing CGL insurance shall be written on ISO occurrence form CG 00 01 10 93, or substitute form providing equivalent coverage, and shall, at
minimum, cover liability arising from products-completed operations and liability assumed under an insured contract.
Continuing CGL insurance shall have a products-completed operations aggregate of at least two times its each occurrence limit.
Continuing commercial umbrella coverage, if any, shall include liability coverage for damage to the insured's completed work equivalent to that
provided under ISO CG 00 01.
C. Business Auto and Umbrella Liability Insurance.
Contractor shall maintain business auto liability and, if necessary, commercial umbrella liability insurance with a limit of not less than $1,000,000
each accident. Such insurance shall cover liability arising out of any auto including owned, hired and non-owned autos.
Business auto insurance shall be written on Insurance Services Office (ISO) form CA 00 01, CA 00 05, CA 00 12, CA 00 20, or a substitute form
providing equivalent liability coverage. If necessary, the policy shall be endorsed to provide contractual liability coverage equivalent to that provided in
the 1990 and later editions of CA 00 01.
D. Workers Compensation Insurance.
Contractor shall maintain workers compensation as required by statute and employers liability insurance. The commercial umbrella and/or employers
liability limits shall not be less than $1,000,000 each accident for bodily injury by accident or $1,000,000 each employee for bodily injury by disease.
If the Village has not been included as an insured under the CGL using ISO additional insured endorsement CG 20 10 under the Commercial
General and Umbrella Liability Insurance required in this Agreement, the Contractor waives all rights against the Village and its officers, officials,
employees and agents for recovery of damages arising out of or incident to the Contractor's work.
E. General Insurance Provisions.
(i) Evidence of Insurance.
Prior to beginning work, Contractor shall furnish the Village with a certificate(s) of insurance and applicable policy endorsement(s), executed by a
duly authorized representative of each insurer, showing compliance with the insurance requirements set forth above.
All certificates shall provide for 30 days written notice to the Village prior to the cancellation or material change of any insurance referred to therein.
Written notice to the Village shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested.
Failure of the Village to demand such certificate, endorsement or other evidence of full compliance with these insurance requirements or failure of
the Village to identify a deficiency from evidence that is provided shall not be construed as a waiver of Contractor's obligation to maintain such
insurance.
The Village shall have the right, but not the obligation, of prohibiting Contractor or any subcontractor from entering the project site until such
certificates or other evidence that insurance has been placed in complete compliance with these requirements is received and approved by the Village.
Failure to maintain the required insurance may result in a stop work order at the Village's option.
With respect to insurance maintained after final payment in compliance with a requirement above, an additional certificate(s) evidencing such
coverage shall be promptly provided to the Village whenever requested.
Contractor shall provide certified copies of all insurance policies required above within 10 days of the Village's written request for said copies.
(ii) Acceptability of Insurers.
For insurance companies which obtain a rating from A.M. Best, that rating should be no less than A VII using the most recent edition of the A.M.
Best's Key Rating Guide. If the Best's rating is less than A VII or a Best's rating is not obtained, the Village has the right to reject insurance written by
an insurer it deems unacceptable.
(iii) Cross-Liability Coverage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 601/702
If Contractor's liability policies do not contain the standard ISO separation of insured's provision, or a substantially similar clause, they shall be
endorsed to provide cross-liability coverage.
(iv) Deductibles and Self-Insured Retentions.
Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to the Village. At the option of the Village, the Contractor may be asked to eliminate such
deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the Village, its officers, officials, employees and agents or required to procure a bond guaranteeing
payment of losses and other related costs including but not limited to investigations, claim administration and defense expenses.
(v) Subcontractors.
Contractor shall cause each subcontractor employed by Contractor to purchase and maintain insurance of the type and minimum amount of
coverage specified above. When requested by the Village, Contractor shall furnish copies of certificates of insurance evidencing coverage for each
subcontractor.
17. In the event the Village Engineer determines, in the Village Engineer's sole and absolute discretion, that the Owner/Developer (i) has failed to
timely complete any of the eight categories of construction set forth in paragraph 3 on or before the completion dates therein specified; (ii) has not
adequately maintained, any of the Public Improvements, or (iii) the Owner/Developer is otherwise in default under this Agreement, the Subdivision
Ordinance or the Village Approvals, the Village may, after ten (10) days' prior written notice to the Owner/Developer (or without written notice in the
case of emergency repair work deemed necessary by the Village Administrator), enter on any or all of the Property, for which the Owner has granted to
the Village and to the Village's designees, a non-exclusive license pursuant to paragraph 15, and cause to be performed any work and pay any monies
to cover the Owner's and/or the Developer's financial obligations hereunder using the funds pursuant to this Agreement drawn from the Construction
Security or the Maintenance Security deposited pursuant to this Agreement. The Village shall have the right to demand immediate payment directly
from the Owner/Developer, based on costs actually incurred or on the Village's reasonable estimates of costs to be incurred, an amount of money
sufficient to defray the entire costs of the work, including, without limitation, legal fees and administrative expenses. Owner/Developer shall, after
demand by the Village, pay the required amount to the Village.
18. Use of Funds in the Event of Breach of Agreement. If the Owner/Developer fails or refuses to complete the Public Improvements in accordance
with this Agreement and the agreed-on construction schedule, or fails or refuses to correct any defect or deficiency in the Public Improvements, or fails
or refuses to restore property in accordance with a demand from the Village, or in any manner fails or refuses to meet fully any of its obligations under
this Agreement and/or the Subdivision Ordinance, then the Village may, in its sole and absolute discretion, draw on and retain all or any of the funds
remaining in the Performance and Payment Letter of Credit, the Maintenance Letter of Credit or the Irrevocable Cash Deposit, or demand the surety
perform its obligations under the Subdivision Performance Bond, and if necessary, file suit on said bond and retain the monies recovered from the
surety under the Subdivision Performance Bond. The Village thereafter shall have the right to exercise its rights under this Agreement and the
Subdivision Ordinance to take any other action it deems reasonable and appropriate to mitigate the effects of the failure or refusal by the
Owner/Developer and to reimburse itself from the applicable construction security and/or maintenance security for all of its costs and expense,
including without limitation legal fees and administrative expenses resulting from or incurred as a result of the Owner's/Developer's failure or refusal to
fully meet its obligations under this Agreement and the Subdivision Ordinance. If the funds remaining in the Performance and Payment Bonds, Standby
Letter of Credit (Performance and Payment), and/or Cash Bond are insufficient to pay fully the Village for all its costs and expenses to fully pay for the
Public Improvements, and to maintain a cash reserve equal to 15% of the original construction security amount during the entire time the Maintenance
Letter of Credit, Maintenance Bond or Maintenance Cash Deposit should have been maintained by the Owner/Developer, then the Owner/Developer
shall, after demand of the Village, immediately deposit with the Village additional funds as the Village determines are necessary to fully repay the
Village's costs and expenses and to establish the required maintenance cash reserve. Any subcontractor and material supplier of the Developer or
Contractor or Subcontractor and/or a material supplier of any tier that provided labor and/or material in connection with the Public Improvements shall
be deemed a third party beneficiary under the Subdivision Labor and Material Payment Bond that has perfected its lien rights in accordance with the
Mechanic's Lien Act (if applicable) and the Public Construction Bond Act shall be authorized to bring suit thereon in accordance with the applicable
statute.
19. Village Lien Rights. If any money, property, or other consideration due from the Owner/Developer to the Village pursuant to this Agreement is not
either recovered from the construction security deposits required in paragraph 4 or paid or conveyed to the Village by the Owner/Developer within ten
(10) days after a demand for payment or conveyance, then the money, or the Village's reasonable estimate of the value of the property or other
consideration, together with interest at the maximum rate permitted by law and costs of collection, including without limitation legal fees and
administrative expenses, shall become a lien on the Property, and the Village shall have the right to collect the amount or value, with applicable interest
and costs, including without limitation legal fees and administrative expenses, and the right to enforce the lien in the manner provided by law for
mortgage foreclosure proceedings. The lien shall be subordinate to the lien of any first mortgage now or hereafter placed on the Property; provided,
however, that the lien subordination shall apply only to charges that have become due and payable prior to a sale or transfer of the Property pursuant
to a judgment of foreclosure, or any other proceeding in lieu of foreclosure, but the sale or transfer shall not relieve the Property from liability for any
charges that thereafter become due, nor form the lien of any subsequent charge.
20. Hold Harmless. Owner/Developer shall, in the event a claim is made against the Village, its officers, other officials, agents and employees or any
of them, or if the Village, its officers, other officials, agents and employees or any of them, is made a party-defendant in any proceeding arising out of,
or alleged to arise out of, the construction, installation, payment for, failure to pay for, maintenance and/or repair of the Public Improvements or in
connection with this Agreement, including, but not limited to, matters pertaining to the hazardous material and other environmental matters, (except as
may be required by provisions 765 ILCS 705/1 and 740 ILCS 35/1 of the Illinois Statute for the negligent acts and omissions of the Village, its officers,
other officials, agents and employees or any of them) defend and hold the Village and such officers, other officials, agents and employees harmless
from all claims, liabilities, losses, taxes, judgments, costs, fees, including expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees in connection therewith. Any such
indemnified person may obtain separate counsel to participate in the defense thereof at his own expense. However, if the Canons of Legal Ethics
require such indemnified person to be separately defended where there is no agreement as to a conflict of interest, then Owner/Developer shall bear
such expense.
21. Remedies.
A. It is agreed that the parties hereto shall have the following rights and remedies in the event of a breach or default hereunder.
(i) Enforce or compel the performance of this Agreement, at law or in equity by suit, action, mandamus or any other proceedings, including, but not
limited to, injunction and/or specific performance.
(ii) Maintain an action to recover any sums which the other party has agreed to pay pursuant to this Agreement and which have become due and
remain unpaid for more than 15 days following written notice of delinquency.
(iii) Draw upon any Performance and Payment Letter of Credit, Maintenance Letter of Credit, or Cash Bond, and/or to enforce and compel
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 602/702
performance on any Performance and Payment Letter of Credit, Maintenance Letter of Credit if any draw is dishonored, and on any Subdivision
Performance Bond, Subdivision Labor and Material Payment Bond and/or Maintenance Bond.
B. Upon a breach of this Agreement, any of the parties, by any action or proceeding at law or in equity, may exercise any remedy available at law or
in equity. The remedies of the Village shall include, but not be limited to, the right to stop construction of the development and refuse issuance of further
building permits in the event the Village deems the terms of this Agreement to have been violated.
C. In the event the Village chooses to sue in order to enforce the obligations hereunder, Owner/Developer shall pay all costs and expenses incurred
by the Village, including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees and costs and expenses incurred by the Village. In addition, if the Owner/Developer do not
pay any fees provided for herein, the Village may withhold the issuance of building permits and/or occupancy permits until payment is received, or if the
appropriate security is not deposited, withhold approval of plat of subdivision until the appropriate security is delivered. Village may use remedies
available to it to collect such fees and charges as are due.
22. Exercise of Home Rule Power. This Agreement is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code; provided, however, that any
limitations in the Illinois Municipal Code in conflict with the provisions of this Agreement shall not be applicable, and as to all such provisions, the
Village hereby exercises its home rule powers pursuant to the provisions of Article VII, Section 6 of the Constitution of the State of Illinois.
23. Venue, Illinois law, attorney's fees. The parties agree that this Agreement shall be governed by Illinois law and that the proper venue for the
enforcement of this Agreement shall be the Circuit Court for the 18th Judicial Circuit, DuPage County, Illinois. The Developer and the Owner, jointly and
severally, agree to reimburse the Village for any reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Village in enforcing or attempting to enforce the obligations
of the Developer and the Owner, or either of them, under this Agreement, regardless of whether a lawsuit is actually filed, within 15 days after the
receipt of copies of paid invoices for such attorney's fees.
24. Binding Effect. This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto, and their heirs, legatees, beneficiaries,
successors in interest, assignees, and lessees.
25. Miscellaneous.
A. Notice. Unless otherwise notified in writing, all notices, requests and demands shall be in writing and shall be personally delivered to or mailed by
the United States certified mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested, as follows:
To the Village: Village of Bartlett
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, IL 60103
Attention: Valerie L. Salmons, Village Administrator
With a copy to: Bryan E. Mraz
Bryan E. Mraz & Associates, P.C.
111 East Irving Park Road
Roselle, IL 60172
To the Owner:
With a copy to:
To the Developer:
With a copy to:
B. Severability. If any provision of this Agreement is held invalid by a court of a competent jurisdiction or in the event a court shall determine that the
Village does not have the power to perform a disputed provision, the provision shall be deemed to be excised from this Agreement and invalidity shall not
affect any of the other provisions contained herein, and the judgment or decree shall relieve the Village from performance under the invalid provision of
this Agreement.
[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]
OWNER: [Insert Name of Legal Owner] VILLAGE OF BARTLETT
By: By:
Name: Village President
Title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 603/702
Attest:
DEVELOPER: [Insert Name of Developer]
By: Village Clerk
Name:
Title:
Attest:
Name:
Title:
B. Appendix F-2; Subdivision Performance Bond:
SUBDIVISION PERFORMANCE BOND
KNOW ALL PERSONS by these presents that we [ insert the name and address of the Developer] as Principal (the "Principal") and [ insert name
and address of Surety] as Surety (the "Surety"), a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of , and licensed by the Illinois
Department of Insurance to issue and sign surety bonds in the State of Illinois, are held and firmly bound unto the Village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage and
Kane Counties, Illinois (the "Village") as Obligee in the full and just sum of:
[ insert an amount equal to the lesser of (i) 115% of the reasonably estimated cost of construction of the Public Improvements adjusted for Public
Improvements scheduled to be completed after one (1) year per paragraph A below by adding 1.25% per month for each month or fraction thereof
beyond one (1) year up to a maximum of 150% of the estimated cost of the Public Improvements approved by the Village Engineer; or (ii) 110% of the
bid amount for the Public Improvements based on executed contracts for the construction and installation of the Public Improvements on file with the
Village Clerk.]
U.S. Dollars ($ ) (the "Penal Sum"). For the payment of which sum of money well and truly to be made, Principal and Surety jointly and severally
bind themselves and their respective heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, and assigns, firmly by these Presents, said
amount to include payment of actual costs and damages and for attorney's fees, engineering fees, accounting fees, testing fees, consulting fees,
administrative costs, court costs, interest, and any other fees and expenses resulting from or incurred by reason of Principal's failure to promptly and
faithfully perform its contract and other obligations to the Village, said contract and other obligations being more fully described below, and to include
attorney's fees, court costs, administration and other expenses necessarily paid or incurred in successfully enforcing performance of the obligation of
the Surety under this Bond; and
WHEREAS, the Principal and Surety on this Bond agree that all the undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions and agreements of the contractor
contracts entered into between the Principal and the Village will be performed and fulfilled and to pay all persons, firms and corporations having
contracts with the Principal or with subcontractors, all just claims due them under the provisions of such contracts with the Principal or with
subcontractors, all just claims due them under the provisions of such contracts for labor performed or materials furnished in the performance of the
contract on account of which this Bond is given, when such claims are not satisfied out of the contract price of the contract on account of which this
Bond is given (of which there is none), after final settlement between the officer, board, commission or agent of the Village and the Principal has been
made; and
WHEREAS, the Principal has asked the Village to approve the final plat of subdivision or final planned unit development ("PUD") plan for certain real
property in the Village legally described on Exhibit A (the "Property"); and
WHEREAS, the Village has approved of the development of the Property by the passage of Ordinance 20 - , "An Ordinance [ insert full title of
ordinance approving final plat of subdivision and/or final PUD plan]", subject to certain conditions (the "Subdivision Approval Ordinance") and pursuant
to which the Principal entered a certain Public Improvements Completion Agreement dated (the "PICA"), under which the Principal has promised and
agreed, among other things, that, in consideration of the approval of [ insert name of the subdivision/PUD] [(the "Subdivision") or (the "PUD")] by the
Village, the Principal shall cause to be constructed and fully paid for, all of the on-site and any off-site public improvements, including, but not limited to,
site grading and erosion control, the water distribution system, sanitary sewer system, storm water management and storm sewer system, street
system, street lights, sidewalks, bicycle paths, and landscaping and tree planting (the "Public Improvements") for such Subdivision or PUD in a good
and workmanlike manner with materials of good quality in strict accordance with the engineering plans and specifications for the Public Improvements
prepared by [ insert name of engineer] dated [insert plan date], last revised [ insert last revision date] (the "Plans") and the Village Subdivision & PUD
Ordinance (the "Subdivision Ordinance"), and to maintain the Public Improvements until they are completed and accepted by the Village corporate
authorities and a maintenance bond or other maintenance guaranty has been deposited with the Village in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance.
The Subdivision Approval Ordinance, the PICA, and the Subdivision Ordinance, and the terms and conditions of each of them, are hereby
incorporated herein by this reference as though fully set forth herein and are collectively referred to herein as the "Village Approvals".
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITIONS OF THIS OBLIGATION ARE such that if the Principal shall well, truly, promptly and faithfully perform all the
undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions, and agreements of said Principal under the Village Approvals, including, but not limited to: (1) cause the
Public Improvements to be constructed in a good and workmanlike manner with materials of good quality in strict accordance with the Plans and the
Subdivision Ordinance; (2) complete each of the eight phases of construction listed in the following paragraph A on or before the completion dates
therein specified (the "Completion Dates"); (3) provide, perform and complete properly and in the manner specified in the Subdivision Ordinance and
the PICA, all necessary work, labor, services, transportation, equipment, materials, apparatus, machinery, tools, fuels, gas, electric, water, waste
disposal, information data and other means and items necessary for the construction, installation and completion of the Public Improvements; (4)
procure and furnish all permits, licenses and other governmental approvals and authorizations necessary in connection therewith and all costs
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 604/702
incidental thereto; (5) pay all applicable federal, state, county and local taxes; (6) cause a maintenance guaranty in the form of (i) a Maintenance Bond,
(ii) a Standby Letter of Credit (Maintenance) or (iii) Maintenance Cash Bond to be deposited with the Village in accordance with the PICA and the
Subdivision Ordinance; (7) to do all other things required of the Principal by the Village Approvals, or any of them; and (8) to provide, perform and
complete all of the foregoing in full compliance with, and as required by and pursuant to the Village Approvals, or any of them; all of which are herein
referred to as the "Principal's Obligations" whether or not any of the work enters into and becomes a component part of the Public Improvements
contemplated, then this Obligation shall be null and void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect.
A. Completion Dates. The Public Improvements shall be completed in accordance with the following schedule:
i. Site grading, including grading of rights-of-way, detention basins and/or retention ponds, lots and open space areas shall be completed on or
before [ insert completion date].
ii. Underground improvements, including water mains, vaults and valve vaults, sanitary sewer mains and manholes and any required force main,
shall be completed on or before [ insert completion date].
iii. Storm water facilities, including underground items, detention items, wetland/riparian areas and erosion control, shall be completed on or before [
insert completion date].
iv. Curbs and street base, including "first lift" of pavement shall be completed on or before [ insert completion date].
v. Street lighting shall be completed on or before [ insert completion date].
vi. Sidewalks and bicycle paths shall be completed on or before [ insert completion date].
vii. Parkway and open space restoration (including removal of all material, overburden and soil stock piles, and repairs to catch basins, manholes
and other structures located in parkways and open space areas), and landscaping shall be completed on or before [ insert completion date].
viii. Final street surface ("second lift"), including necessary repairs to street base "first lift", catch basins, manholes and other structures located
between curb lines shall be completed on or before [ insert completion date].
B. Surety for value received, hereby stipulates and agrees that no changes, modifications, alterations, omissions, deletions, additions, extensions of
time, or forbearances on the part of the Village, the Principal, or either of them to the other in or to the terms of the Village Approvals, or any of them,
and/or any other of the Principal's Obligations; in or to the schedules, Plans, drawings, specifications; in or to the method or manner of performance of
the work in connection with the Public Improvements; in or to the manner of the payment therefor; or in or to Village furnished facilities, equipment,
service, property or sites shall in any way release the Principal and Surety, or either of them, or any of their respective heirs, executors, administrators,
successors, or assigns, or affect the obligations of the Surety on this Bond, all notice of any and all of the foregoing changes, modifications, alterations,
deletions, additions, extensions of them, or forbearances being hereby waived by the Surety.
C. Upon the default of the Principal with respect to undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions, and agreements, the termination of the Principal's
right to proceed with the work, and written notice of that default and termination by the Village to the Surety ("Notice"), the Surety shall promptly remedy
the default by taking one of the following actions:
(1) The Surety shall complete the work pursuant to a written takeover agreement, using a completing contractor jointly selected by the Surety and
the Village; or
(2) The Surety shall pay a sum of money to the Village, up to the Penal sum of the Bond, that represents the reasonable cost to complete the work
and perform the Principal's Obligations under the Village Approvals.
The Surety shall respond to the Notice within 15 working days of receipt indicating the course of action that it intends to take or advising that it
requires more time to investigate the default and select a course of action. If the Surety requires more than 15 working days to investigate the default
and select a course of action or if the Surety elects to complete the work with a completing contractor that is not prepared to commence performance
within 15 working days after receipt of Notice, and if the Village determines it is in the best interest of the Village to maintain the progress of the work,
the Village may continue to work until the completing contractor is prepared to commence performance. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Village, in
no case may the Surety take longer than 30 working days to advise the Village on the course of action it intends to take. The Surety shall be liable for
reasonable costs incurred by the Village to maintain the progress, subject to the Penal Sum of the Bond.
D. This Bond shall remain in full force and effect until the Public Improvements and the other Principal's Obligations are in fact completed or
satisfied, regardless of whether any notice of the Principal's failure to complete the Principal's Obligations, including, without limitation, the Public
Improvements has been served on the Principal or the Surety.
E. Any suit under this Performance Bond must be instituted before the expiration of two (2) years from the date on which the last of the Public
Improvements described in paragraph A are scheduled for completion; provided, however, that the Surety shall give written notice by certified mail,
return receipt requested, deliver to addressee only, to the Village Administrator, the Village Treasurer and the Village Clerk, of the expiration of such
two (2) year period not less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of such two (2) year period, otherwise the expiration date shall be extended
automatically to the date ninety (90) days after such notice is actually given.
F. The Village shall have no obligation to actually incur any expense or correct any deficient performance of the Principal in order to be entitled to the
proceeds on the Bond.
G. No right of action shall accrue under this Bond to or for the use of any person or corporation other than the Village, its successors or legal
representatives.
H. This Bond shall be governed by Illinois law and the parties agree that the proper venue for the enforcement of this Bond shall be the Circuit Court
for the Eighteenth Judicial Circuit, DuPage County, Illinois. The Principal, the Owner and the Surety, jointly and severally, agree to reimburse the Village
for its costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Village in enforcing or attempting to enforce the Principal's Obligations and the Surety, or
any of them, under this Bond, regardless of whether a lawsuit is actually filed, within 15 working days after the receipt of copies of paid invoices for
such attorney's fees.
SIGNED AND SEALED this day of , 20 .
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 605/702
PRINCIPAL: [Insert name of Developer] SURETY: [Insert name of Surety]
By: By:
Name: Name:
Title: Title:
C. Appendix F-3; Subdivision Labor And Material Payment Bond:
SUBDIVISION LABOR AND MATERIAL PAYMENT BOND
KNOW ALL PERSONS by these presents that we [ insert the name and address of the Developer] as Principal and [ insert name and address of
Surety] as Surety (the "Surety"), a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of , and licensed by the Illinois Department of
Insurance to issue and sign surety bonds in the State of Illinois, are held and firmly bound unto the Village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage and Kane
Counties, Illinois (the "Village") as Obligee, for the use and benefit of itself and of claimants as hereinafter defined, in the full and just sum of:
[ insert an amount equal to (i) 115% of the estimated cost of construction of the Public Improvements adjusted for Public Improvements scheduled
to be completed after one (1) year by adding 1.25% for each month or fraction thereof beyond one (1) year up to a maximum of 150% of the estimated
cost of the Public Improvements as approved by the Village Engineer; or (ii) 110% of the bid amount for the Public Improvements based on executed
contracts for the construction and installation of the Public Improvements on file with the Village Clerk.]
U.S. Dollars ($ ) (the "Penal Sum") to be paid to it, or the claimants or its or their assigns, to which payment well and truly to be made, Principal and
Surety jointly and severally bind themselves and their respective heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, and assigns, firmly
by these Presents, said amount to include attorney's fees, court costs, administration and other expenses necessarily paid or incurred in successfully
enforcing performance of the obligation of the Surety under this Bond.
WHEREAS, the Principal and Surety on this Bond agree that all the undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions and agreements of the Principal
contracts entered into between the Principal and the Village will be performed and fulfilled and to pay all persons, firms and corporations having
contracts with the Principal or with subcontractors, all just claims due them under the provisions of such contracts with the Principal or with
subcontractors, all just claims due them under the provisions of such contracts for labor performed or materials furnished in the performance of the
contract on account of which this Bond is given (of which there is none), when such claims are not satisfied out of the contract price of the contract on
account of which this Bond is given, after final settlement between the officer, board, commission or agent of the Village and the Principal has been
made; and
WHEREAS, the Village has approved of the development of the Property by the passage of Ordinance 20 - , "An Ordinance [ insert full title of
ordinance approving final plat of subdivision and/or final PUD plan]", subject to certain conditions (the "Subdivision Approval Ordinance") and pursuant
to which the Principal entered a certain Public Improvements Completion Agreement dated (the "PICA"), under which the Principal has promised and
agreed, among other things, that, in consideration of the approval of [ insert name of the subdivision/PUD] [(the "Subdivision") or (the "PUD")] by the
Village, the Principal shall cause to be constructed and fully paid for, all of the on-site and any off-site public improvements, including, but not limited to,
site grading and erosion control, the water distribution system, sanitary sewer system, storm water management and storm sewer system, street
system, street lights, sidewalks, bicycle path, landscaping and tree planting (the "Public Improvements") for such Subdivision or PUD in a good and
workmanlike manner with materials of good quality in strict accordance with the engineering plans and specifications for the Public Improvements
prepared by [ insert name of engineer] dated [ insert plan date], last revised [ insert last revision date] (the "Plans") and the Village Subdivision &
PUD Ordinance (the "Subdivision Ordinance"), and to maintain the Public Improvements until they are completed and accepted by the Village
corporate authorities and a maintenance bond has been deposited with the Village in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION IS such that if Principal shall promptly pay or cause to be paid all sums of money
that may be due to any claimant with respect to Principal's Obligations under the Village Approvals (1) to provide, perform, and complete at the
Property and in the manner specified in the Village Approvals all necessary work, labor, services, transportation, equipment, materials, apparatus,
machinery, tools, fuels, gas, electric, water, waste disposal, information, data and other means and items necessary to the construction, installation,
and completion of the Public Improvements required in the Village Approvals; (2) to procure and furnish all permits, licenses, and other governmental
approvals and authorizations necessary in connection therewith; (3) to pay all applicable federal, state, and local taxes; (4) cause a maintenance
guaranty in the form of (i) a Maintenance Bond, (ii) a Standby Letter of Credit (Maintenance), or (iii) a Maintenance Cash Bond to be deposited with the
Village in accordance with the PICA and the Subdivision Ordinance; (5) to do all other things required of Principal by the Village Approvals, or any of
them; and (6) to provide, perform, and complete all of the foregoing in a proper and workmanlike manner and in full compliance with, and as required
by and pursuant to, the Village Approvals, all of which is herein referred to as the "Work"", whether or not any of the Work enters into and becomes a
component part of the Public Improvements contemplated, then this obligation shall be null and void; otherwise it shall remain in full force and effect.
Principal and Surety hereby jointly and severally agree that every claimant who has not had all just claims for the furnishing of any part of the Work
paid in full, including, without limitation, all claims for amounts due for materials, lubricants, oil, gasoline, or rentals of or service or repairs on
machinery, equipment, and tools consumed or used in connection with the furnishing of any part of the Work, may sue on this Bond for the use of such
claimant, may prosecute the suit to final judgment for such sum or sums as may be justly due such claimant, and may have execution therein;
provided, however, that the Village shall not be liable for the payment of any costs or expenses of any such suit. The provisions of Section 23 of the
Mechanic's Lien Act (770 ILCS 60/23) if applicable, and the Public Construction Bond Act (30 ILCS 550/1, et seq.) shall be deemed inserted herein,
including, but not limited to, the time limits within which notices of claim for lien must be filed and actions brought under this Bond.
Principal and Surety hereby jointly agree that the Village may sue on this Bond if the Village is held liable to, or voluntarily agrees to pay, any
claimant directly, but nothing in this Bond shall create any duty on the part of the Village to pay any claimant.
Surety, for value received, hereby stipulates and agrees that no changes, modifications, alterations, omissions, deletions, additions, extension of
time, or forbearances on the part of the Village or Principal to the other in or to the terms of the Village Approvals; in or to the schedules, plans,
drawings, or specifications; in or to the method or manner of performance of the Work; in or to Village-furnished facilities, equipment, materials, service,
or site; or in or to the mode or manner of payment therefor shall in any way release Principal and Surety or either of them, or any of their heirs,
executors, administrators, successors, or assigns, or affect the obligations of Surety on this Bond, all notice of any and all of the foregoing changes,
modifications, alterations, omissions, deletions, additions, extension of time, or forbearances and notice of any and all defaults by Principal or of the
Village's termination of Principal being hereby waived by Surety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 606/702
SIGNED AND SEALED this day of , 20 .
PRINCIPAL: [Insert name of Developer] SURETY: [Insert name of Surety]
By: By:
Name: Name:
Title: Title:
D. Appendix F-4; Standby Letter Of Credit:
[BANK LETTERHEAD]
STANDBY LETTER OF CREDIT
(Performance and Payment)
[ Insert date of issuance]
Village of Bartlett
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, Illinois, 60103
Issuance. At the request and for the account of [ name and address of applicant] ("Applicant"), we [ name and address of issuer at place of
issuance] ("Issuer") issue this irrevocable standby letter of credit number [ reference number] ("Standby") in favor of the Village of Bartlett, 228 South
Main Street, Bartlett, Illinois, 60103 ("Beneficiary") in the maximum aggregate amount of USD [insert amount equal to the lesser of (1) 115% of the
reasonably estimated cost of construction of the Public Improvements adjusted for Public Improvements scheduled to be completed after one (1) year
by adding 1.25% for each month or fraction thereof beyond one (1) year up to a maximum of 150% of the estimated cost of the Public Improvements
approved by the Village Engineer, or (ii) 110% of the bid amount for the Public Improvements based on executed contracts for the installation and
construction of the Public Improvements on file with the Village Clerk].
Undertaking. Issuer undertakes to Beneficiary to pay Beneficiary's demand for payment for an amount available under this Standby and in the form
of Annex A (Payment Demand) or Annex B (Payment Demand after Notice of Non-extension), completed as indicated and presented to Issuer at the
following place for presentation: [ address of place for presentation], at or before the close of business on the expiration date.
Overdrawing. If a demand exceeds the amount available, but the presentation otherwise complies, Issuer undertakes to pay the amount available.
Expiration. The expiration date of this Standby is [ insert specific calendar date set, not less than one year after issuance].
Automatic Extension. The expiration date of this Standby shall be automatically extended for successive one-year periods, unless 60 or more
calendar days before the then current expiration date Issuer gives written notice to the Beneficiary that Issuer elects not to extend the expiration date.
Issuer's written notice must be sent by registered, certified or express mail or nationally recognized overnight courier to Beneficiary's above stated
address and to the attention of the Village Treasurer, in the Finance Department, or alternatively be received by the Village Administrator, 60 or more
calendar days before the then current expiration date. At any time before the next expiration date, Issuer may retract its notice of non-extension by
giving Beneficiary a written notice of retraction in the same manner as giving notice of non-extension, and thereby automatically extend the expiration
date. The expiration date is not subject to automatic extension beyond [ insert specific calendar date, not less than three years nor more than five
years after issuance date], and any pending automatic one-year extension shall be ineffective beyond that date.
Payment. Payment against a complying presentation shall be made within three business days after presentation at the place for presentation or by
wire transfer to a duly requested account of Beneficiary.
ISP98. This Standby is issued subject to the International Standby Practices 1998 (ISP98) (International Chamber of Commerce Publication No.
590).
Illinois Law. This Standby is issued subject to ISP98, and as to matters not covered by ISP98, is governed by the law of the State of Illinois. The
State courts located in Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any action to enforce the Issuer's obligations under this Standby.
Issuer's Charges and Fees. Issuer's charges and fees for issuing, amending, or honoring this Standby are for Applicant's account and shall not be
deducted from any payment Issuer makes under this Standby. Issuer undertakes to Beneficiary to pay the charges and fees of any bank nominated in
this Standby to advise and confirm this Standby for acting on such nomination.
Communications. Communications other than demands may be made to Issuer in the manner and at the place for presentation and also as follows: [
addresses for mailed, couriered, telephone, telefax, or electronic communications]. Communications other than for notices of non-extension may
be made to Beneficiary at Beneficiary's above-stated address and also as follows: Village of Bartlett, Attention: , 228 South Main Street, Bartlett, Illinois,
60103, telephone 630-837-0800, telefax 630-837-0155, e-mail < @vbartlett.org>.
[Issuer's name]
[signature]
Authorized Signature
Text in [ALL CAPITALS UNDERLINED] to be completed as indicated when the Beneficiary prepares a Payment Demand.
Annex A: Payment Demand
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 607/702
[insert DATE]
[Insert NAME AND ADDRESS OF ISSUER OR OTHER ADDRESSEE AT PLACE OF PRESENTATION AS STATED IN STANDBY]
RE: Standby Letter of Credit No. [REFERENCE NUMBER], dated [DATE] issued by [ISSUER'S NAME] ("Standby")
The undersigned Beneficiary demands payment of USD [Insert AMOUNT] under the Standby.
Beneficiary states that Applicant is obligated to pay to Beneficiary the amount demanded as provided in [the Public Improvements Completion
Agreement dated between the Applicant and the Beneficiary, the Village of Bartlett Subdivision & PUD Ordinance (as amended) and/or [Insert
ORDINANCE NUMBER, TITLE AND DATE OF PASSAGE OF SPECIFIC ORDINANCE(S) THAT GRANTED SUBDIVISION AND/OR ZONING
APPROVAL FOR THE APPLICANT'S DEVELOPMENT AND/OR OTHER DOCUMENT THAT IDENTIFIES THE UNDERLYING OBLIGATIONS OF
THE APPLICANT TO THE BENEFICIARY].
Beneficiary requests that payment be made by wire transfer to an account of Beneficiary as follows: [Insert NAME, ADDRESS, AND ROUTING
NUMBER OF BENEFICIARY'S BANK, AND NAME AND NUMBER OF BENEFICIARY'S ACCOUNT].
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, Illinois 60103
Valid if signed by any two of the following: [INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE TREASURER
[INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
[INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
Text in [ALL CAPITALS UNDERLINED] to be completed as indicated when the Beneficiary prepares a Payment Demand.
Annex B: Payment Demand after Notice of Non-extension
[insert DATE]
[Insert NAME AND ADDRESS OF ISSUER OR OTHER ADDRESSEE AT PLACE OF PRESENTATION AS STATED IN STANDBY]
RE: Standby Letter of Credit No. [REFERENCE NUMBER], dated [DATE] issued by [ISSUER'S NAME] ("Standby")
The undersigned Beneficiary demands payment of USD [Insert AMOUNT] under the Standby.
Beneficiary states that the Standby is set to expire fewer than 60 days from the date hereof because Issuer has given a notice of non-extension of the
Standby, no retraction of the non-extension notice or satisfactory replacement standby has been timely received, and the amount demanded is required to
secure the obligations of Applicant as provided in the Public Improvements Completion Agreement dated , the Bartlett Subdivision & PUD Ordinance (as
amended), and/or [Insert ORDINANCE NUMBER, TITLE AND DATE OF PASSAGE OF SPECIFIC ORDINANCE(S) THAT GRANTED SUBDIVISION
AND/OR ZONING APPROVAL FOR THE APPLICANT'S DEVELOPMENT AND/OR OTHER DOCUMENT THAT IDENTIFIES THE UNDERLYING
OBLIGATIONS OF THE APPLICANT TO THE BENEFICIARY].
Beneficiary requests that payment be made by wire transfer to an account of Beneficiary as follows: [Insert NAME, ADDRESS, AND ROUTING
NUMBER OF BENEFICIARY'S BANK, AND NAME AND NUMBER OF BENEFICIARY'S ACCOUNT].
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, Illinois 60103
Valid if signed by any two of the following: [INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE TREASURER
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 608/702
[INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
[INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
E. Appendix F-5; Irrevocable Cash Deposit Agreement:
IRREVOCABLE CASH DEPOSIT AGREEMENT
DEVELOPER: BENEFICIARY:
Village of Bartlett
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, Illinois, 60103 Attention: Village Clerk
Name:
Address:
Attention:
OWNER:
Name:
Address:
Attention:
Name of Subdivision-Development:
Property to be Developed: Legally described on Exhibit A (the "Property")
AMOUNT:
TO: VILLAGE OF BARTLETT, 228 South Main Street, Bartlett, Illinois, 60103
KNOW ALL PERSONS by these presents that we [ insert name and address of Developer] (the "Developer"), a corporation or limited liability company [
strike one or insert other type of legal entity] organized and existing under the laws of the State of and [ insert name of the legal owner of the Property], a
limited liability company organized and existing under the laws of , or as Trustee u/t/a dated and known as Trust No. [ strike one or insert other type of
ownership entity] (the "Owner"), are jointly and severally held and firmly bound unto the Village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage and Kane Counties, Illinois (the
"Village") as Beneficiary in the full and just sum of:
[ insert an amount equal to the lesser of (i) 115% of the estimated cost of construction of the Public Improvements adjusted for Public Improvements
scheduled to be completed after one (1) year per paragraph A of Part I below by adding 1.25% per month for each month or fraction thereof such
completion date exceeds one (1) year up to a maximum of 150% of the estimated cost of the Public Improvements approved by the Village Engineer; or (ii)
110% of the bid amount for the Public Improvements based on executed contracts for the construction and installation of the Public Improvements on file
with the Village Clerk.]
U.S. Dollars ($ ) (the "Penal Sum"). For the payment of which sum of money well and truly made, Developer and Owner, sometimes hereinafter
collectively referred to as the "Principal", jointly and severally bind themselves, and their respective heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives,
successors, and assigns, firmly by these Presents, said amount to include payment of actual costs and damages and for attorney's fees, engineering fees,
accounting fees, testing fees, consulting fees, administrative costs, court costs, interest, and any other fees and expenses resulting from or incurred by
reason of Principal's failure to promptly and faithfully perform its contract and other obligations to the Village, said contract and other obligations being
more fully described below, and to include attorney's fees, court costs, administration and other expenses necessarily paid or incurred in successfully
enforcing performance of the Principal.
WHEREAS, the Principal has asked the Village to approve the final plat of subdivision or final planned unit development ("PUD") plan for certain real
property in the Village legally described on Exhibit A (the "Property"); and
WHEREAS, the Village has approved of the development of the Property by the passage of Ordinance 20 - , "An Ordinance [insert full title of ordinance
approving final plat of subdivision and/or final PUD plan]", subject to certain conditions (the "Subdivision Approval Ordinance") and pursuant to which the
Principal entered a certain Public Improvements Completion Agreement dated (the "PICA"), under which the Principal has promised and agreed, among
other things, that, in consideration of the approval of [insert name of the subdivision/PUD] [(the "Subdivision") or (the "PUD")] by the Village, the Principal
shall cause to be constructed and fully paid for, all of the off-site and any on-site public improvements, including, but not limited to, site grading and erosion
control, the water distribution system, sanitary sewer system, storm water management and storm sewer system, street system, street lights, sidewalks,
bicycle path, landscaping and tree planting (the "Public Improvements") for such Subdivision or PUD in a good and workmanlike manner with materials of
good quality in strict accordance with the engineering plans and specifications for the Public Improvements prepared by [insert name of engineer] dated
[insert plan date], last revised [insert last revision date] (the "Plans") and the Village Subdivision & PUD Ordinance (the "Subdivision Ordinance"), and to
maintain the Public Improvements until they are completed and accepted by the Village corporate authorities and a maintenance guaranty has been
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 609/702
deposited with the Village in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the Subdivision Approval Ordinance, the PICA, and the Subdivision Ordinance, and the terms and conditions of each of them, are hereby
incorporated herein by this reference as though fully set forth herein and are collectively referred to herein as the "Village Approvals".
PART I - CASH PERFORMANCE BOND
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITIONS OF THIS OBLIGATION ARE such that if the Principal shall well, truly, promptly and faithfully perform all the
undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions, and agreements of said Principal under the Village Approvals, including, but not limited to: (1) cause the Public
Improvements to be constructed and maintained in a good and workmanlike manner with materials of good quality in strict accordance with the Plans and
the Subdivision Ordinance; (2) complete each of the eight phases of construction listed in the following paragraph A of this Part I on or before the
completion dates therein specified (the "Completion Dates"); (3) provide, perform and complete properly and in the manner specified in the PICA and the
Subdivision Ordinance and the PICA, all necessary work, labor, services, transportation, equipment, materials, apparatus, machinery, tools, fuels, gas,
electric, water, waste disposal, information, data and other means and items necessary for the construction, installation and completion of the Public
Improvements; (4) procure and furnish all permits, licenses and other governmental approvals and authorizations necessary in connection therewith and
all costs incidental thereto; (5) pay all applicable federal, state, county and local taxes; (6) cause a maintenance guaranty in the form of a separate cash
deposit, a Standby Letter of Credit (Maintenance), or a Maintenance Bond to be deposited with the Village, or continue to hold a portion of the cash
deposit made hereunder equal to the Maintenance Amount (hereinafter defined) in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance; (7) to do all other things
required of the Principal by the Village Approvals, or any of them; and (8) to provide, perform and complete all of the foregoing in full compliance with, and
as required by and pursuant to the Village Approvals, or any of them; all of which are herein referred to as the "Principal's Obligations" whether or not any
of the work enters into and becomes a component part of the Public Improvements contemplated, then this Obligation shall be null and void; otherwise, it
shall remain in full force and effect.
A. Completion Dates. The Public Improvements shall be completed in accordance with the following schedule:
i. Site grading, including grading of rights-of-way, detention basins and/or retention ponds, lots and open space areas shall be completed on or before
[insert completion date].
ii. Underground improvements, including water mains, vaults and valve vaults, sanitary sewer mains and manholes and any required force main, shall
be completed on or before [insert completion date].
iii. Storm water facilities, including underground items, detention items, wetland/riparian areas and erosion control, shall be completed on or before
[insert completion date].
iv. Curbs and street base, including "first lift" of pavement shall be completed on or before [insert completion date].
v. Street lighting shall be completed on or before [insert completion date].
vi. Sidewalks and bicycle paths shall be completed on or before [insert completion date].
vii. Parkway and open space restoration (including removal of all material, overburden and soil stock piles, and repairs to catch basins, manholes and
other structures located in parkways and open space areas), and landscaping shall be completed on or before [insert completion date].
viii. Final street surface ("second lift"), including necessary repairs to street base "first lift", catch basins, manholes and other structures located between
curb lines shall be completed on or before [insert completion date].
B. Owner for value received, hereby stipulates and agrees that no changes, modifications, alterations, omissions, deletions, additions, extensions of
time, or forbearances on the part of the Village, the Developer, or either of them to the other in or to the terms of the Village Approvals, or any of them,
and/or any other of the Principal's Obligations; in or to the schedules, Plans, drawings, specifications; in or to the method or manner of performance of the
Work in connection with the Public Improvements; in or to the manner of the payment therefor; or in or to Village furnished facilities, equipment, service,
property or sites shall in any way release the Developer and the Owner, or either of them, or any of their respective heirs, executors, administrators,
successors, or assigns, or affect the obligations of the Owner on this Bond, all notice of any and all of the foregoing changes, modifications, alterations,
deletions, additions, extensions of them, or forbearances and notice of any defaults by the Developer being hereby waived by the Owner.
C. Upon the default of the Developer and the Owner, or either of them, with respect to the undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions, agreements,
Village Approvals and/or the Principal's Obligations, and written notice of that default by the Village to the Developer and the Owner ("Notice"), the
Developer shall promptly remedy the default within the applicable cure period as set forth herein, otherwise, the Village may elect, at its option and in its
sole and absolute discretion, to complete the work using a completing contractor selected by the Village and pay from the monies on deposit with the
Village for the reasonable cost to complete the work, and perform the Principal's Obligations under the Village Approvals, including the reimbursement to
itself, or to pay directly from the monies on deposit pursuant to the terms hereof, the costs of satisfying said Principal's Obligations up to the Penal Sum.
D. This Bond shall remain in full force and effect until the Public Improvements and the other Principal's Obligations are in fact completed, regardless of
whether any notice of the Principal's failure to complete the Principal's Obligations, including, without limitation, the Public Improvements has been served
on the Developer and the Owner, or either of them, or upon any of their respective successors in interest.
E. In the event of a default under the PICA, or of any of the Principal's Obligations, if said default is not cured within the Cure Period after notice of
default has been given, the Village shall have the right to draw down on the Cash Bond and use the funds on deposit to complete the Public Improvements
and to hold 15% of the Penal Sum to cover the Principal's maintenance obligations to maintain, repair, correct, and replace any damaged or defective
Public Improvements, and to pay for said maintenance, repair and replacement work, and to satisfy any of the Developer's Obligations, without the
consent of the Developer, or the Owner.
F. The Village shall have no obligation to actually incur any expense or correct any deficient performance of the Principal in order to be entitled to the
proceeds on the Bond.
G. Each of the Developer and the Owner hereby grant to the Village a security interest and first lien upon the funds on deposit with the Village which are
hereby pledged to the Village to secure the Principal's Obligations. The monies deposited hereunder shall not be subject to the claims of any creditor of
the Developer, the Owner, or either of them, through legal process, bankruptcy, operation of law or otherwise, or be subject to assignment, alienation,
other pledge, attachment, execution, or levy, garnishment or hypothecation, except for persons, firms, entities, contractors or subcontractors that furnished
labor and/or material in connection with the Public Improvements that have perfected a claim under the Public Construction Bond Act as provided in Part II
of this Cash Bond.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 610/702
H. Maintenance Security. Upon satisfaction of the Owner's/Developer's other obligations required for acceptance of the Public Improvements by the
Corporate Authorities under the PICA and the Subdivision Ordinance, the Cash Bond may be reduced to 15% of the actual total cost of the Public
Improvements based on contracts on file with the Village Clerk, otherwise reduced to 15% of the Penal Sum (the "Maintenance Amount") as security for
the performance of the Owner's/Developer's maintenance obligations under the PICA and the Subdivision Ordinance which shall constitute the
"Maintenance Cash Bond". The Maintenance Cash Bond shall continue to be held by the Village in escrow until the last to occur of (a) the date that is the
end of the Maintenance Period set forth in the PICA, or (b) the date that is one (1) year after the proper correction of any defect or deficiency in the Public
Improvements pursuant to the PICA and payment of the cost of correction. If the Village is required to draw on the Maintenance Cash Bond by reason of
the Principal's failure to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement, the PICA, the Subdivision Ordinance or the Village Approvals, then the Principal shall
within ten (10) days thereafter cause the Maintenance Cash Bond to be increased to its full original amount.
I. Reductions. The aggregate amount of the Cash Bond may be reduced only for completed categories of the Public Improvements work as those
categories and time schedule are described in subparagraphs (i) through (viii) inclusive of paragraph A of Part I of this Agreement, but only after joint
direction by the Developer and the Village, either to reflect a reduction in the total amount of the deposit required to 110% of the bid amount based on
executed contracts on file with the Village Clerk, or to reimburse the Owner/Developer for payment of Public Improvement work satisfactorily completed,
but in no event shall any such reduction for work completed cause the remaining balance of the Cash Bond to be reduced below 150% of the amount
certified by a licensed engineer retained by the Developer as to the value of the remaining work, and as confirmed by the Village Engineer, nor reduced
below the Maintenance Amount, and further provided that all Public Improvements have been completed for which a reduction is sought has been fully
paid for as evidenced by owner's sworn statements, general contractor's sworn statements and applicable lien waivers furnished to the Village. No
reduction of the Cash Bond shall be allowed until the Village Attorney has approved of owner's sworn statement(s), contractor's sworn statements, partial
or final waivers of lien, as may be appropriate, and any additional documentation that the Village Attorney may reasonably request to demonstrate
satisfactory completion of the Public Improvement(s) in question and full payment therefor of all contractors, subcontractors, and material suppliers of
every tier performing such work or furnishing such materials. After acceptance of the Public Improvements by the Corporate Authorities and reduction of
the Cash Bond to the Maintenance Amount (hereinafter defined), said Maintenance Cash Bond shall not be reduced by reason of any cost incurred by the
Principal to satisfy its obligations under this Agreement, and shall not be released until the Maintenance Period and any extension thereof for repair and/or
replacement work, has expired, and the Developer and Owner have furnished sworn statements and lien waivers evidencing that all maintenance, repair
and replacement work during the Maintenance Period and extension thereof, if any, has been fully paid.
J. Replenishment of Cash Bond. If at any time the Village determines that the Cash Bond is not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the remaining
unpaid cost of all Public Improvements and all unpaid Village fees, or that the funds remaining in the Maintenance Cash Bond are not, or may not be,
sufficient to pay all unpaid costs of correcting any and all defects and deficiencies in the Public Improvements, then, within ten (10) days after a demand by
the Village, the Principal shall deposit additional funds with the Village to increase the amount of the Cash Bond to an amount determined by the Village to
be sufficient to cover said deficiency and pay the unpaid costs and fees, otherwise the Village may draw down the entire remaining balance of the Cash
Bond and pursue any deficiency from the Developer and the Owner, or either of them.
K. In the event the Developer and the Owner, or either of them, fails to perform each of their respective or joint and several obligations under this
Agreement, the PICA, the Subdivision Ordinance and the Village Approvals, or under any of them, the Village shall provide a notice of such default to the
Developer and the Owner, and the Developer and the Owner shall have thirty (30) days (the "Cure Period") to cure any such default. In the event any and
all defaults set forth in the notice of default are not cured within the Cure Period, the Village may use the funds held pursuant to the Irrevocable Cash
Deposit Agreement to pay for the completion and maintenance of the Public Improvements, and after completion thereof, for the payment of labor and
material provided by subcontractors and material suppliers with respect to the Public Improvements, as provided in Part II of this Agreement.
L. This Cash Bond shall be governed by Illinois law and the parties agree that the proper venue for the enforcement of this Cash Bond shall be the
Circuit Court for the Eighteenth Judicial Circuit, DuPage County, Illinois. The Developer and the Owner, jointly and severally, agree to reimburse the Village
for its costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Village in enforcing or attempting to enforce the Principal's Obligations, or any of them, under
this Cash Bond, regardless of whether a lawsuit is actually filed, within thirty (30) days after the receipt of copies of paid invoices for such costs and
attorney's fees.
PART II - LABOR AND MATERIAL CASH PAYMENT BOND
WHEREAS, the Principal agrees that all the undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions and agreements entered into between the Principal and the
Village will be performed and fulfilled, and to pay all persons, firms and corporations having contracts with the Principal or with subcontractors, all just
claims due them under the provisions of such contracts with the Principal or with subcontractors, all just claims due them under the provisions of such
contracts for labor performed or materials furnished in the performance of the contract on account of which this Cash Bond is given, when such claims are
not satisfied out of the contract price of the contract, on account of which this Cash Bond is given (which in this instance is none), after final settlement
between the officer, board, commission or agent of the Village and the Principal has been made; and
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION IS such that if Principal shall promptly pay or cause to be paid all sums of money that
may be due to any claimant with respect to Developer's and/or for the Owner's Obligations under the Village Approvals (1) to provide, perform, and
complete the on-site and off-site Public Improvements and in the manner specified in the Village Approvals all necessary work, labor, services,
transportation, equipment, materials, apparatus, machinery, tools, fuels, gas, electric, water, waste disposal, information, data and other means and items
necessary to the construction, installation, and completion of the Public Improvements required in the Village Approvals; (2) to procure and furnish all
permits, licenses, and other governmental approvals and authorizations necessary in connection therewith; (3) to pay all applicable federal, state, and
local taxes; (4) to do all other things required of Principal by the PICA, the Subdivision Ordinance, and/or the Village Approvals; and (5) to provide,
perform, and complete all of the foregoing in a proper and workmanlike manner and in full compliance with, and as required by and pursuant to, the PICA,
the Subdivision Ordinance and/or the other Village Approvals, all of which is herein referred to as the "Work", whether or not any of the Work enters into
and becomes a component part of the Public Improvements contemplated, then this obligation shall be null and void; otherwise it shall remain in full force
and effect.
A. Developer and Owner hereby jointly and severally agree that every claimant who has not had all just claims for the furnishing of any part of the Work
paid in full, including, without limitation, all claims for amounts due for materials, lubricants, oil, gasoline, or rentals of or service or repairs on machinery,
equipment, and tools consumed or used in connection with the furnishing of any part of the Work, may sue on this Cash Bond for the use of such claimant,
may prosecute the suit to final judgment for such sum or sums as may be justly due such claimant, and may have execution therein; provided, however,
that the Village shall not be liable for the payment of any costs or expenses of any such suit. The provisions of Section 23 of the Mechanic's Lien Act (770
ILCS 60/23) if applicable, and the Public Construction Bond Act (30 ILCS 550/1, et seq.) shall be deemed inserted herein, including, but not limited to, the
time limits within which notices of claim for lien must be filed and actions brought under this Bond.
B. Developer and Owner hereby jointly agree that the Village may sue on this Cash Bond if the Village is held liable to, or voluntarily agrees to pay, any
claimant directly, but nothing in this Bond shall create any duty on the part of the Village to pay any claimant.
C. Principal, for value received, hereby stipulates and agrees that no changes, modifications, alterations, omissions, deletions, additions, extension of
time, or forbearances on the part of the Village or Principal to the other in or to the terms of the Village Approvals; in or to the schedules, plans, drawings,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 611/702
or specifications; in or to the method or manner of performance of the Work; in or to Village-furnished facilities, equipment, materials, service, or site; or in
or to the mode or manner of payment therefor shall in any way release Principal, or its heirs, executors, administrators, successors, or assigns, or affect
the obligations of Principal on this Cash Bond, all formal notice of any and all of the foregoing changes, modifications, alterations, omissions, deletions,
additions, extension of time, or forbearances being hereby waived by the Principal.
SIGNED AND SEALED this day of , 20 .
DEVELOPER: [Insert Name of Developer] OWNER: [Insert name of Surety]
By: By:
Name: Name:
Title: Title:
F. Appendix F-6; Maintenance Bond:
MAINTENANCE BOND
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that we ( insert the name and address of the Developer) as Principal (the "Principal") and ( insert
name and address of Surety) as Surety (the "Surety") are held and firmly bound unto the Village of Bartlett, Cook, DuPage and Kane Counties, Illinois
(the "Village") as Obligee in the amount of
[ insert amount of Bond equal to (i) 15%, of the actual cost of the Public Improvements based on contracts on file with the Village Clerk, otherwise
(ii) 15% of the original amount of the Subdivision Performance Bond]
U.S. Dollars ($ ) (the "Penal Sum") for the payment whereof the Principal and the Surety jointly and severally bind themselves and their respective
heirs, successors, assigns and legal representatives firmly by these Presents.
WHEREAS, the Principal has heretofore deposited with the Village (i) a Subdivision Performance Bond and a Subdivision Labor and Material
Payment Bond, (ii) Standby Letter of Credit (Performance and Payment), or (iii) a Cash Bond, to guaranty the completion of, payment for and
maintenance of the Public Improvements for the Subdivision or PUD known as [ insert name of Subdivision or PUD] (the "Subdivision"), including but
not limited to, site grading and erosion control, the water distribution system, sanitary sewer system, storm water management and storm sewer
system, street system, street lights, sidewalks, bicycle paths, driveway approaches, landscaping and tree planting (the "Public Improvements"); and
WHEREAS, the Public Improvements were completed on [ insert completion date as determined by the Village Engineer] (the "Completion Date")
and the Principal has requested the Village to release the Subdivision Performance Bond and the Subdivision Labor and Material Payment Bond, the
Standby Letter of Credit (Performance and Payment), or the Cash Bond; and
WHEREAS, the Village is willing to release the Subdivision Performance Bond and the Subdivision Labor and Material Payment Bond, the Standby
Letter of Credit (Performance and Payment), or the Cash Bond only if it is replaced by a Maintenance Bond in the penal sum above set forth to
guaranty performance of the Principal's maintenance obligations set forth in the Public Improvements Completion Agreement dated [insert date]
between the Principal and the Village, the Village of Bartlett Subdivision and PUD Ordinance (the "Subdivision Ordinance"), and the Ordinance adopted
by the Corporate Authorities of the Village accepting the Subdivision;
NOW, THEREFORE, if the Principal shall for and within the period of months [ insert Maintenance Period determined by the Village Engineer,
between 15 months and 24 months] from and after the Completion Date well and truly: (1) maintain the Public Improvements, (2) repair any damage to
the Public Improvements caused by the Principal, its agents, servants, employees or its successors and assigns, or by any contractor hired by the
Principal, its agents, servants, employees, successors or assigns, or any subcontractor hired by such contractor, (3) repair and/or replace any defective
workmanship or material in the Public Improvements, and (4) make good and protect the Village against the results of any defective workmanship or
materials appearing to have been incorporated in any part of the Public Improvements which shall have appeared or been discovered within months [
insert Maintenance Period determined by the Village Engineer, between 15 months and 24 months] after the Completion Date (the "Maintenance
Period"), and (5) pay all maintenance, repair and/or replacement costs in connection with its obligations under provisions (1) through (4) inclusive of
this paragraph and provide sufficient evidence of said payment, including furnishing sworn owner's statements, sworn contractor statements dated on
or after the last day of the Maintenance Period from each prime contractor(s) with whom the Principal contracted to perform said work and final waivers
of lien from all persons and entities that furnished labor and/or material in connection with any maintenance, repair and/or replacement work; then this
obligation shall be null and void; otherwise, to remain in full force and effect.
For purposes of this Maintenance Bond, the Principal and the Surety agree that in the event that any Public Improvements are damaged, the burden
shall be on the Principal to show that such damage was not caused by the Principal, its agents, servants, employees, successors or assigns or by any
contractor hired by the Principal, its agents, servants, employees, successors or assigns, or any subcontractor hired by such contractor.
Any suit under this Bond must be instituted before the expiration of three (3) years after the Completion Date; provided, however, that the Surety
shall give written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, deliver to addressee only, to the Village Administrator, the Village Treasurer and the
Village Clerk, of the expiration of such two year period not less than 60 days prior to the expiration of such three year period or the expiration date shall
be extended automatically to the date 90 days after such notice is actually given.
No right of action shall accrue under this Bond to or for the use of any person or corporation other than the Village, its successors or legal
representatives.
The Principal and the Surety, jointly and severally, agree to reimburse the Village for any reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Village in
enforcing or attempting to enforce the obligations of the Principal and the Surety, or any of them, under this Bond, regardless of whether a lawsuit is
actually filed.
SIGNED, SEALED AND DATED this day of , 20 .
(Insert appropriate signature and attestation format, including officer titles and corporate seal.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 612/702
G. Appendix F-7; Standby Letter Of Credit:
[BANK LETTERHEAD]
STANDBY LETTER OF CREDIT
(Maintenance)
[ Insert date of issuance]
Village of Bartlett
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, Illinois, 60103
RE: [ Insert Name of Applicant's Development]
Issuance. At the request and for the account of [ name and address of applicant] ("Applicant"), we [ name and address of issuer at place of
issuance] ("Issuer") issue this irrevocable standby letter of credit number [ reference number] ("Standby") in favor of the Village of Bartlett, 228 South
Main Street, Bartlett, Illinois, 60103 ("Beneficiary") in the maximum aggregate amount of USD [insert amount equal to the lesser of (i) 15% of the
actual cost of the Public Improvements based on contracts on file with the Village Clerk, otherwise (ii) 15% of the original amount of the Standby Letter
of Credit (Performance and Payment)].
Undertaking. Issuer undertakes to Beneficiary to pay Beneficiary's demand for payment for an amount available under this Standby and in the form
of Annex A (Payment Demand) or Annex B (Payment Demand after Notice of Non-Extension), completed as indicated and presented to Issuer at the
following place for presentation: [ address of place for presentation], at or before the close of business on the expiration date.
Overdrawing. If a demand exceeds the amount available, but the presentation otherwise complies, Issuer undertakes to pay the amount available.
Expiration. The expiration date of this Standby is [ insert specific calendar date set, not less than 15 months nor more than 24 months as
determined by the Village Engineer].
Automatic Extension. The expiration date of this Standby shall be automatically extended for successive six (6) month periods, unless 60 or more
calendar days before the then current expiration date Issuer gives written notice to the Beneficiary that Issuer elects not to extend the expiration date.
Issuer's written notice must be sent by registered, certified or express mail or nationally recognized overnight courier to Beneficiary's above stated
address and to the attention of the Village Treasurer, in the Finance Department, or alternatively be received by the Village Administrator, 60 or more
calendar days before the then current expiration date. At any time before the next expiration date, Issuer may retract its notice of non-extension by
giving Beneficiary a written notice of retraction in the same manner as giving notice of non-extension, and thereby automatically extend the expiration
date. The expiration date is not subject to automatic extension beyond [ insert specific calendar date, not more than three years after issuance
date], and any pending automatic six (6) month extension shall be ineffective beyond that date.
Payment. Payment against a complying presentation shall be made within three business days after presentation at the place for presentation or by
wire transfer to a duly requested account of Beneficiary.
ISP98. This Standby is issued subject to the International Standby Practices 1998 (ISP98) (International Chamber of Commerce Publication No.
590).
Illinois Law. This Standby is issued subject to ISP98, and as to matters not covered by ISP98, is governed by the law of the State of Illinois. The
State courts located in Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any action to enforce the Issuer's obligations under this Standby.
Issuer's Charges and Fees. Issuer's charges and fees for issuing, amending, or honoring this Standby are for Applicant's account and shall not be
deducted from any payment Issuer makes under this Standby. Issuer undertakes to Beneficiary to pay the charges and fees of any bank nominated in
this Standby to advise and confirm this Standby for acting on such nomination.
Communications. Communications other than demands may be made to Issuer in the manner and at the place for presentation and also as follows: [
addresses for mailed, couriered, telephone, telefax, or electronic communications]. Communications other than for notices of non-extension may
be made to Beneficiary at Beneficiary's above-stated address and also as follows: Village of Bartlett, Attention: , 228 South Main Street, Bartlett, Illinois,
60103, telephone 630-837-0800, telefax 630-837-0155, e-mail < @vbartlett.org>.
[Issuer's name]
[signature]
Authorized Signature
Text in [ALL CAPITALS UNDERLINED] to be completed as indicated when the Beneficiary prepares a Payment Demand.
Annex A: Payment Demand
[insert DATE]
[Insert NAME AND ADDRESS OF ISSUER OR OTHER ADDRESSEE AT PLACE OF PRESENTATION AS STATED IN STANDBY]
RE: Standby Letter of Credit No. [REFERENCE NUMBER], dated [DATE] issued by [ISSUER'S NAME] ("Standby")
The undersigned Beneficiary demands payment of USD [Insert AMOUNT] under the Standby.
Beneficiary states that Applicant is obligated to pay to Beneficiary the amount demanded as provided in [the Public Improvements Completion
Agreement dated between the Applicant and the Beneficiary, the Village of Bartlett Subdivision & PUD Ordinance (as amended) and/or [Insert
ORDINANCE NUMBER, TITLE AND DATE OF PASSAGE OF SPECIFIC ORDINANCE(S) THAT ACCEPTED THE PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS FOR
THE APPLICANT'S DEVELOPMENT].
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 613/702
Beneficiary requests that payment be made by wire transfer to an account of Beneficiary as follows: [Insert NAME, ADDRESS, AND ROUTING
NUMBER OF BENEFICIARY'S BANK, AND NAME AND NUMBER OF BENEFICIARY'S ACCOUNT].
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, Illinois 60103
Valid if signed by any two of the following: [INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE TREASURER
[INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
[INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
Text in [ALL CAPITALS UNDERLINED] to be completed as indicated when the Beneficiary prepares a Payment Demand.
Annex B: Payment Demand after Notice of Non-extension
[insert DATE]
[Insert NAME AND ADDRESS OF ISSUER OR OTHER ADDRESSEE AT PLACE OF PRESENTATION AS STATED IN STANDBY]
RE: Standby Letter of Credit No. [REFERENCE NUMBER], dated [DATE] issued by [ISSUER'S NAME] ("Standby")
The undersigned Beneficiary demands payment of USD [Insert AMOUNT] under the Standby.
Beneficiary states that the Standby is set to expire fewer than 60 days from the date hereof because Issuer has given a notice of non-extension of the
Standby, no retraction of the non-extension notice or satisfactory replacement standby has been timely received, and the amount demanded is required to
secure the obligations of Applicant as provided in the Public Improvements Completion Agreement dated , the Bartlett Subdivision & PUD Ordinance (as
amended), and/or [Insert ORDINANCE NUMBER, TITLE AND DATE OF PASSAGE OF SPECIFIC ORDINANCE THAT ACCEPTED THE PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS FOR THE APPLICANT'S DEVELOPMENT].
Beneficiary requests that payment be made by wire transfer to an account of Beneficiary as follows: [Insert NAME, ADDRESS, AND ROUTING
NUMBER OF BENEFICIARY'S BANK, AND NAME AND NUMBER OF BENEFICIARY'S ACCOUNT].
VILLAGE OF BARTLETT
228 South Main Street
Bartlett, Illinois 60103
Valid if signed by any two of the following: [INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE TREASURER
[INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
[INSERT ORIGINAL SIGNATURE]
[INSERT TYPED PRINTED NAME]
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
(Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 614/702
11-12-7: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
11-12-8: APPENDIX H; STANDARD DETAILS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Erosion And Sediment Control:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 615/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 616/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 617/702
B. Sanitary Utilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 618/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 619/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 620/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 621/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 622/702
C. Water Utilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 623/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 624/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 625/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 626/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 627/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 628/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 629/702
D. Storm Utilities:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 630/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 631/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 632/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 633/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 634/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 635/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 636/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 637/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 638/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 639/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 640/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 641/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 642/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 643/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 644/702
E. Pavement Construction:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 645/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 646/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 647/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 648/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 649/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 650/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 651/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 652/702
(Ord. 2015-05, 1-20-2015)
F. Street Lighting:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 653/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 654/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 655/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 656/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 657/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 658/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 659/702
G. Miscellaneous:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 660/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 661/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 662/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 663/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 664/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 665/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 666/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 667/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 668/702
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 669/702
(Ord. 2004-148, 10-19-2004)
Title 12
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 670/702
Chapter 1
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title 12 of the Bartlett Municipal Code, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BENEFICIAL INTEREST: Any interest, regardless of how small or minimal such interest may be, in a land trust, held by a trustee for the beneficiaries of
such land trust.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Any not-for-profit corporation, society, association, foundation or institution organized and operating exclusively for
charitable, religious or educational purposes.
PERSON: Any natural person, partnership, joint stock company, business trust, joint venture, company, domestic or foreign corporation, foundation, club,
association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals, acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise, or an assignee,
receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, any estate, trust, land trust, testamentary
trust, inter vivos trust, trust in perpetuity, Municipal corporation, political subdivision of the State of Illinois or the United States or any instrumentality
thereof. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the owners
or part owners, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
RECORDATION: The recording of deeds or facsimile of an assignment of beneficial or other interests with the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook
County, DuPage County or Kane County, Illinois, or the registration of deeds with the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois.
VALUE: The amount of full actual consideration for any transfer covered hereunder, including the amount of any mortgage, mortgages or other lien or liens
to which the sale is subject or the amount of any mortgage, mortgages or other lien or liens assumed by the grantee or purchaser. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A. A tax is imposed on the transfer of title to real estate located within the corporate limits of the Village as evidenced by the recordation of a deed or by
the delivery of any deed by any person, and a tax is imposed on the transfer of the beneficial or other interest in real estate located within the corporate
limits of the Village as evidenced by the recordation of any assignment or facsimile, whether investing the owner with the beneficial interest in or legal
title to said property or merely the possession or use thereof for any purpose or the future transfer of any such real property or beneficial interest.
B. The tax imposed shall be three dollars ($3.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of value or fraction thereof for each transfer as stated in the
declaration. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-3: LIABILITY FOR TAX:
The primary liability for payment of the tax imposed provided in Section 12-1-2 shall be borne by the grantor involved in any such transaction or by the
assignor of any instrument transferring the beneficial interest in real estate lying within the corporate limits of the Village; provided, however, it shall be
unlawful for the grantee, purchaser or trustee involved in any such transaction to accept a conveyance or assignment if the transfer tax has not been paid.
If the transfer tax has not been paid and the stamps affixed to the deed, assignment or facsimile, then the grantee's, purchaser's or trustee's title shall be
subject to the lien provided in Section 12-1-12 hereof and the grantee shall be liable for payment of the tax. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to
any and all other taxes. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-4: REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX STAMPS REQUIRED:
A. The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the Finance Department through the sale of real estate transfer tax stamp(s), which shall be
caused to be prepared by said Finance Department in such quantities as said Director of Finance may from time to time prescribe. Such stamp or
stamps shall be numbered 00001 and upward and in the denomination of the amount of said real estate transfer tax due and shall be in substantially
the following design:
Bartlett Real Estate Transfer Tax
00001 $0000
B. Such stamps shall be available for sale at, and during the regular business hours of the Village offices and the offices of such agent as the Village may
designate. For the purpose of reviewing the request for the stamp(s), the Village shall process a request within three (3) working days. Upon payment
of the tax herein levied and imposed, the stamp(s) so purchased shall be affixed to the deed, assignment, facsimile or other instrument of conveyance
or transfer. Any person so using and affixing a stamp shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by marking it with his initials and the
day, month and year when the affixing occurs. Such marking shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a machine or
punch; however, the stamp shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its genuineness. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-5: DECLARATION FORMS AND FILING OF DOCUMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 671/702
A. At the time the transfer tax is paid, there shall be presented to the Director of Finance on a form prescribed by him a declaration signed by at least one
of the sellers or grantors and also signed by at least one of the purchasers or grantees involved in the transaction, or by their attorneys or agents, or by
a licensed real estate salesperson or broker having knowledge of the terms of the transaction, which declaration shall state the full consideration for the
property so transferred and shall be deemed a confidential record. Where the declaration is signed by an attorney, agent, licensed real estate
salesperson or broker on behalf of sellers or buyers who have the power of direction to deal with the title to the real estate under a land trust
agreement, the trustees being the mere repository of record legal title with a duty of conveying the real estate only when and if directed in writing by the
beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of direction, said attorney, licensed real estate salesperson or broker need only identify the land trust
which is the repository of record legal title and not the beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of direction under the land trust agreement.
B. At such time as the request for Village real estate transfer stamp(s) is made, there shall also be filed with the Finance Department: 1) a fully executed
and completed copy of the "Real Estate Transfer Declaration" required by section 3 of the Real Estate Transfer Tax of the State of Illinois; and 2) a
copy of the deed, assignment, facsimile or other instrument conveying title or assigning or transferring an interest in said property, and which shall
include the date of the transaction which it evidences, the names of the grantor and grantee or assignor and assignee, a legal description, the
permanent index number and a common street address of the property to which it relates. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-6: REVENUE STAMPS, NONISSUANCE:
The Director of Finance or his or her designee may refuse to issue real estate transfer tax stamp(s), although payment of the taxes is offered, if any of the
following conditions exist:
A. Outstanding sum of money due the Village from the property or the property owners.
B. Refusal to allow inspection pursuant to the Bartlett Building Code, the Bartlett Zoning Code, or any other provision of the Bartlett Municipal Code.
C. Any other violation of the Bartlett Municipal Code.
D. Failure to have had a final reading of the water meter and failure to have made payment on any water and/or sewer bill pursuant to subsection 12-1-7B
of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-7: WATER AND SEWER BILL:
A. Meter Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use water from the Village water system, except through a meter properly installed,
pursuant to the ordinances of the Village.
B. Final Bill: A request to the Village for a final reading of the water meter shall be made three (3) days prior to the date the final reading is requested.
Upon receipt of such request, the Village shall take a final reading and prepare a bill, which shall be paid in full prior to issuance of any real estate
transfer stamp(s).
C. Procedure Sans Final Reading: In the event a final reading is not possible prior to the transfer of property for which Village real estate transfer tax
stamp(s) are required, the owner, consumer or user shall pay one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the last bill or other reasonable amount as
determined by the Village until a final reading is conducted. In the event the final reading shows that the owner, consumer or user still owes the Village
money, said owner, consumer and/or user, as the case may be, shall promptly pay to the Village any outstanding sums. In the event the final reading
shows that the owner, consumer or user has paid in excess of the amount due, the Village shall promptly refund any monies paid to the person or entity
in whose name the water bill is listed on the Village records. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed by this Chapter of the Municipal Code shall not apply to the following transactions, provided said transaction in each case is
accompanied by a certificate setting forth the facts or such other certificate of record as the Director of Finance may require:
A. Transactions involving property acquired by or from any governmental body or by any charitable organizations. The latter transaction is exempt only
when one charitable organization conveys property to another charitable organization.
B. Transactions which secure debt or other obligation.
C. Transactions in which deeds, without additional consideration, confirm, correct, modify or supplement deeds previously recorded.
D. Transactions in which the actual consideration is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
E. Transactions in which the deeds are tax deeds.
F. Transactions which are releases of property which is security for a debt or other obligation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 672/702
G. Transactions in which the deeds are pursuant to court decree.
H. Transactions made pursuant to mergers, consolidations or transfers, or sales of substantially all of the assets of a corporation pursuant to plans or
reorganization.
I. Transactions between subsidiary corporations and their parents for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary
corporations's stock.
J. Transactions wherein there is an actual exchange of real property except that the money difference or money's worth paid from one to the other shall not
be exempt from the tax.
K. Transactions representing transfers subject to the imposition of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States.
L. A transfer by lease.
M. Transactions wherein not less than one of the grantor(s) or assignor(s) has continuously resided upon the property within the Village for the past one
year and has evidence that not less than one of the grantor(s) or assignor(s) has either: 1) closed on the purchase and has resided in a different
residence within the Village within the preceding six (6) months of the scheduled closing or transfer date on the sale or transfer transaction subject to
this Chapter; or 2) entered into a contract to purchase a different residence within the Village within which said grantor(s) or assignor(s) intend to reside
with a scheduled closing date as set forth in a fully executed and completed real estate sales contract not more than twelve (12) months after the sale
or transfer transaction subject to this Chapter.
Every deed or other instrument which is tax exempt pursuant to this Section shall be presented to the Finance Department so as to be appropriately
marked by said Department as an exempt deed or instrument eligible for recordation without the payment of tax. At such time as a deed or instrument
is presented to the Finance Department, a certificate setting forth the facts and supporting documentation which justify exemption shall be presented.
(Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-9: RECORDATION OF DEEDS:
No deed conveying real property within the corporate limits of the Village shall be entitled to recordation by the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County,
DuPage County or Kane County, Illinois, or the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois, unless such deed shall bear either a Village real estate transfer
tax stamp or an exemption mark from the Finance Department. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-10: DUTY OF TRUSTEE:
No trustee of real estate shall accept an assignment of beneficial interest in real estate located in the Village unless such instrument shall bear either a
Village real estate transfer tax stamp(s) or any exemption mark from the Finance Department. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-11: PROCEEDS OF TAX:
A. All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of the
Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the General Fund of the Village.
B. No refund of taxes paid in error for any reason shall be made after sixty (60) days from the date of payment of said tax. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-12: LIEN CREATED; ENFORCEMENT:
In the event a deed conveying real estate, or an assignment of beneficial or other interest in real estate within the corporate limits of the Village is filed for
recordation or accepted by a trustee of a land trust without the Village real estate transfer tax stamp(s) required by this Chapter affixed to such instrument,
a lien is declared against said real estate conveyed or interest therein transferred in the amount of the tax. The fact that the deed or assignment does not
have the real estate transfer tax stamp(s) affixed to it in an amount equal to the amount of State transfer taxes shall constitute constructive notice of lien.
The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as in cases of mortgages or mechanics' liens. Suit to foreclose this lien must be commenced within
two (2) years after the date of recording the deed. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the Village from bringing a civil action to collect the tax
imposed by this Chapter from any person who has liability for payment of the same, including interest and penalties as hereinbelow provided. (Ord. 94-24,
3-15-94)
12-1-13: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Village the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due
upon said tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per month commencing as of the first day following the day when the deed was recorded or the assignment
of beneficial interest was accepted by the trustee. In addition, a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the tax and interest shall be assessed and collected
against any person who fails to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-14: CIVIL LIABILITY FOR TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 673/702
In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Village the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, said person shall be liable to the Village
for such tax, together with interest and penalties. The Village may bring an action to collect such tax, interest and penalties in any court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
12-1-15: FINE FOR VIOLATION:
In addition to the remaining provisions of this Chapter, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any provision of this Chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 94-24, 3-15-94)
Title 13
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Chapter 1
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
13-1-1: ADOPTION OF CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW:
The regulations of the cable and video customer protection law1 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the village's boundaries. (Ord. 2008-5, 1-15-2008)
13-1-2: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be incorporated into
this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action
by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 2008-5, 1-15-2008)
13-1-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village. (Ord. 2008-5, 1-15-2008)
13-1-4: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
A. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision
of the law.
B. The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30)
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the
cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-5, 1-15-2008)
13-1-5: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 2008-5, 1-
15-2008)
13-1-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval and publication as required by law. (Ord. 2008-5, 1-15-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 674/702
Chapter 2
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEES AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES
13-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the village.
The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization
to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received
from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 675/702
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or
any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2008-4, 1-15-2008)
13-2-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
A. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
C. Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the village.
D. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the
first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance codified herein by the holder. The ordinance codified herein shall
be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6)
to the village.
E. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
F. Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with
the village in which a fee is paid.
G. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-4, 1-15-2008)
13-2-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
A. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to section 13-2-2 of this chapter.
B. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
C. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 13-2-2D of this chapter.
D. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2008-4, 1-15-2008)
13-2-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2008-4, 1-15-2008)
13-2-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 676/702
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2008-4, 1-15-2008)
13-2-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for the
sum. (Ord. 2008-4, 1-15-2008)
13-2-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2008-4, 1-15-2008)
Chapter 3
TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL
13-3A-1: TITLE; PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known as the BARTLETT TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE and its purpose and intent is to:
A. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services;
B. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications
providers and services;
C. Promote competition in telecommunications;
D. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of the telecommunications providers and services;
E. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services;
F. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the municipality for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
G. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the municipality;
H. Protect the integrity and appearance of the public ways;
I. Assure that the municipality's current and ongoing costs of granting private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons seeking
such access and causing such costs;
J. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the municipality comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
municipality;
K. Assure that the municipality can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 677/702
L. Enable the municipality to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3A-2: WORD USE:
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" or "will" are always mandatory and not merely directory, and the word "may" is
permissive. The words "he", "his", and "him" shall be gender neutral.
A. Conflicting Provisions: The headings and captions contained in this chapter are to facilitate reference only, and shall not in any way affect the
construction or interpretations hereof.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another
person.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the municipality as that term is defined in
the cable communications policy act of 1984, 47 USC 522.
CORPORATE AUTHORITY: The president and village board of the village of Bartlett.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way available
for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
FACILITIES: The individual parts that together make the telecommunications system fully operational for the purposes set forth herein, including, but
not limited to, all cables, conduits, access manholes, pedestals, boxes, equipment, devices and other appurtenances.
GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY: The United States Of America, the state of Illinois and any political subdivision thereof, including, but not limited to,
the municipality, and any agency, department, commission, board, bureau or other instrumentality of any of them that has jurisdiction over the
telecommunications system or any property over, under, above or along which the telecommunications system shall be installed.
GRANTEE: A licensee who has received a license under article C of this chapter, or a franchisee who has received a franchise under article D of this
chapter, or a recipient of both a franchise and license. A recipient of a license or franchise, or both, whether obtained directly or indirectly, by transfer,
assignment, sale, lease, merger, consolidation, or other act of a licensee or franchisee, by operation of law or otherwise, shall also be considered a
grantee.
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within
the village, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the
cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included
only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the village, charges for
the channel mileage between each channel point within the village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within
the village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
1. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: a) the fee imposed by this section, b) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, c) amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code,
d) the tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, e) 911 surcharges, or f) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue
code;
2. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the village;
3. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing
agreement;
4. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
5. Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the village;
6. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 678/702
profit other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;
7. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made);
8. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications devices; or
9. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the village.
GROSS REVENUE: All of the revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, that is derived from or in
conjunction with the operation of the telecommunications system in the municipality, including, but not limited to, all revenue received for the
provision of service, installation, reconnection, sale of products and the imputed value of free service and the value of all goods and services
received by the service provider in exchange for the service; provided, however, that no billings shall be imputed related to the services provided to
the municipality.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The state administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the state of Illinois.
INDEX: The consumer price index for urban wage earners (CPI-U) in the Chicago region, or if said index is not then being published, the successor
or the most nearly comparable successor index thereto.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the municipality, other than public streets and utility easements as those
terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the municipality, which are not subject to right of way licensing and
franchising as provided in this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY: The village of Bartlett, and all representatives including, but not limited to, its elected officials, employees and agents.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of way within the municipality, but under the jurisdiction and control of
a governmental entity other than the municipality.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground
supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERMITS: All approvals, consents, permits, licenses, easements and authorizations required to be obtained from all governmental authorities and
persons, in connection with the telecommunications systems, including those needed to obtain access to or use of any real property.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, and individuals and
includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PRODUCTS: All equipment, instruments, parts, accessories and other goods offered in connection with or otherwise relating to the service.
PROVIDERS: Any person providing telecommunications services within the municipality, whether located in the public way or not.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any municipal street, alley, water or public right of way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities. "Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and
shall not include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public right of way.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for vehicular travel under the jurisdiction and control of the municipality
which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes, not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by and/or
under the jurisdiction of the municipality.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining
within the state of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of
business, or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether
such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed
to do business in this state.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in
connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SERVICE: The provision or offering of telecommunications service, either directly or as a carrier for others, to persons by means of the
telecommunications system.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime
systems, air to ground systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's primary use of the telecommunications
equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole user, as required by the
order and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for pole attachment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 679/702
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio
services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics,
laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless
telecommunications as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications
are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not
include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her
to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges,
charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated
into, end to end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the
provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following) as now
or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video
system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates, or manages plant,
equipment or property within the municipality, used or to be used for the purpose of offering any telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: 1) Any telecommunications retailer; and 2) any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the village, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the village.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of
voice, data, image, graphic and/or video signals, including cable television, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, antennas, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite and/or similar facilities, with or without the benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: The telecommunications network to be constructed and installed by the provider pursuant to and in accordance
with this document, including, but not limited to, all cables, conduits, access manholes, pedestals, boxes, equipment, devices and appurtenances to
be used by the provider to make the network fully operational, for the purposes of transmitting, receiving and distributing telecommunications and
other information, including, without limitation, voice, data, video, including cable television, facsimile, alarm and meter reading signals and other
forms of communications.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the municipality and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes, not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment, and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant
and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the municipality for the purpose of providing utility or
telecommunications services.
VILLAGE: The president and board of trustees, officers, employees, and agents of the village of Bartlett.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in section 704(c) of the
telecommunications act of 1996 (public law 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996; amd. Ord. 97-90, 12-2-1997)
13-3A-3: REGISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide, or propose to provide any telecommunications
service for a fee directly to the public, either within the municipality, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities within the municipality,
shall register with the municipality pursuant to article B of this chapter. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3A-4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the municipality for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons and areas outside the municipality, shall first obtain a license granting the use of such public ways from the municipality pursuant to article C of
this chapter. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3A-5: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications providers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over, or across any public way of the municipality, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 680/702
areas within the municipality, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the municipality pursuant to article D of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3A-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3A-7: COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
Grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, codes, rules, and regulations of the federal, state, county, and village
governments, and all administrative agencies thereof, including, but not limited to, judicial orders, regardless of whether such law, code, rule or regulation
is expressly referenced in this chapter.
A. Grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, codes, rules, and regulations of the municipality and all applicable
memoranda and other directives of the municipality, as such laws, ordinances, resolutions, codes, rules, regulations, memoranda and directives may
be modified or amended, provided that such modification or amendment does not impair, conflict with, or diminish the rights granted under this chapter.
B. This chapter shall not take the place of any license, permit or approval that is, or may in the future, be required to be secured by a telecommunications
provider from any governmental authority or person. Specifically:
1. Telecommunications franchises for the provision of cable television service shall be in accordance with the cable act of 1984 as amended, and the
Illinois municipal code;
2. All federal, state, and local laws as well as rules and regulations of the FCC, the ICC and any other governmental authority charged with the
regulation of telecommunications shall be in full force and effect; and
3. All door to door sales will be registered with the municipality. Door to door sales will be conducted in compliance with all federal, state and local laws.
(Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3A-8: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the village entered into before the effective date hereof regarding
the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent
waived. (Ord. 97-90, 12-2-1997)
13-3A-9: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No license or franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the
municipality for the delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3A-10: AGREEMENT (FOR LICENSES OR FRANCHISES NOT OBTAINED BY MERGER, CONSOLIDATION, OR
REORGANIZATION):
No license or franchise granted hereunder, or obtained directly or indirectly, by transfer, assignment, sale, lease, or other act of a licensee or franchisee, by
operation of law or otherwise, other than by merger, consolidation, or reorganization by the grantee, shall be effective until:
A. The applicant and the municipality have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the license or
franchise to occupy and use the public ways of the municipality will be granted;
B. All applicable fees have been paid; and
C. The liability, indemnification, insurance, and security provisions required in article I of this chapter have been satisfied. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3A-11: AGREEMENT (FOR LICENSES OR FRANCHISES OBTAINED BY MERGER, CONSOLIDATION, OR
REORGANIZATION):
No license or franchise obtained directly or indirectly, by merger, consolidation, or reorganization by the grantee, shall be effective until:
A. All applicable fees have been paid;
B. The liability, indemnification, insurance, and security provisions required in article I of this chapter have been satisfied; and
C. Notice is given to the village pursuant to section 13-3J-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 681/702
ARTICLE B. REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
13-3B-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every "telecommunications provider" as defined herein shall register with the village within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof or becoming a
telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the village, provided, however, that any telecommunications retailer that has
filed a return pursuant to subsection 13-3F-2C of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this section. (Ord. 97-90, 12-2-1997)
13-3B-2: AMENDED REGISTRATION:
Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village pursuant to this section has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration
form or current return as required by subsection 13-3F-2C of this chapter, as the case may be, to the village within thirty (30) days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the
village. (Ord. 97-90, 12-2-1997)
ARTICLE C. TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE
13-3C-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the municipality for the
sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3C-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this article, shall file an application with the municipality which shall include the following
information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the municipality, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the municipality that the applicant intends to use or lease.
2. The location and route requested for applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
3. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, including cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
4. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
5. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.
E. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways, information in sufficient detail
to identify:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
I. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 682/702
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct,
operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities
and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer
or provide such telecommunications services.
M. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to article F of this chapter.
N. Such other and further information as may reasonably be required by the municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3C-3: DETERMINATION BY THE MUNICIPALITY:
Within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application under section 13-3C-2 of this article, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards:
A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The legal ability of the applicant.
C. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
D. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license would be granted.
E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private property, facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
G. The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region.
H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare should the license be granted.
I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
J. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
K. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3C-4: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years. (Ord. 96-
6, 2-6-1996)
13-3C-5: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this article shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. A new license
application and grant shall be required of any licensee that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a
previously granted license. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3C-6: PROVISION OF SERVICE WITHIN THE MUNICIPALITY:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the municipality upon submitting an application for
approval pursuant to article D of this chapter. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
ARTICLE D. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 683/702
13-3D-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the municipality and to provide
telecommunications services to any person or area within the municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this article shall file an application with the municipality which shall include all of the
information required in section 13-3C-2 of this chapter as well as the following additional information:
A. A complete description of the system design, capabilities and technical standards that the system is expected to achieve.
B. A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to its subscribers and the corresponding rates for said services
and customer service standards and policies.
C. A description of the proposed services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the municipality and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
D. The area(s) of the municipality the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
E. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to article F of this chapter.
F. Such other and further information as may reasonably be required by the municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-3: DETERMINATION BY THE MUNICIPALITY:
Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under section 13-3D-2 of this article, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the standards listed in section 13-3C-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-4: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of ten (10) years.
(Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-5: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this article shall be the corporate boundaries of the municipality and the specific public ways necessary to
serve such areas. The grantee's system shall be accessible to all residences, businesses and institutions within twenty four (24) months of the effective
date of a franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-6: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A grantee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit a grantee
from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers, including the imposition of cost based rates. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-7: SERVICE TO THE MUNICIPALITY:
A grantee shall make its telecommunications services available to the municipality at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise
provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-8: AREA WIDE INTERCONNECT:
The system shall be interconnected with all providers within the municipality as well as all contiguous communities allowing for seamless delivery of all
voice, video, and data signals as soon as practicable.
A. The grantee shall make a good faith effort to obtain agreements for the sharing of interconnection costs among all interconnecting companies. Upon
finding that the grantee has made a good faith effort and has not been able to obtain a reasonable agreement, or that the cost of the interconnection
would cause an unreasonable increase in subscriber rates, the municipality may postpone the deadline for interconnection to that particular area, or,
upon finding that the grantee is unreasonable, the municipality may request further study, or may enforce the interconnection deadline.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 684/702
B. The provisions above shall not be construed so as to preclude cooperative effort, joint ownership of facilities, or cost sharing arrangements; provided,
however, that each and every aspect of construction and operation of the interconnect shall be clearly designated in written agreement(s) between the
parties and be operating and maintained as provided for in this agreement and by all applicable state and federal regulations. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-9: EMERGENCY SERVICES:
In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the municipality, make available its facilities to the municipality without cost,
for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-10: ANNUAL MEETING:
The grantee shall meet annually with the municipality to discuss construction plans for the next year as prescribed in section 13-3G-6 of this chapter and
the performance of the grantee over the previous year. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3D-11: RIGHT TO REGULATE RESERVED:
Subject to any limitations imposed under the public utilities act or any other state law or federal law which limits the municipality's authority to regulate
telecommunications providers, the municipality reserves the right to prescribe regulations for the performance of telecommunications providers should the
appropriate governmental authority abandon such regulation. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
ARTICLE E. RESERVED
(Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
ARTICLE F. FEES AND COMPENSATION
13-3F-1: INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
A. A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent
(1.0%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the village for telecommunications originating or
received in the village.
B. Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this article, the village infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder
shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights of way within the village by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the
infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this article does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees
otherwise authorized by law.
C. The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this article shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in
section 13-3F-2 of this article. (Ord. 97-90, 12-2-1997)
13-3F-2: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE
MAINTENANCE FEES:
A. A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
B. Unless otherwise approved by the village administrator the infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to
reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
C. Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the village administrator,
which shall contain such information as the village administrator may reasonably require.
D. Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this article and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under subsection A of
this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this article shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.
E. If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions herein, whether as a result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due, under this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 685/702
article, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the village administrator may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3)
years after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the village within the
applicable statutory period of limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same telecommunications retailer during the
applicable statutory period of limitations.
F. Amounts paid under this article by telecommunications retailers shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
1. "Gross charges" for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax act;
2. "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code;
3. "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code;
4. "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the public utilities act.
G. The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this article to determine
whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the village by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the village within twenty one (21)
days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
H. The village administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this article consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to article B of this chapter. (Ord. 97-90, 12-2-1997)
13-3F-3: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
A. The village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village franchise, license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time
the village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this article is subject to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
B. The village clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village
has a franchise.
C. The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this article shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than
ninety (90) days after the village provides written notice by certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has an existing
franchise, license, or similar agreement that the village waives all compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement during
such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 97-90, 12-2-1997)
13-3F-4: FEES AND COMPENSATION FOR NONRETAILER TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
A. Application And Review Fees:
1. Any applicant for a license pursuant to article C of this chapter by a nonretailer telecommunications provider shall pay a fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or one percent (1%) of the estimated cost of the applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's
professional engineer and approved by the village engineer, whichever is greater. This fee is intended to compensate the municipality for all staff
expenses, excluding engineering expenses and attorney fees recovered under subsections A2 and A3 of this section, associated with reviewing and
administering applicant's license application.
2. Any applicant for a license pursuant to article C of this chapter by a nonretailer telecommunications provider shall reimburse the municipality for all
engineering expenses incurred by the municipality in reviewing applicant's license application.
3. Any applicant for a license pursuant to article C of this chapter by a nonretailer telecommunications provider shall reimburse the municipality for all
attorney fees incurred by the municipality in reviewing applicant's license application.
4. Any applicant for a license pursuant to article C of this chapter by a nonretailer telecommunications provider shall reimburse the municipality for any
direct and indirect costs that the municipality incurs when administering and reviewing applicant's license application, and which the municipality
does not recover under subsection A1, A2, or A3 of this section.
5. The application and review fee provided in this section shall be deposited with the municipality as part of the application filed pursuant to article C of
this chapter.
6. A nonretailer telecommunications provider applicant whose license application has been finally withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty
(60) days of its written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under this section, less:
a. Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus
b. All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the municipality in connection with the application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 686/702
B. Other Municipal Costs: All license nonretailer telecommunications providers shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefor, reimburse the
municipality for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the municipality in connection with any modifications, amendment, renewal or
transfer of the license agreement.
C. Construction Permit Fee: Prior to the issuance of a construction permit, the nonretailer telecommunications provider ("the permittee") shall pay a permit
fee equal to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the estimated cost of constructing the telecommunications
facilities, as certified by the applicant's engineer and approved by the village engineer, whichever is greater. This fee is intended to compensate the
municipality for all staff expenses, excluding engineering expenses and attorney fees recovered under subsections A1 and A2 of this section,
associated with reviewing and administering permittee's construction permit application.
1. Any permittee for a construction permit pursuant to article G of this chapter shall reimburse the municipality for all engineering expenses incurred by
the municipality in reviewing permittee's construction permit application.
2. Any permittee for a construction permit pursuant to article G of this chapter shall reimburse the municipality for all attorney fees incurred by the
municipality in reviewing permittee's construction permit application.
3. Any permittee for a construction permit pursuant to article G of this chapter shall reimburse the municipality for any other direct or indirect costs that
the municipality incurs when administering and reviewing permittee's construction permit application, and which the municipality does not recover
under this section.
D. Annual License Fee: Unless otherwise agreed in a license agreement, each nonretailer telecommunications provider grantee shall pay an annual
license fee to the municipality as reimbursement for the municipality's costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and
occupancy of the public ways on behalf of the public, and existing and future users. In 1997, for telecommunications facilities requiring excavation of
existing rights of way or easements, license grantee shall pay an annual license fee of one dollar ($1.00) per linear foot for each linear foot in which
license grantee's cable, conduit, fiber optic, or other telecommunications facilities occupies municipal property, public streets or public ways. In 1997,
the telecommunications facilities being installed in existing conduit, without the need of disturbing the right of way, license grantee shall pay an annual
license fee of fifty cents ($0.50) per linear foot for each linear foot in which license grantee's cable, conduit, fiber optic, or other telecommunications
facilities occupies municipal property, public streets, or public ways. This fee will be adjusted in five (5) year intervals, based upon cumulative changes
in the consumer price index for urban wage earners in the Chicago region.
E. Attorney Fees: Nonretailer telecommunications providers shall reimburse the municipality for all attorney fees incurred by the municipality including, but
not limited to, attorney fees incurred by the municipality for drafting agreements and any other necessary documents and for reviewing the applicant's
insurance, security submittals, and other necessary documents. In no event shall the municipality recover, under this section, attorney fees for
reviewing an application or attorney fees for reviewing a construction permit application.
F. Interest: In the event that any fees or recomputed amount is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be charged
for such date at an annual rate of two percent (2%) over the price rate announced from time to time by Harris Trust And Savings Bank of Chicago,
Illinois.
G. Regulatory Fees And Compensation Not A Tax: The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this section and any compensation charged and paid for
the public ways and provided for in this section, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local and municipal taxes as may be
levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or
transmission of telecommunications services.
H. Retail Telecommunications Providers: The terms, conditions, fees and provisions of this section shall not apply in retail telecommunications providers.
(Ord. 97-90, 12-2-1997)
ARTICLE G. CONSTRUCTION
13-3G-1: GENERAL:
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the municipality except as
provided within this article. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the municipality and shall be
accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.
B. The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles.
C. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points
along the route which are within the public ways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 687/702
D. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along the route
proposed by the applicant.
E. The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the municipality, but not within the public ways.
F. The construction methods to be employed, including:
1. Provisions for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways.
2. Burial depths, markers, etc.
G. The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a landscape
plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or other areas to be disturbed during construction. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
No person shall install, construct, or operate any telecommunications facilities within the municipality without first obtaining a construction permit.
A. No permit shall be issued to a licensee or franchisee for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the municipality unless the
telecommunications carrier has complied with all liability, indemnification, insurance, and security provisions required under this chapter, unless
otherwise permitted under a license or franchise agreement.
B. No permit shall be issued to a franchisee or licensee for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities without payment of all applicable
fees established in article F of this chapter, unless otherwise permitted under a license or franchise agreement.
C. No permit shall be issued to a franchisee or licensee for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the
telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to article C or D of this chapter, unless otherwise permitted
under a license or franchise agreement.
D. No permit shall be issued to any person for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the municipality unless the
telecommunications carrier has filed a registration statement with the municipality pursuant to article B of this chapter, unless otherwise permitted
under a license or franchise agreement.
E. All grantees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in this chapter, provided, however, that nothing in
this article shall prohibit the municipality and a licensee or franchisee from agreeing to an alternative plan review or permit and construction procedures
in a license or franchise agreement, provided that the village, in its sole discretion, determines that such alternative procedures provide substantially
equivalent safeguards for the liability, indemnification, insurance, and security provisions required under this chapter, and for responsible construction
practices. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-4: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a license or
franchise agreement:
A. A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
B. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and
then only if surplus space is available.
1. All cables and wires or other work shall be installed parallel with existing wires whenever possible.
2. Multiple cable configurations shall be in parallel arrangement and bundled in accordance with engineering and safety considerations.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the municipality, a
grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. All wires and cables passing under the roadway shall be installed in conduit.
E. All underground burials shall be located approximately 2.5 feet below the surface unless otherwise agreed to or specified by the municipality.
F. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this chapter, the grantee's telecommunications facilities must be placed underground at the
request of the adjacent property owner, provided that the excess cost over arterial location shall be borne by the property owner making the request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 688/702
G. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way
of the municipality, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be longer than ninety (90) days after the completion of the first underground installation.
H. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access
to future telecommunications carriers.
I. The municipality shall have the right to have conduit, fiber optic and/or other communications cable, fixtures and appurtenances thereto necessary for a
municipal communications system collocated and constructed by the grantee within and/or attached to grantee's facilities being so constructed or
installed.
J. In complying with the requirements of subsection I of this section, the actual additional or marginal cost of materials and labor expended by the grantee
over and above that amount which the grantee would have expended solely for its own purposes shall be paid by the municipality. This payment may,
at the option of the municipality, be credited against the compensation payable by the grantee to the municipality.
K. If no space can be created within the requested route(s), the applicant may seek an exception to any requirements set forth in this section by submitting
a written request to the municipality for review. The municipality will consider situations which may warrant a variance, including, but not limited to:
1. Reduced environmental effect.
2. The lack of alternatives for achieving equivalent service.
3. The lack of alternative routing which can be made available.
4. The feasibility of alternative routes. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-5: COMPLIANCE WITH JULIE:
All grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of JULIE. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-6: COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
All grantees are required to cooperate with the municipality and with each other.
A. By February 1, of each year, grantees shall provide the municipality with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public ways.
B. Each grantee shall meet with the municipality or other grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by the municipality to schedule
and coordinate construction in the public ways.
C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the municipal engineer or the director of public works, to
minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-7: CONSTRUCTION CODES:
Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes,
rules and regulations including the national electrical safety code, national electrical code of the national board of fire underwriters, BOCA and the Illinois
administrative code 265 where applicable. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-8: ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings comply with applicable technical
codes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-9: TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN:
All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the "Uniform Manual Of Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to
persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-10: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
All initial permit applications shall be accompanied by a manual or documents which set forth the specifications, standards and procedures for construction
and installation. Said specifications, standards and procedures shall be consistent with the highest standards of the telecommunications industry and shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 689/702
at a minimum, establish procedures to ensure quality work and provide for the safety and protection of residents, employees and property. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-
1996)
13-3G-11: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Within forty five (45) days after submission of all plans and documents required of the applicant and payment of all applicable fees required under article F
of this chapter, the village engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and documents comply with all requirement of this chapter and other applicable
codes and regulations, shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting
the time, place and manner of performing the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate. However, in no event, shall the village engineer issue a
construction permit unless permitted under section 13-3G-3 of this article. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-12: CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE:
The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the municipal engineer ten (10) working days before commencing any work in or about the
public ways. The permittee shall further notify the municipal engineer not less than two (2) working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public
ways. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-13: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT:
All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The village
engineer and his or her representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance
with such requirements. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-14: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for
inspection by the village engineer or representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-15: SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the permittee shall cause the
location of such facilities to be verified by a registered Illinois land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate, at permittee's expense, any facilities which are
not located in compliance with permit requirements. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-16: NONCOMPLYING WORK:
Upon order of the municipal engineer, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the
requirements of this chapter, shall be removed at permittee's expense. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-17: COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the municipal ways and other public and private property.
All construction work authorized by a permit within the municipal ways, including restoration, must be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of
the date of issuance. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-18: AS BUILT DRAWINGS:
Within sixty (60) days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the municipality with two (2) complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and
certified to the municipality as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. Said maps shall be
updated annually. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-19: RESTORATION:
Upon completion of any construction work, grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, and in the manner reasonably approved of by the municipality or
the affected property owner in its/their sole judgment and discretion, as the case may be, promptly repair the public way, private property, or improvement
and restore the same to, as nearly as practicable, the condition existing prior to the performance of the work. Such restoration shall be completed within
ten (10) days after the date of commencement of such work.
A. In the event that such public way, private property, or improvement cannot be so repaired, replaced or restored, grantee shall cause the municipality or
the affected owner of the same as the case may be, to be justly compensated.
B. All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the municipal engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 690/702
C. Where any such destruction, damage or disturbance is not immediately discovered, or where any such restoration effort fails or is otherwise inadequate
or insufficient, grantee shall have a continuing obligation to perform all necessary restoration work, despite the prior termination or expiration of rights
granted.
D. In the event that restoration cannot be completed in the time allowed due to severe weather conditions, the grantee shall notify the municipality of the
locations of all pending restorations so affected. Weather related pending restorations shall be completed as soon as practicable. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-20: FAILURE, NEGLECT, OR REFUSAL TO REPAIR:
In the event of any failure, neglect or refusal by grantee, after ten (10) days' written notice from the municipality, to repair or provide just compensation for
such destruction, damage or disturbance as provided in this chapter, the municipality may, but shall be under no obligation to, do such work, or cause it to
be done, and the actual cost thereof as found and declared by the municipality, shall be paid by the grantee within thirty (30) days after demand therefor. If
the grantee fails to so reimburse the municipality, the municipality may collect the amount due from the security fund established pursuant to this chapter,
with or without court action. In withdrawing any amount due from the security fund under this section, the municipality will comply with subsection 13-3I-5D
of this chapter. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-21: SUBCONTRACTORS:
Any contractor, vendor, or agent assigned to work on the installation, maintenance or repair of the telecommunications system must be property licensed
under laws of the state of Illinois and all local ordinances, and be thoroughly experienced in underground conduit, fiber optic and cable installation,
installation on poles, or in any other capacity for which retained. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-22: INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAY:
No grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by the municipality, the
general public, or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee,
temporarily or permanently, as determined by the municipal engineer, at the grantee's expense. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-23: PUBLIC SAFETY:
A grantee shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public
and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such ways or property. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-24: NOTICE OF WORK:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee's behalf, shall commence any
nonemergency work in or about the public ways of the municipality or other ways, without ten (10) working days' notice to the municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-
1996)
13-3G-25: REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK:
In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the
circumstances, provided that the grantee shall notify the municipality as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work, or as soon thereafter
as possible if advance notice is not practicable. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-26: MUNICIPAL WORK IN PUBLIC WAYS:
The municipality shall give the grantee no less than seven (7) days' advance written notice of street improvements or other activity which could affect the
telecommunications facilities. All such work shall be done, insofar as possible, in such a manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent free use and
operation of the grantee's telecommunications facilities. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-27: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
Upon thirty (30) days' advance notice from the municipality, a grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the corporate authorities shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
A. The health or safety of the public or any person.
B. Correcting an aesthetically unacceptable installation.
C. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any municipal or public improvement in or upon the public ways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 691/702
D. The operations of the municipal or other governmental entity in or upon the public ways. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-28: EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
The municipality retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public ways as the municipality may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency at grantee's expense. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-29: AUTOMATIC AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
If ordered by the municipality to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities into public ways not included in a previously granted license or
franchise, the municipality shall grant an amendment to the license or franchise without further application. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-30: TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
At the request of any person holding a valid building permit issued by the municipality or other appropriate governmental authority and upon reasonable
notice, depending on the circumstances, not exceeding thirty (30) days, grantee shall temporarily raise, lower or remove its facilities as may be necessary
to facilitate such move, subject to the payment, in advance, to the grantee, of the direct expenses of such temporary move by the permit holder, including
standby time. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-31: DAMAGE TO GRANTEE'S FACILITIES:
Unless directly and proximately caused by the wilful, intentional or malicious acts by the municipality, the municipality shall not be liable for any damage to
or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the municipality as a result of or in connection with any public works, public
improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-32: CONSTRUCTION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Prior to initiating any construction activity on, over, under or through privately owned property, including utility easements, the grantee shall provide at least
five (5) days' advance notice of such work to the property owner, and if applicable, tenants of the property.
A. Such notice shall include, at a minimum:
1. A thorough description of the construction activity.
2. The date and time such work is expected to commence and the anticipated duration.
3. The name, address, and telephone number for a responsible representative of the grantee capable of answering questions and resolving all potential
disputes with the property owner. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-33: GRANT OF PRIVATE EASEMENTS:
The grantee shall secure the written consent of any subscriber or property owner on whose land or at whose premises the grantee conducts any
construction or installation outside of the easement. All easements, other than utility easements, constructed for the cable communications system shall be
recorded on plats of survey by the grantee. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-34: MINIMAL INCONVENIENCE:
The grantee shall complete all installation or construction to be performed at each subscriber's premises, including any installation of new equipment,
either within or outside a subscriber's premises, in one day. The grantee shall permanently secure and install, pursuant to all applicable local regulations,
including all requirements as to attachment of appurtenances, burial of cable and restoration, all cable drops and reception equipment at a subscriber's
location at the time of installation to the extent practicable. The desire of each subscriber as to the point of entry into their residence, common areas, or
business shall be observed to the maximum extent possible. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-35: TEMPORARY CABLES:
In the event a temporary cable or drop line is required, the grantee must permanently install and bury if necessary, the cable or drop line within ten (10)
days. In the event a temporary cable or drop line is required due to winter related conditions, the grantee must permanently install and bury, if necessary,
the cable or drop line within sixty (60) days of the first date that such installation is possible. At a minimum, all temporary cables or drops remaining from
winter shall be buried prior to Memorial Day weekend. The grantee shall pay the property owner twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for every day a
temporary cable or drop remains unburied past the deadlines prescribed herein. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-36: APPURTENANCES:
The grantee shall securely attach all appurtenances, including on premises boxes, with sufficient appropriate fasteners so that the appurtenances may not
become loose or be removed without severe force. Location of such appurtenances shall be chosen to be consistent with electrical and telephone
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 692/702
appurtenances and blend with the aesthetics of the building and area whenever possible. No permanent or temporary fixture for the reception of cable
service may be attached to any structure without the express written consent of the owner or legal occupant of the structure. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-37: GROUND WIRES:
All ground wires shall be securely fastened to the building surface and routed in a way to prevent such wires from becoming a safety hazard, and in
compliance with all applicable codes. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3G-38: TREE TRIMMING:
Grantee shall not cut or trim any tree, shrub or vegetation on public property without first obtaining written authorization from the municipality or on private
property without written authorization of the owner of the tree, shrub or vegetation. All such trimming shall be performed in accordance with standard local
horticultural practices. The municipality reserves the option to have its employees perform the trimming, to require the grantee to hire a competent
professional to perform the work, or allow the grantee to perform the work under the supervision and direction of the municipality. Any such work shall be
performed at the grantee's expense. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
ARTICLE H. ADMINISTRATIVE
13-3H-1: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The grantee shall maintain books and records of its operation within the municipality to show total revenues by service category in sufficient detail,
consistent with generally accepted accounting principles.
A. Grantee shall maintain all books and records required for regulation of rates by the appropriate governmental authority.
B. Grantee shall maintain such books and records for the municipality separate from any other operation, provided, however, that any expenses,
expenditures or revenues which apply to both the system in the municipality and any other operation shall be reasonably allocated between all such
operations.
C. Grantee shall keep appropriate records of all requests for installation of service, service calls, and outages, showing the date completed and any
corrective action taken. A summary of the above listed information shall be submitted to the municipality prior to the annual performance evaluation
meeting.
D. The required books and records shall be made available in the grantee's local office during normal business hours, for inspection and audit by the
municipality within thirty (30) days after such request has been made. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3H-2: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
The grantee shall submit to the municipality copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by any federal, state and local courts, regulatory agencies
and other governmental bodies relating to its telecommunications operations within the municipality.
A. Copies of the grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms, subscriber user services, policies regarding the processing of subscriber
complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in
connection with subscriber or user services shall be filed with the municipality and updated as necessary, and shall be made available for public
inspection in the grantee's local office.
B. Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents filed by the grantee with federal or state agencies having jurisdiction
over telecommunications, or the same received from said agencies, shall be furnished simultaneously to the municipality by the grantee.
C. Within ten (10) days of a written request from the municipality, each grantee shall furnish the municipality with information sufficient to demonstrate:
1. That the grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.
2. That all municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes or applicable franchise fees due the municipality in connection with the
telecommunications services and facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee.
3. In addition to the annual filing required in section 13-3G-18 of this chapter, all books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee
with respect to those facilities within the public ways shall be made available for inspection by the municipality at reasonable times and intervals.
(Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
ARTICLE I. LIABILITY, INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE, AND SECURITY
13-3I-1: LIABILITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 693/702
The grantee shall be responsible for:
A. Any damage or loss to any real or personal property of the municipality or any person, and for any injury to or death of any person, or officer, employee
or agent of the municipality arising out of or in connection with grantee's negligence or misconduct in the construction, installation, use, operation,
maintenance, repair, and/or removal of the telecommunications system, or its failure to act in connection therewith, when in the reasonable judgment of
the municipality, grantee should have taken certain action.
B. Grantee shall be liable for the acts or omissions of any entity used by the grantee, including an affiliate, when such entity is involved directly or indirectly
in the construction, installations, use, operation, maintenance, repair, and/or removal of the telecommunications system, as if the acts or omissions of
such entity were the acts or omissions of the grantee. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3I-2: INDEMNIFICATION:
Each license or franchise agreement shall include the following:
A. Grantee shall, and does hereby agree to, save, indemnify and hold the municipality, its corporate authorities, elected and appointed officials, officers,
boards, commissions, legal counsel, employees and agents harmless from any injury, claim, demand, suit, judgment, execution, liability, debt, damages
or penalty (the "claims") arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or result from, grantee's negligence, including, but not limited to, its
failure to act, or misconduct in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of the telecommunications system, or the distribution of any
service over the telecommunications system, whether such acts or omissions are those of the grantee or its officers, employees, agent or contractors
and whether or not any such act or omission is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter.
B. Grantee shall, and does hereby agree to, pay all expenses incurred by the municipality in defending itself with regard to any and all of the claims. These
expenses shall include all out of pocket expenses, such as attorney and expert fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services
rendered by any employee of the municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3I-3: RELEASE AND WAIVER OF CLAIMS:
Grantee shall have no recourse against the municipality for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the terms and conditions of this chapter nor
because of the municipality's enforcement thereof. Grantee shall be deemed to expressly agree that it accepts this chapter relying solely upon its own
investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the municipality to grant the rights contained herein and that, in partial consideration of the
grant of such rights, grantee waives and releases the municipality from any and all claims of damages of any kind whatsoever, either known or unknown,
existing or future, which it may have in connection with any matter specified in this chapter, unless such damage is directly caused by the malicious or
intentional acts of the municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3I-4: GRANTEE INSURANCE:
Unless otherwise expressly provided in writing in the license or franchise agreement, grantee shall procure and maintain for the duration of the license or
franchise, insurance against claims for injuries to persons or damages to property which may arise from or in connection with the license, franchise and/or
the performance of the work by the grantee, its agents, representatives, employees or subcontractors. The cost of such insurance shall be borne solely by
the grantee.
A. Minimum Scope Of Insurance: Coverage shall be at least as broad as:
1. Insurance services office commercial general liability coverage "occurrence" form CG 0001 (ed. 11/85) or insurance services office form number GL
0002 (ed. 1/73) covering comprehensive general liability and insurance services office form number GL 0404 covering broad form comprehensive
general liability or the most recent revision.
Please note endorsement CG 21 34 11 88, CG 21 39 11 88 or other such endorsement or policy provision which limits contractual liability shall be
deleted in its entirety.
2. Insurance services office business auto coverage form number CA 0001 (ed. 1/87) covering automobile liability, code 1 "any auto" and endorsement
CA 0029 (ed. 2/88) changes in business auto and truckers coverage forms - insured contract or insurance services office business auto liability
coverage form CG 0001 (ed. 10/90) symbol 01 "any auto".
3. Workers' compensation insurance as required by the labor code of the state of Illinois and employers liability insurance.
B. Minimum Limits Of Insurance:
1. Unless lower insurance limits are permitted under subsection B2 of this section, all grantees shall maintain limits no less than:
a. Commercial General Liability: Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and
property damage. If commercial general liability insurance or other form with a general aggregate limit is used, either the general aggregate limit
shall apply separately to this project using the endorsement CG 25 03 11 85 or the general aggregate limit shall be no less than ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00) or the contractor shall furnish an owner's and contractor's protective liability policy ("OCP") meeting the terms and conditions of
this article, including, without limitation, regarding coverages, minimum amounts and types of coverage, acceptability of insureds, additional
insureds, cancellation and modification.
b. Automobile Liability: Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage including
coverages for owned, hired or nonowned vehicles, as applicable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 694/702
c. Workers' Compensation And Employers Liability: Workers' compensation limits as required by statute and employers liability limits of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per disease.
2. Grantees granted a license or franchise to install its telecommunications facilities only within existing conduit or duct in public ways and/or to run
wires or cables only on existing overhead utility poles shall maintain limits no less than:
a. Commercial General Liability: Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and
property damage. If commercial general liability insurance or other form with a general aggregate limit is used, either the general aggregate limit
shall apply separately to this project using the endorsement CG 25 03 11 85 or the general aggregate limit shall be no less than five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) or the contractor shall furnish an owner's and contractor's protective liability policy ("OCP") meeting the terms and conditions of
this article, including, without limitation, regarding coverages, minimum amounts and types of coverage, acceptability of insureds, additional
insureds, cancellation and modification.
b. Automobile Liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage including
coverages for owned, hired or nonowned vehicles, as applicable.
c. Workers' Compensation And Employers Liability: Workers' compensation limits as required by statute and employers liability limits of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per disease.
C. Deductibles And Self-Insured Retentions: Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by the village. At the option of
the village, either: the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retention as respects the district, its officers, officials,
employees, volunteers and agents; or the contractor shall procure a bond guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim
administration and defense expenses.
D. Other Insurance Provisions: The policies are to contain, or be endorsed to contain, the following provisions:
1. General Liability And Automobile Liability Coverages:
a. The village of Bartlett, its officers, officials, employees, volunteers and agents, are to be covered as additional insureds as respects: liability arising
out of activities performed by or on behalf of the grantee, including the insured's general supervision of its grantee; products and completed
operations of the grantee; premises owned, occupied or used by the grantee; or automobiles owned, leased, hired or borrowed by the grantee.
The coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of protection afforded to the village, its officers, officials, employees, volunteers and
agents.
b. The grantee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the village, its officers, officials, employees, volunteers, and agents. Any
insurance or self-insurance maintained by the village, its officers, officials, employees, volunteers and/or agents shall be in excess of the
contractor's insurance and shall not contribute with it.
c. Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policies shall not affect coverage provided to the village, its officers, officials, employees,
volunteers, and agents.
d. The grantee's insurance shall contain a severability of interests/cross liability clause or language stating that the grantee's insurance shall apply
separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability.
2. Workers' Compensation And Employers Liability Coverage: The insurer shall agree to waive all rights of subrogation against the village, its officers,
officials, employees, volunteers, and agents for losses arising from work performed by the grantee for the village and/or in village streets, highways,
public rights of way, utility easements and drainage easements.
3. All Coverages: The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the
telecommunications license or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a license or franchise, or
engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be suspended or canceled, nor the intention not to renew be stated until ninety (90)
days after receipt by the Municipality, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Municipality of such intent to
suspend, cancel or not to renew.
Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the municipality of said notice, and in no event later than thirty (30) days prior to said suspension, cancellation
or failure to renew, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the municipality replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Acceptability Of Insurers: Insurance is to be placed with insurers with a policy holder rating of no less than A- and a financial rating of no less than X in
the latest edition of the "Best Insurance Guide" and which insurance companies are licensed to do business in the state of Illinois. Each grantee shall
list the name of the insurance company or companies that will be providing such insurance, and the Best's rating thereof, on the license application
form. Failure to list the license applicant's or franchise applicant's insurance company(ies), policy holder rating(s), or financial rating(s) shall render the
license application or franchise application, as the case may be, incomplete.
F. Verification Of Coverage: Grantee shall furnish the village with certificates of insurance naming the village, its officials, officers, employees, volunteers
and agents as additional insureds, and with original endorsements effecting coverage required by this article. The certificates and endorsements for
each insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf and shall be submitted in duplicate on
standard Acord forms. All certificates and endorsements are to be received and approved by the village before work commences. The village reserves
the right to require complete, certified copies of all required insurance policies, at any time. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3I-5: PERFORMANCE, CONSTRUCTION, AND PAYMENT SECURITY:
Before a construction permit may be issued pursuant to this chapter, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide and deposit monies, bonds,
letters of credit or other instruments, in form and substance acceptable to the municipality, to unconditionally guarantee full and complete performance of
the requirement imposed by this chapter, and payment for labor and material in connection therewith, or by an applicable license or franchise agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 695/702
A. Security Fund: Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with the municipality by depositing the amount of the lesser of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) or ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of constructing the telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's engineer
and approved by the municipal engineer, with the municipality in cash, or an unconditional letter of credit, in form acceptable to the village, from a
federally regulated and federally insured financial institution with at least sixty million dollars ($60,000,000.00) in assets and a capital asset ratio of not
less than six percent (6%).
1. Provide that it shall not be canceled without the prior written consent of the municipality; and
2. Not require the consent of the grantee prior to the collection by the municipality of any amount covered by said instrument; and
3. Shall be maintained at the sole expense of the grantee so long as any of the grantee's telecommunications facilities are located within the public
ways of the municipality; and/or the grantee has acted, or failed to act, in a manner that would permit the municipality to withdraw from the security
fund under subsection C of this section, including, but not limited to, the failure of grantee to make necessary repairs.
B. Purpose: The security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The full and complete performance of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the municipality pays or incurs because of any
failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the municipality.
2. The payment by grantee of all liens and taxes, and all damages, claims, costs or expenses that the municipality has paid or incurred by reason of
any act or default of the grantee, including, but not limited to:
a. Any restoration work that the municipality must perform itself or have completed as a consequence of grantee's failure to so perform or complete;
or
b. All other payments due to the municipality pursuant to this chapter.
C. Withdrawals: The municipality may withdraw from the security fund under the following circumstances:
1. Grantee fails to make any payment required to be made by the grantee under this chapter; or
2. Grantee fails to pay any taxes or liens relating to the telecommunications system that are due and unpaid; or
3. Grantee fails to pay the municipality any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the municipality has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of
any act or default of the grantee; or
4. Grantee fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the municipality determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.
D. Notice Of Withdrawal: Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the municipality shall give written notice to the grantee:
1. Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, cost or expenses which the municipality has incurred by reason of grantee's
act or default;
2. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;
3. Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies due the municipality before the municipality withdraws the amount thereof from the
security fund, if applicable;
4. That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the municipality designee.
E. Replenishment: Grantee shall replenish the security fund within fourteen (14) days after written notice from the municipality that there is a deficiency in
the amount of the fund.
F. Interest: Any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund may be withdrawn by the grantee.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon any termination of the rights granted herein, other than a revocation, grantee shall be entitled to the return
of the security fund, or portion thereof as remains on deposit at such termination, and after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the
municipality for the failure by grantee to comply with any provision of this chapter. In the event of any revocation of the rights granted herein, the
security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the municipality to the extent necessary to cover any costs, loss or
damage incurred by the municipality as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the grantee.
H. Performance And Payment Bonds Or Letter Of Credit: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the grantee shall furnish the
village prior to performing any work within the public ways, either: 1) a performance bond, and a labor and material payment bond, each cosigned by a
corporate surety licensed to do business in Illinois, with a management rating of at least A- and a financial rating of at least X in the latest edition of the
"Best Insurance Guide"; or 2) an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a federally regulated and federally insured financial institution with at least forty
million dollars ($40,000,000.00) in assets and a capital asset ratio of not less than six percent (6%) in form acceptable to the village, each in an amount
equal to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways of the
municipality, naming the village as the primary co-obligee, in form acceptable to the village.
1. The performance bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the village engineer,
including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the construction.
2. The performance bond or the letter of credit shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the municipality:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 696/702
a. Timely completion of construction;
b. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;
c. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the municipality;
d. Restoration of the public ways and other property, including municipal and private property, affected by the construction;
e. The submission of "as built" drawings after completion of the work as required by this chapter;
f. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-
1996)
ARTICLE J. GENERAL PROVISIONS; VIOLATION
13-3J-0: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing herein shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
A. Generally applicable taxes; and
B. Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding towers and
other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
C. Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or within, use of
or repair of the public rights of way; and
D. Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord. 97-90, 12-2-
1997)
13-3J-1: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
All telecommunications providers, without limitation, within the municipality, whether located within the public ways, or not, shall, at all times, meet all
applicable standards and/or guidelines of the federal communications commission, and the Illinois commerce commission, and all other applicable federal,
state and community standards for the delivery of video, audio and data signals, whether directly regulated or not.
A. If subsequent regulations do not include these standards, they shall remain in full force and effect as if each were listed here until such time as the
municipality exercises its right hereunder to amend this chapter to require such standards as it shall deem necessary. In no event will subsequent
standards be less stringent than those in effect on the effective date hereof. This section will not apply if the municipality is preempted with respect to
the particular regulation in question by the ICC, FCC, or other governmental agency having authority over the particular regulation in question.
B. The grantee shall give notice to all subscribers at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the commencement of maintenance work in any area where such
activity is likely to cause a service interruption or other inconvenience. Such notice shall state the objectives of the maintenance work, the areas
affected by the maintenance work, the specific day and hours that disruption is possible, and a name and phone number of a person to contact for
further information.
C. All providers shall simultaneously file copies of all reports and correspondence required by all federal and state agencies charged with the oversight of
the grantee. In the event said agencies no longer enforce technical standards, grantee shall file reports with the municipality on a monthly basis
showing compliance with all technical standards. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-2: CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS:
All telecommunications providers, without limitation, within the municipality, whether located within the public ways, or not, shall, at all times, meet all
applicable standards and/or guidelines of the federal communications commission, and/or chapter 1, section 730 of the Illinois administrative code of the
Illinois commerce commission, or subsequent regulations, and all other applicable federal, state and community standards relating to consumer protection,
whether directly regulated or not.
A. If subsequent regulations do not include these standards, they shall remain in full force and effect as if each were listed here until such time as the
municipality exercises its right hereunder to amend this chapter to require such standards as it shall deem necessary. In no event will subsequent
standards be less stringent than those in effect on the effective date hereof. This section will not apply if the municipality is preempted with respect to
the particular regulation in question by the ICC, FCC, or other governmental agency having authority over the particular regulation in question.
B. Unless otherwise agreed to in a license or franchise agreement, all providers within the municipality shall provide reports on a monthly basis showing
compliance with consumer protection standards. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-3: LEASED CAPACITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 697/702
A grantee shall have the right, subject to applicable laws and regulations, without prior municipal approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its
customers; provided:
A. Grantee shall furnish the municipality with a copy of any such lease or agreement.
B. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the payment of all
applicable fees and taxes.
C. Cable providers shall set aside leased access capacity pursuant to federal law. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-4: AMENDMENTS:
The municipality may, acting in its sole discretion, amend a license or franchise agreement upon application of the grantee, when necessary to enable the
grantee to take advantage of technological advancements which will afford it an opportunity to more efficiently or economically serve its customers or
extend service to customers beyond previously authorized areas. The grantee shall reimburse the municipality for all of its costs, whether direct or indirect,
relating to any amendments sought by the grantee. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-5: ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT:
A. Except in the event of a merger, consolidation, or reorganization of the grantee, the grantee shall not have the right to assign its rights and privileges
under this chapter, or to otherwise transfer such rights or privileges in any manner whatsoever, without the prior written approval of the village.
B. In the event of a transfer or assignment of the grantee's rights and privileges under this chapter, all provisions of this chapter which are obligatory upon,
or which inure to the benefit of, the grantee shall also be obligatory upon and inure to the benefit of any and all successors and assigns of the grantee.
C. For all transfers or assignments of any right or privilege under this chapter, other than by merger, consolidation, or reorganization, grantee and the
proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or system, or part thereof, shall provide and certify the following information to the municipality not less
than one hundred fifty (150) days prior to the proposed date of transfer.
1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and conditions of the proposed transfer or assignment;
2. All information required of a telecommunications license or franchise pursuant to this chapter;
3. Any other information reasonably required by the municipality.
D. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial, and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and
operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.
E. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the municipality for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and
expenses reasonably incurred by the municipality in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
F. Any transfer of assignment or a telecommunications grant, system or integral part of a system, other than by merger, consolidation, or reorganization by
the grantee, without prior approval of the municipality under this section or pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for
revocation of the grant. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-6: TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF THE GRANT:
Any transaction which singularly or collectively results in a change of ten percent (10%) or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the
ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of grantee's telecommunications system,
facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be reported to the village, and all information reasonably requested by the village shall be provided by the
grantee. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from this requirement. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-7: RENEWAL:
A grantee that desires to renew its license or franchise agreement shall file an application with the municipality not later than twenty four (24) months prior
to the expiration of its current license or franchise agreement.
A. The municipality shall review the performance of the grantee and assess community needs. A report shall be completed not later than twelve (12)
months prior to the expiration of the current license or franchise agreement.
B. The grantee shall file a preliminary proposal for changes sought in its license or franchise agreement not later than twelve (12) months prior to the
expiration of the current license or franchise agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 698/702
C. During the final twelve (12) months of the current license or franchise agreement, the municipality and the grantee shall hold regularly scheduled
meetings until a final agreement is reached.
D. Any failure by the grantee to provide reasonably requested information in regards to renewal shall result in a denial of the request for renewal.
E. If necessary, the municipality may extend the license or franchise term in six (6) month increments during the renewal process, subject to applicable
law.
F. The grantee shall reimburse the municipality for all of its costs, whether direct or indirect, relating to any renewal proceeding, pursuant to article F of this
chapter. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-8: NONRENEWAL:
Subject to applicable law, if the municipality does not renew the license or franchise, the municipality shall, to the extent permitted by law, have the option
to:
A. Acquire at fair market value, all of the assets of the grantee's operations within the municipality, which value shall exclude any value attributable to the
license or franchise itself; or
B. Require the sale of all such assets to a succeeding grantee at the nonrenewing grantee's expense; or
C. Require removal of all such assets from the municipality at grantee's expense.
The municipality shall exercise such options within one year from the date of the license or franchise expiration. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-9: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
The municipality shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards:
A. The legal, financial and technical ability of the applicant.
B. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities, taking into account the quality of the applicant's service
and the ability of the telecommunications system to meet current and future community needs.
C. The applicant's compliance with the requirement of this chapter and the license or franchise agreement.
D. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules, policies and regulations.
E. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-10: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No license or franchise agreement shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the performance of the license or franchise agreement, or of
the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the
municipality. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-11: VIOLATIONS:
The failure to comply with all applicable laws, codes, rules, and regulations of all governmental authorities, or the failure to comply with provisions of this
chapter constitutes a material breach of this chapter. The grantee shall as diligently as possible, but in no event later than thirty (30) days after delivery of
a violation notice by the municipality, correct such violation. If the violation constitutes a potential threat to the public, grantee shall correct the violation
within two (2) days after delivery of a violation notice. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-12: REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT:
A license or franchise granted by the municipality to use or occupy public ways of the municipality may be revoked for the following reasons:
A. Construction or operation in the municipality or in the public ways at an unauthorized location.
B. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee, assignment of a license or franchise, sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or
license assets, or a substantial interest therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 699/702
C. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee.
D. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
E. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required.
F. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the municipality.
G. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
H. Violation of material provisions of this chapter, or the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
I. Failure to comply with any applicable laws, rules or regulations. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-13: NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE:
In the event that the municipality believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, the municipality shall give the grantee written notice of
the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and
providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:
A. That corrective action has been, or is actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance, or
B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance, or
C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-14: HEARING:
In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the municipality, the corporate authorities shall provide the grantee with
notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-15: STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS:
If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise or license agreement, the
municipality shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature,
circumstances, and the extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
A. Whether the misconduct or violation was flagrant.
B. Whether the misconduct or violation was intentional.
C. Whether substantial harm resulted.
D. Whether there is a history of prior violations.
E. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-16: TRESPASSING FACILITIES:
Any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related
appurtenances within the public ways of the municipality shall be considered a trespassing facility under the following circumstances:
A. Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's license or franchise.
B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the municipality.
C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 700/702
D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.
E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee's license, franchise or permit. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-17: REMOVAL OF TRESPASSING FACILITIES AND OTHER REMEDIES:
Upon discovery of a trespassing facility, the municipality may, acting in its sole discretion, exercise one or more of the following options:
A. Order the immediate removal of the trespassing facilities from the public ways at grantee's expense; and/or
B. Seek to obtain penalties to the extent provided pursuant to this chapter; and/or
C. Seek other remedies available to the municipality under federal, state or local laws; and/or
D. Provide a thirty (30) day opportunity to cure if the municipality determines that the trespass was inadvertent, and the grantee is making a good faith
effort to remove or relocate the facilities promptly. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-18: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each
day in which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-19: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-20: NOTICE TO GRANTEE:
The municipality shall not take any final action involving the evaluation, modifications, renewal, revocation or termination of the grantee's license or
franchise unless the municipality has:
A. Called a meeting for such purpose;
B. Advised the grantee in writing at least ten (10) days prior to such meeting as to its time, place and purpose; and
C. Published a notice, at least once, ten (10) days before the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality. The grantee and any
interested persons shall be entitled to be heard at such meeting. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-21: NOTICES:
All notices and other communications in connection with this chapter shall be in writing, and shall be deemed delivered to the addressee thereof when
delivered in person at the address set forth in the license or franchise agreement, or three (3) business days after deposit in any main or branch United
States post office. All notices and communications in connection with this chapter that are sent by mail must be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, postage prepaid, and properly addressed. (Ord. 96-6, 2-6-1996)
13-3J-22: DELEGATION OF POWERS:
Any right, power or duty of the municipality, its elected officials, employees, agents, or other representatives, may be transferred or delegated by
ordinance, resolution, or other appropriate action of the municipality to an appropriate officer, employee, department, or any legal authority, including any
intergovernmental agency created for the purpose of regulating the operation and development of telecommunications facilities and services. (Ord. 96-6,
2-6-1996)
Title 14
RESERVED
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 701/702
Title 15
PUBLIC FUNDS
Chapter 1
GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROVIDING PUBLIC FUNDS TO CIVIC
ORGANIZATIONS
15-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
The guidelines and requirements imposed by this chapter upon civic organizations requesting public funds from the village of Bartlett shall be known as
the CIVIC ORGANIZATION FUNDING GUIDELINES. (Ord. 2015-06, 2-3-2015, eff. 6-1-2015)
15-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definition(s) shall apply:
CIVIC ORGANIZATION: Any not for profit unincorporated association, trust, estate, partnership, organization, committee, council, commission, club, Illinois
not for profit corporation, or foreign not for profit corporation or other entity that provides or sponsors services, programs or special events for public benefit
or public enjoyment on a not for profit basis. (Ord. 2015-06, 2-3-2015, eff. 6-1-2015)
15-1-3: PURPOSES:
A. The village of Bartlett is fortunate to have numerous not for profit community organizations providing desirable services that benefit residents of the
village. Some of those organizations request and receive tax dollars or public funds to help support their efforts.
B. Since the village must ensure it is at all times accountable for public funds, a process and application for funding request form has been developed to
standardize and enhance the reporting process, to document what services will be provided, and to better communicate the benefits to the Bartlett
community as a whole.
C. To set forth the requirements for all civic organizations that request tax dollars from the village of Bartlett on an annual basis to fund services, programs,
or special public events that benefit the village and its residents. (Ord. 2015-06, 2-3-2015, eff. 6-1-2015)
15-1-4: GENERAL GUIDELINES:
A. All civic organizations requesting funds from the village of Bartlett shall submit an application for funding request each year on the form set forth as
appendix 15A attached to the ordinance codified herein, which shall include a narrative of the civic organization's primary mission and goals and stating
specifically how the services or programs proposed to be provided will benefit the Bartlett community, and detailing the amount of funding requested,
the services, programs and/or special public event to be funded, and the purposes of the anticipated expenditures from village funds.
B. By submitting a request for funding, a civic organization becomes responsible for the completion of all applicable guidelines. Civic organizations failing
to submit the application for funding request and all required documentation in support of such request each year may not receive funding for the year.
In addition, the village may elect to reduce or eliminate the payment of public funds payable to civic organizations or to an individual civic organization
or organizations from year to year in its sole and absolute discretion, and the receipt of public funds to a civic organization from the village in any year
shall not be relied upon or give rise to an expectancy that a civic organization will receive any or a similar amount of funding from the village in any
future year. (Ord. 2015-06, 2-3-2015, eff. 6-1-2015)
15-1-5: STANDARD REQUIREMENTS:
Each civic organization requesting funding from the village shall submit on or before November 1, 2015, for fiscal year 2015/2016, and by November 1 of
each year thereafter, of each year the following:
A. An application for funding request on the form as set forth on appendix 15A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
B. A copy of articles of incorporation evidencing the civic organization is a "not for profit corporation" formed under the Illinois not for profit corporation act
(or if a foreign not for profit corporation, proof that the organization is registered with the Illinois secretary of state and has been authorized to conduct
its affairs in Illinois). If the organization is an unincorporated association, proof that the organization has complied with the Illinois assumed name act.
C. A copy of the civic organization's bylaws or other rules of operation and amendments.
D. If the civic organization is a recognized 501(c)(3) tax exempt entity, a copy of IRS form 1023 application for recognition of exemption under section
501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code and letter of recognition of 501(c)(3) status from the IRS, and a copy of the civic organization's most recent audit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=715 702/702
E. Financial statements or other documentation showing all sources and uses of funds for the preceding two (2) years (if organization has been in
existence for at least 2 years).
F. A proposed budget showing amount and types of receipts and expenditures anticipated for the present and next succeeding one year.
G. A statement that funds received from the village shall not be used to pay for any political or religious purpose, to purchase alcohol or private
entertainment, or to pay for any operational expenses (such as salaries or facilities).
H. If funds were paid to the civic organization in the immediately preceding year by the village of Bartlett, a complete post funding report on the form as set
forth on appendix 15B attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 2015-06, 2-3-2015, eff. 6-1-2015)
15-1-6: CRITERIA FOR AWARDING FUNDS TO CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS:
A. The corporate authorities, in its annual budget process, will set a total amount of funds to be allocated to civic organizations during its upcoming fiscal
year, taking into account the village's other financial obligations and past practices. Priority will be given to civic organizations that provide a service or
program that the village does not currently provide and/or which meaningfully supplements a village provided service, program or special public event.
B. The corporate authorities will also consider the following:
1. The size of the request for funding;
2. The civic organization's past history and reputation of the civic organization for community enrichment;
3. The completeness of its application for funding request and submittals in support of its request;
4. Past success of the organization's programs, services and events;
5. The number of people served;
6. The cost per person reached;
7. The number of volunteer versus staff hours worked; and
8. Such other factors as the corporate authorities deem appropriate.
C. The corporate authorities may award or not award funding requests or fund all or a portion of a funding request, to one or more civic organizations each
year in its sole and absolute discretion. (Ord. 2015-06, 2-3-2015, eff. 6-1-2015)