1-1
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 1
General Provisions
Sec. 1.01. How Code designated and cited.
Sec. 1.02. Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec. 1.03. Catchlines of sections.
Sec. 1.04. Severability of parts of Code.
Sec. 1.05. General penalty; continuing violations; place of confinement.
Sec. 1.06. Summons - warrant for violations.
Sec. 1.07. Record and memorandum of ordinances.
Sec. 1.08. Provisions construed as continuations of existing ordinances.
Sec. 1.09. Corporate seal - use and custody.
Sec. 1.10. Fiscal year.
Sec. 1.11. Official time.
Sec. 1.12. Effect of repeal of ordinance.
Sec. 1.13. Effect of repeal of repealing ordinance.
Sec. 1.14 Conflict with home-rule county ordinance.
Last revision Ordinance A-227-01-17, 4-24-17
1-2
Sec. 1.01. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this Code in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be
designated the "Burr Ridge Municipal Code" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited
as the " General Municipal Code of the Village of Burr Ridge of 1974" and the "Burr Ridge Village
Code, 1974."(A-227-1-90)
Sec. 1.02. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the interpretation and construction of this Code, the following definitions and rules of construction
shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of Trustees or the
context clearly requires otherwise:
Absence.
The word "absence" shall include the failure of an officer, employee or person to be present at a place
and time required by law or which permits such officer, employee, or person to perform a duty under
law in a timely manner, although such officer, employee or person is not disqualified from continuing in
office or as an employee as a result of said absence.
Action.
The term "action" shall include suits, prosecutions, and all judicial proceedings before administrative
bodies when the sense of the text requires the inclusion of such quasi judicial or other proceedings.
Board.
The words "Board" or "the Board" mean the Board of Trustees of the Village of Burr Ridge, Illinois.
Computation of time.
The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first
day and including the last, unless the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be
excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Sunday, then such
succeeding day shall also be excluded.
Gender.
Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.
In the Village.
The words "in the Village" or "within the Village" mean and include all territory over which the Village
now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory
powers.
Month.
The word "month" means a calendar month.
Number.
Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things and
words importing the plural may include the singular.
Occupant or tenant.
The words "occupant" or "tenant" applied to a building or land, mean any person who holds a written
or an oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with
others.
1-3
Officer.
Whenever the title of any Village officer is used, it shall be construed as if the words "of the Village of
Burr Ridge" followed it.
Officer-Appointed.
The word "appointed officer" shall mean any officer of the Village not elected by popular vote at a
special or general election of the Village.
Or, and.
"Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
Owner.
The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant of the whole or a part of the holder of any beneficial
interest of such building or land.
Person.
The word "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or any city or
state or any subdivision thereof; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal
representative thereof.
Personal property.
Includes every species of property, except real property as defined by this section.
Preceding, following.
The word "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.
President.
The term "President" shall mean the President of the Village of Burr Ridge.
Property.
The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Publicway.
The word "publicway" shall include streets and sidewalks.
Real property.
shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.
Seal.
The word "seal" as used herein is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
Sidewalk.
The word "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a
roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
State.
The words "state" or "the state" mean the State of Illinois.
Street, highway or roadway.
1-4
The words "street, highway or roadway", means the entire width between property lines of every way
or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right
for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Tense.
Words in the present tense include the future.
Village.
The words "Village" or "the Village" mean the Village of Burr Ridge in Cook and DuPage Counties,
State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided.
Written, in writing.
The words "written" or "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and
letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to be affixed to any official or
public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case
he is unable to write, by his proper mark.
Year.
The word "year" means a calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
Sec. 1.03. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed
when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
Sec. 1.04. Severability of parts of Code.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this Code be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since
the same would have been enacted by the President and the Board of Trustees without the
incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional work, phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
Sec. 1.05. General penalty; continuing violations; place of confinement.
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village any act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
seven hundred fifty dollars. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Amended by A-227-1-96)
The person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed, for violation of this Code or any ordinance of
the Village, upon the order of the court or magistrate before whom the conviction is had, may be
committed to the county jail until the fine, penalty, and costs are fully paid. No imprisonment, however,
shall exceed 6 months for any one offense.
Sec. 1.06. Summons - warrant for violations.
1-5
In all actions for the violation of this Code or any ordinance of the Village, the first process shall be a
summons or a warrant. A warrant for the arrest of an accused person may issue upon the affidavit of
any person that this Code or an ordinance has been violated, and that the person making the
complaint has reasonable grounds to believe that the party charges is guilty thereof. Every person
arrested upon a warrant, without unnecessary delay, shall be taken before the proper office for trial.
Sec. 1.07. Record and memorandum of ordinances.
All ordinances passed by the President and Board of Trustees shall be recorded by the Village Clerk in
a proper book with indexes. The original shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk, and due proof
of publication of all ordinances requiring publication shall be procured by the Clerk, and such proof or
affidavit of publication shall be attached to and filed away with the ordinances; and the Clerk shall also
note in this book of ordinances, at the foot of the record of each ordinance, a memorandum of the date
of the passage, posting of such ordinance.
Sec. 1.08. Provisions construed as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as all other
ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be construed as a continuation
thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1.09. Corporate seal - use and custody.
The corporate seal of the Village shall be and remain in the custody of the Village Clerk and his
successor in office, to be used by him in all cases provided for by any provisions of this Code or other
ordinance of the Village or the laws of the state, and in all such other cases whereby the laws and
customs of any state or nation the use of the corporate seal of the Village becomes necessary.
Sec. 1.10. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the Village shall begin on May first of each calendar year.
Sec. 1.11. Official time.
Official time within the Village for the transaction of all Village business shall be called "local time"
which, shall, unless otherwise established by motion or resolution of the President and Board of
Trustees, be the official time established from time to time by the State of Illinois for the conduct of
affairs of the State of Illinois.
All clocks or other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises maintained or controlled by
the Village shall be set and run according to the official time as provided in this section, and it is hereby
made the duty of the officer or other person having control and charge of such buildings and premises
to see that the clocks or other timepieces are set and run in accordance with the official time provided
by this section.
All persons residing within the Village and all persons doing business within the Village are hereby
requested to set and run any and all clocks or other timepieces under their control within the Village in
accordance with the official time as provided by this section.
Sec. 1.12. Effect of repeal of ordinance.
1-6
Whenever an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or
part of ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication or posting
of the ordinance repealing or modifying the same, when such publication or posting shall be required
to give effect thereto unless otherwise expressly provided therein; but no suit, proceeding, right, fine,
or penalty, instituted or created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal,
shall in anywise be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered
as fully as if such ordinance had continued in force, unless it shall be therein otherwise expressly
provided.
Sec. 1.13. Effect of repeal of repealing ordinance.
When any ordinance, repealing any former ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed,
such repeal shall not be construed so as to revive such former ordinance, clause of provision, unless it
shall be therein so expressly provided.
Sec. 1.14 Conflict with home-rule county ordinance. (added by A-227-01-17)
In the application and enforcement of regulations or ordinances of Cook or DuPage Counties, the
provisions of this Village Code shall apply and prevail over any provisions enacted by either of the
Counties which are in conflict with this Code, including, but not limited to, the following:
Paid sick leave; minimum wage – employers.
Employees shall comply with all federal and State employment laws and guidelines with regard to paid
sick leave and in regard to the payment of any required minimum wage. Employee eligibility for paid
sick leave and for minimum wage shall be pursuant, and based upon, the applicable federal and State
employment laws and guidelines.
No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or payment of a minimum wage, including,
without limitation, any additional obligations adopted by the County of Cook Board of Commissioners,
shall apply within the Village of Burr Ridge for employers except those required by federal and State
law of the Village of Burr Ridge.
For the purposes of this Section, the term “employee” means an individual permitted to work by an
employer regardless of the number of persons the employer employs, or the number of hours worked,
and the term “employer” means any person employing one or more employees, or seeking to employ
one or more employees, if the person has its principal place of business within the Village of Burr
Ridge, or does business within the Village of Burr Ridge.
For the purposes of this Section, the term “employer” does not mean:
(a) The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of
the United States;
(b) An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
(c) The government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or
(d) The government of any municipality
1
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 2
Administration
Article I. Village President
Sec. 2.1. Election - Term of Office
Sec. 2.2. The Duties
Sec. 2.3. Designation of Duties
Sec. 2.4. Signing Commissions
Sec. 2.5. Local Liquor Commissioner
Sec. 2.6. Powers as to Litigation
Sec. 2.7. Other Duties
Sec. 2.8. Bond - Oath - Compensation
Sec. 2.9. President Pro-tem - Acting President; Chain of Succession
Sec. 2.9.1 Chairman Pro-Tem
Sec. 2.9.2 Emergency Spending Authority
Article II. Trustees
Sec. 2.10. Trustees - Election - Functions
Sec. 2.11. Trustees - Oath - Salary
Article III. Village Clerk
Sec. 2.12. Election - Term
Sec. 2.13. Bond - Oath - Salary
Sec. 2.14. Powers and Duties
Sec. 2.15. Documents
Sec. 2.16. Indexes
Sec. 2.17. Issuance of License and Permits - Collection of Fees
Sec. 2.18. Record of licenses
Sec. 2.19. Ordinances - Resolutions
Sec. 2.20. Elections
Sec. 2.21. Additional Duties
Sec. 2.22. Vacancy
Sec. 2.23. Deputy Clerk; Chain of Succession
Article IV. Village Treasurer
Sec. 2.24. Appointment
Sec. 2.25. Bond
Sec. 2.26. Duties
Sec. 2.27. Duty to Pay Money Over to Treasurer
Article V. Village Administrator
Sec. 2.28. Creation of Position
Sec. 2.29. Employment
Sec. 2.30. Bond
Sec. 2.31. Responsibilities and Duties
2
Sec. 2.32. Compensation
Sec. 2.33. Conflict of Interest Prohibited
Article VI. Finance Department
Sec. 2.34. Creation
Sec. 2.35. Appointment of Finance Director
Sec. 2.36. Bond
Sec. 2.37. Duties of Finance Director
Sec. 2.38. Special Assessment Funds
Sec. 2.39. Checks - Transfer of Funds
Article VII. Police Department
Sec. 2.40. Creation
Sec. 2.41. Appointment of Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief
Sec. 2.42. Duties of Police Chief
Sec. 2.43. Oath of Police Officers
Sec. 2.44. Duties of Police - Generally
Sec. 2.45. Powers of Police
Sec. 2.46. Duty of Arresting Officers to Attend Trial
Sec. 2.47. Property Stolen, Seized, Abandoned or Found - Custody Thereof
Sec. 2.48. Badge of Police Officers and Police Identification Card
Sec. 2.49. Residency Requirements
Article VIII. Department of Public Works
Sec. 2.50. Creation
Sec. 2.51. Appointment of Superintendent of Public Works
Sec. 2.52. Duties of the Superintendent of Public Works
Article IX. Community Development Department
Sec. 2.53. Creation
Sec. 2.54. Appointment of Community Development Director
Sec. 2.55. Duties of Community Development Director
Article X. Bonding
Sec. 2.56. Requirements as to Execution of Bond; Sureties
Sec. 2.57. Bond Schedule
Sec. 2.58. Payment of Bond Premium
Article XI. Meeting of the Board of Trustees
Sec. 2.59. Time and Place
Sec. 2.60. Special Meeting
Sec. 2.61. Committees
Sec. 2.62. President
Sec. 2.63. Deciding Vote
Sec. 2.64. Ordinances - Voting - Approval – Veto- Teleconference Voting
Sec. 2.65. Reconsideration - Passing Over Veto
Sec. 2.66. Quorum
3
Sec. 2.67. Rules of Order
Sec. 2.68. Meetings Open to Public
Article XII. Board of Local Improvements
Sec. 2.69. Appointment
Sec. 2.70. Meetings - Powers and Duties
Article XIII. Legal Counsel
Sec. 2.71. Legal Counsel
Article XIV. Municipal Budget Act
Sec. 2.72. Adoption of Municipal Budget Act
Sec. 2.73. Preparation of Budget
Sec. 2.74. Revisions to Budget and Delegation of Authority
Article XV. State Officials Employees Ethics Act
Sec. 2.75 Adoption of State Act
Sec. 2.76 Solicitation of Gifts
Sec. 2.77 Offering of Gifts
Sec. 2.78 Participation in Prohibited Political Activities
Sec. 2.79 Officer and Employee Defined
Sec. 2.80 Penalties
Sec. 2.81 Other Ordinances and Policies
Sec. 2.82 Further Amendments to State Act
Sec. 2.83 Repealer if State Act Declared Unconstitutional
Sec. 2.84 Partial Repealer
Article XVI. Local Government Travel Expense Control Act
Sec. 2.85 Definitions
Sec. 2.86 Allowable Expenses
Sec. 2.87 Non-Allowable Expenses
Sec. 2.88 Alcohol
Sec. 2.89 Entertainment
Sec. 2.90 Expenses Exceeding Maximum Allowance
Article XVII. PSEBA (Pubic Safety Employee Benefits Act) Benefit Administration
Sec. 2.91 Purpose
Sec. 2.92 Policy and Procedure for Administering Applications for PSEBA Benefits
Sec. 2.93 Policy and Procedure for Hearings for PSEBA Benefits
Sec. 2.94 Eligibility for PSEBA Benefits
Last Revision A-781-01-17, 9-25-17
2-1-1
ARTICLE I. VILLAGE PRESIDENT
Sec. 2.1 Election - Term of Office (amended by A-781-01-13)
The Village President shall hold the office for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and
has qualified, as provided by statute, and shall be the President of the Board of Trustees.
The term of office shall commence on the date of the first regular or special meeting of the Board of
Trustees in May following the regular April Village election at which the Village President is elected.
(amended by A-781-01-06)
Sec. 2.2. The Duties
The Village President shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Village, and shall perform all such
duties as may be required by statute or ordinance. The Village President shall have the power and
authority to examine and inspect, at any reasonable time, the books, records and papers of any agent,
employee or officer of the Village.
Sec. 2.3. Designation of Duties
Whenever there is a question as to the respective powers or duties of any appointed officer of the
Village, this shall be settled by the President and he shall have the power to delegate to any such
officer, any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform the
duty.
When an appointed officer is referred to in this Code, it shall mean all officers of the Village designated
by state law or by duly adopted Ordinances of the Village.
Sec. 2.4. Signing Commissions
The Village President shall sign all commissions, resolutions, ordinances and other legal documents
approved or adopted by the Board of Trustees.
Sec. 2.5. Local Liquor Commissioner
The President shall be the local Liquor Control Commissioner and is charged with the administration of
Illinois Compiled Statutes Chapter 235, and such ordinances or resolutions enacted by the Board of
Trustees.
Sec. 2.6. Powers as to Litigation
The President shall sign and is authorized to sign on behalf of the Village, all instruments necessary to
the prompt prosecution or defense of any or all actions brought by or against the Village, including
bonds for injunction.
Sec. 2.7. Other Duties
The President shall perform all such other duties as are now or may be hereafter enjoined upon the
office of President by the ordinances of the Village and the laws of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 2.8. Bond Oath - Compensation
2-1-2
Before entering upon the duties of office, the President shall give a bond, with sureties to be approved
by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of duties in the sum as set forth
under Article X of this Chapter. The President shall take the oath of office as prescribed by statute,
and shall receive compensation of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per year for the performance of the
duties of President and shall replace any existing compensation. This amount shall be the complete
compensation of the President. An increase or decrease in the compensation of the President shall
not take effect during the term for which that President is elected. (amended by A-781-01-08)
Sec. 2.9. President Pro-tem - Acting President; Chain of Succession
During the temporary absence or disability of the Village President, the Board of Trustees shall
elect one of its members to act as President Pro-Tem, who during the absence or disability of the
President shall perform all the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the Village
President. The President Pro-Tem shall be selected for a two-year term. In the event of a vacancy
in the office of President Pro-Tem, the Board of Trustees shall elect one of its members as
successor President Pro-Tem. During the temporary absence or disability of the President Pro-
Tem, the Board of Trustees shall elect one of its members to act as Acting President Pro-Tem who
shall have all the same rights and powers of the President Pro-Tem.
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of the President, the vacancy shall be filled for the
remainder of the term in the manner provided by statute. During the period from the time that the
vacancy occurs until the President is elected and has qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the
appointment of an Acting President by the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that only elected
members of the Board of Trustees shall be qualified to serve as Acting President.
Pursuant to the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act (5 ILCS 275/1 et seq.), in the event
of an attack upon the United States or a natural or manmade disaster in the Village resulting in
the unavailability of both the President and President Pro-Tem, or the unavailability of the
President when no President Pro-Tem has been elected, the duties and all of the rights and
powers of the office of Village President shall be discharged by the designated emergency interim
successors in the order specified below. Emergency interim successors for the Office of
President are hereby designated as follows:
1. Village Administrator
2. Chief of Police
3. Community Development Director
4. Public Works Director
5. Assistant to the Village Administrator
Other than taking the oath of office required in order to exercise the rights and powers and
discharge the duties of the office of Village President, an emergency interim successor hereunder
shall not be required to comply with any other provision of law relative to taking office. The
emergency interim successor shall exercise the rights and powers and discharge the duties of the
office of Village President until such time that either the President or previously elected President
Pro-Tem are available to resume the duties of office, or the Board of Trustees elects a President
Pro-Tem. (Section 2.9 amended by A-781-02-02)
Sec. 2.9.1 Chairman Pro-Tem
In the absence of the President, acting President or President Pro-Tem, the Board of Trustees may
elect a Trustee as a temporary Chairperson. The temporary Chairperson shall have only the powers
of a presiding officer and a right to vote in the capacity as trustee on any ordinance, resolution, or
2-1-3
motion.
Sec. 2.9.2 Emergency Spending Authority
In the event that a state of emergency exists within the Village, the Village President, President
Pro-Tem, or emergency interim successor to the Office of Village President, may, by executive
order and without the approval of the Board of Trustees, spend up to $100,000 in Village funds as
necessary to respond to the emergency. For purposes of this Section, a state of emergency is
defined as an attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States causing, or which may
cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the Village in any manner by
sabotage or by the use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, or atomic, radiological, chemical,
bacteriological or biological means or other weapons or processes, or a disaster involving an
occurrence or threat of catastrophic and widespread injury or loss of life to Village residents or
property in the Village resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including but not limited to
fire, flood, earthquake, epidemic and explosion. The Village President, President Pro-Tem, or
emergency interim successor may not exercise the emergency spending authority granted herein
without first declaring that an emergency, as defined above, exists, by setting forth, in writing and
under oath, a declaration of emergency describing the nature of the emergency and detailing facts
to substantiate such finding. The declaration of emergency shall be filed with the Village Clerk as
soon as is practicable. The declaration of emergency, and concurrent spending authority, shall
expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities after
the state of emergency is declared. (Section 2.9.2 added by A-781-02-02)
2-2-1
ARTICLE II. TRUSTEES
Sec. 2.10. Trustees - Election - Functions
The Trustees shall consist of six persons, who shall be elected to office for four-year terms, according
to the method provided by statute. The Trustees shall be the legislative department of the Village
government and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be delegated by statute to
them.
The term of office of each member of the Trustees shall commence on the date of the first regular or
special meeting of the Board of Trustees in May following the regular April Village elections at which
such Village Trustees are elected. (amended by A-781-01-06)
Whenever there is a reference in this Code to the Board of Trustees, such shall refer to the President
and all Trustees.
Sec. 2.11. Trustees - Oath - Salary
The Trustees shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. It is preferable that newly elected
Trustees take the oath of office in a public ceremony during the last regularly scheduled Village Board
meeting in the month of April.
The Trustees shall receive compensation of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year, for the
performance of the duties of Village Trustee. However, an increase or decrease in the compensation
of any Trustee shall not take effect during the term for which the Trustee was elected. (Amended by
A-781-02-08)
2-3-1
ARTICLE III. VILLAGE CLERK
Sec. 2.12. Election - Term
The Village Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four-year term and until a successor is elected and
qualified, as provided by statute. The term of office of the Village Clerk shall commence on the date of
the first regular or special meeting of the Board of Trustees in May following the regular April Village
election at which the Village Clerk is elected. (amended by A-781-01-06)
Sec. 2.13. Bond - Oath - Salary
Before entering upon the duties of office, the Clerk shall give a bond, with sureties to be approved by
the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of Village Clerk in the
sum as set forth under Article X of this Code. The Clerk shall take the oath of office as prescribed by
statute and shall receive compensation as may be, from time to time, determined by the Board of
Trustees and fixed by ordinance. Once fixed, this compensation shall not be increased or decreased
so as to take effect during the term of the Clerk.
Sec. 2.14. Powers and Duties
The Village Clerk shall perform all the duties now or hereafter provided by the laws of this state and
the ordinances of the Village. Among other things, it shall be the duty of Village Clerk as follows:
1. To keep the office of Village Clerk at the place appointed by the Board of Trustees;
2. To attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees, to call the roll when necessary, and to take
minutes of all its proceedings;
3. To record such minutes, together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by the Board of
Trustees, in books to be kept exclusively for those purposes; and immediately following
each ordinance, the Village Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of its passage and
of its publication or posting, where required;
4. To publish all proceedings of the Board of Trustees and all ordinances required by law to be
published, said ordinances to be published in the manner prescribed by law and as directed
by the Board of Trustees;
5. To serve all notices, either by personal service, by publication or by posting, required by law
or the order of the Board of Trustees or the President to be served, unless such notices are
expressly ordered to be served by some other person;
6. To notify, within five days after the result of any election is declared or appointment made, all
persons elected or appointed to any Village office of their election or appointment;
7. To file all ordinances, communications, receipts and other documents required to be filed,
and to arrange the same in systematic order for ready reference;
8. To keep the corporate seal of the Village and affix the same to all papers which require it;
9. To be the custodian and keeper of all the books, records, ordinances, contracts and papers
of the Village, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance;
2-3-2
10. To make copies of all papers in the office, and transcripts from journals and other records
and files of the office, certified under the corporate seal for use in evidence when required;
and
11. To file or cause to be filed a certified copy of each year's tax levy ordinance with the County
Clerk of DuPage County and the County Clerk of Cook County within the time required by
law.
Sec. 2.15. Documents
The Village Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the Village which are not
assigned to the custody of some other officer.
Sec. 2.16. Indexes
The Village Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index of all documents and records kept so that
ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
Sec. 2.17. Issuance of License and Permits - Collection of Fees
The Village Clerk shall sign and issue all permits and licenses, except liquor licenses, in compliance
with the provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Village, or as so ordered by the Board of
Trustees or other proper officer of the Village and work in conjunction with the Finance Director
regarding the collection of fees.
When a license is required under this code, or any other Ordinance of the Village, and the provisions
of this Code or the separate Ordinance, as the case may be, do not provide who is to sign any such
license to be issued, then either the Village Clerk or the Village President shall sign all such licenses.
Sec. 2.18. Record of Licenses
The Village Clerk shall keep a full record of all licenses granted, transferred or revoked by the Board of
Trustees or the President, under their authority, with the date that the same were granted, transferred
or revoked, and if revoked, the cause therefor, with the number thereof, and the full name and
residence of applicants for such licenses, in a book to be kept for that purpose, and, where bonds are
required, the names of the bondsmen or sureties.
Sec. 2.19. Ordinances - Resolutions
The Village Clerk shall, without delay, deliver to the President of the Board of Trustees, all ordinances
or resolutions which may require approval or other action by the President, with all papers on which
the same were founded.
Sec. 2.20. Elections
The Village Clerk shall perform all election duties required of the Village Clerk by law, may assume the
duties of a Deputy Registrar of voters, and perform such duties in relationship to the voting by
absentee ballots, as required or permitted by law.
Sec. 2.21. Additional Duties
In addition to the duties herein provided, the Village Clerk shall perform such other duties and
2-3-3
functions as may be required by statute or ordinance.
Sec. 2.22. Vacancy
In case the office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the Board of Trustees may
appoint an acting Village Clerk by voting jointly, and such vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of
the term at the next general municipal election occurring after the vacancy as provided in Section 3-2-
7 of the Illinois Municipal Code. In the event that the Village Clerk is absent at any particular meeting,
and the Deputy Village Clerk is not available to act in the person of the Village Clerk, then the Board of
Trustees may appoint a Village Clerk Pro-Tempore for the purposes of fulfilling the functions of the
Village Clerk at such meeting.
Sec. 2.23. Deputy Clerk; Chain of Succession
There is hereby created the office of Deputy Clerk. The Village Clerk may appoint a Deputy Clerk who
shall have the power and duty to execute all documents required by any law or ordinance to be
executed by the Village Clerk, and affix the seal of the Village thereto whenever required. When
signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the Village Clerk followed by the word
"By" and the Deputy Clerk's name and the words "Deputy Clerk."
The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such Deputy Clerk only in the absence
of the Village Clerk, and only when either written direction has been given by the Village Clerk to
exercise such power, or the Board of Trustees have determined by resolution that the Village Clerk is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such function.
Such Deputy Clerk shall have the authority and power herein described, and such further power and
authority as may be provided by statute. The Deputy Clerk need not be a resident of the Village.
Pursuant to the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act (5 ILCS 275/1 et seq.), in the event
of an attack upon the United States or a natural or manmade disaster in the Village resulting in
the unavailability of the Village Clerk, the Deputy Clerk may exercise the powers and duties of the
Village Clerk even in the absence of written direction to exercise such power by the Village Clerk
or a resolution determining the incapacitation of the Village Clerk. In the event of such an attack
or disaster resulting in the unavailability of both the Village Clerk and Deputy Clerk, and pending
the appointment of an acting Village Clerk or Village Clerk Pro-Tempore by the Board of Trustees,
the duties and all of the rights and powers of the office of Village Clerk shall be discharged by the
designated emergency interim successors in the order specified below. Emergency interim
successors for the Office of Village Clerk are hereby designated as follows:
1. Village Administrator
2. Assistant to the Village Administrator
3. Community Development Director
4. Finance Director
Other than taking the oath of office required in order to exercise the rights and powers and
discharge the duties of the office of Village Clerk, an emergency interim successor hereunder
shall not be required to comply with any other provision of law relative to taking office. The
emergency interim successor shall exercise the rights and powers and discharge the duties of the
office of Village Clerk until such time as either the Village Clerk or Deputy Clerk are available to
resume the duties of office, or the Board of Trustees appoints an acting Village Clerk or a Village
Clerk Pro-Tempore. (Section 2.23 amended by A-781-02-02)
2-4-1
ARTICLE IV. VILLAGE TREASURER
Sec. 2.24. Appointment
There is hereby created the office of Village Treasurer. Said office shall consist of the Village
Treasurer and such other Deputy Treasurers as shall be appointed by the Village President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, as provided by statute.
Sec. 2.25. Bond
Before entering upon the duties of office, the Treasurer shall give a bond with sureties to be approved
by the Board of Trustees conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of Village Treasurer in
the sum as set forth under Article X of this Chapter. The amount of such bond shall in no case be less
than that required by statute and shall be conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss by reason of
any neglect of duty or any act of the Treasurer.
Sec. 2.26. Duties
The Village Treasurer shall perform all the duties now or hereinafter provided by the laws of this state
and the ordinances of the Village.
Sec. 2.27. Duty to Pay Money Over to Treasurer
Any money coming into the hands of any officer or employee of the Village for the Village shall be paid
over to the Treasurer daily, or at such other times or intervals as from time to time established by the
Board of Trustees, or as otherwise required by law.
2-5-1
ARTICLE V. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
Sec. 2.28. Creation of Position
There is hereby created the position of Village Administrator, an administrative position of the Village.
Sec. 2.29. Employment
A. The Village Administrator shall be selected by and serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Trustees or under such terms and conditions as the Board of Trustees shall determine and
as permitted by law.
The Village Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of executive, administrative and
academic qualifications with special reference to actual experience in and knowledge of
accepted practices in respect to the duties of the position as hereinafter set forth. The
Village Administrator shall have a bachelor's degree and responsible administrative
experience.
B. During the absence or disability for any reason of the Administrator, the Board of Trustees
may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the position of the
Village Administrator.
C. Residency not required; the Village Administrator need not be a resident of the Village.
Sec. 2.30. Bond
Before assuming the position, the Administrator shall qualify for and obtain a fidelity bond in the sum
as set forth under Article X of this Chapter, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
Village Administrator, with an insurance corporation satisfactory to the Board of Trustees and licensed
to do business in the state as surety. The cost of such bond shall be borne by the Village.
Sec. 2.31. Responsibilities and Duties
The Village Administrator, except as otherwise required by law, shall be the direct representative of the
Board of Trustees in the transaction of all Village business and in all matters concerning the citizens of
the Village and, to the extent not prohibited by law, shall have such specific duties as are assigned
from time to time by the Board of Trustees, including, but not limited to, those duties and authorities
specifically provided for herein as follows:
1. To act as the Village's Chief Administrative officer and to supervise and coordinate the work
and affairs of the Village and of all the departments of the Village government and to report
directly to the Board of Trustees thereon;
2. To attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees (except closed sessions thereof to consider
information relating to the appointment of, removal of, or complaints against the Village
Administrator, with the right to take part in the discussions but with no right to vote;
3. To recommend to the Board of Trustees for adoption such measures as the Administrator
may deem necessary or appropriate;
4. To prepare the budget and tax levies annually and submit them to the Board of Trustees
together with a summary describing the important features, and to be responsible for the
2-5-2
administration of the budget after its adoption;
5. To prepare and submit to the Board of Trustees, at the end of each fiscal year, a complete
report on the finances and administrative activities of the Village for the preceding year;
6. To recommend to the Village President the appointment and/or dismissal of the Village
Attorney, who is required by law to be appointed or dismissed by the Village President by
and with the consent of the Board of Trustees. To recommend to the Board of Trustees the
appointment and/or dismissal of all full-time department heads, all of whom are approved or
dismissed by the Board of Trustees. The Village Administrator shall be responsible for
hiring and to recommend to the Board of Trustees the firing of all other employees except
those employees that pursuant to Statute are under the jurisdiction of the Board of Fire and
Police Commission of the Village provided, however, that the hiring or appointment of
employees by the Administrator shall be on an "at will" or month-to-month basis and further
provided that the salaries of such employees shall be within the specified limits set in the
Village's annual budget;
7. Except as otherwise required by law, to be responsible for the handling of complaints,
suggestions, requests, applications and petitions and other correspondence or
communications directed to the Village (or any officer or officers or any committee thereof,
and whether received directly by the Administrator or through the Board of Trustees or any
individual or committee thereof or any other officer of the Village) and, whenever possible, to
take action immediately to adjust matters which do not require official action of the Board of
Trustees;
8. To be responsible for the maintenance of and upkeep of the Village Hall and all
Village-owned real estate and personal property;
9. To act as the Village's Chief Purchasing Agent and to authorize all purchase orders and
contracts for services, supplies, materials or equipment, or for contractual services, including
printing and publication, and all work or other public improvement contracts involving the
expenditure of not more than five thousand ($5,000.00), provided, however, no such
purchase order or contract shall be authorized without a prior unexpended and
unencumbered appropriation in sufficient amount for such purposes;
(amended by A-781-02-03)
10. To prepare an agenda for all regularly scheduled and special Board meetings;
11. To perform related work to all of the above and such other duties as required by ordinance
or resolution of the Village Board.
Sec. 2.32. Compensation
The Village Administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by the
Board of Trustees in accordance with law.
Sec. 2.33. Conflict of Interest Prohibited
The Village Administrator shall comply fully with the "conflict of interest" provisions set forth from time
to time in the Illinois Municipal Code (Chapter 65/5)) and the Illinois Corrupt Practices Act (Chapter
50/105) regardless of whether said statutory provisions are made expressly applicable to the position
of Village Administrator. The Village Administrator shall also not violate any common law principles
2-5-3
regarding conflict of interest for municipal officers, and shall also not be interested directly or indirectly
in any matters requiring decisions or recommendations to be made by the Village and/or any of its
committees or commissions, and specifically including zoning and other legislative decisions, unless
expressly exempted by law or by the Board of Trustees.
2-6-1
ARTICLE VI. FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 2.34. Creation
There is hereby created the Finance Department, an administrative department of the Village. Said
department shall consist of the Finance Director and such other assistants and employees as the
Board of Trustees may from time to time provide.
Sec. 2.35. Appointment of Finance Director
There is hereby created the position of Finance Director, who shall be appointed by the Board of
Trustees. The Finance Director shall report to the Village Administrator.
Sec. 2.36. Bond
Before entering upon the duties of office, the Finance Director shall give a bond with sureties to be
approved by the Board of Trustees conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of Finance
Director in the sum as set forth under Article X of this Chapter. The amount of such bond shall in no
case be less than that required by statute and shall be conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss
by reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the Finance Director.
Sec. 2.37. Duties of Finance Director
The Finance Director shall perform such duties and functions as may be provided for in this Code, or
as the Village Administrator shall direct. Among other things, it shall be the duty of the Finance
Director as follows:
1. To account for all monies due or belonging to the Village and pay all orders or warrants,
including special assessment and other bonds and interest coupons, authorized by the
Board of Trustees and duly executed by the proper officers of this Village.
2. To keep, or cause to be kept, suitable books of account, showing in a simple, methodical
manner all monies received and from whom and on what account or fund paid and for what
purpose. The books shall be balanced monthly.
3. To keep, or cause to be kept, a separate account with each fund or appropriation stating at
the head of each account the amount to be appropriated and giving the several debits and
credits belonging thereto.
4. To keep, or cause to be kept, an account with each special assessment under its general
description and number, giving in detail all receipts and disbursements therein.
5. To make a monthly report of all transactions as Finance Director to the Board of Trustees,
which report shall be filed with said Board together with cancelled vouchers covering all
transactions embraced in said report.
6. To annually, within six months after the end of the fiscal year, make out and file with the
Village Clerk a full and detailed account of all receipts and disbursements during the
preceding fiscal year of the Village, which account shall show the state of the treasury at the
close of the fiscal year. A copy of such account, as filed with the Village Clerk, together with
the required affidavit of the Village Clerk, shall be filed with the County Collector before
November first as required by statute.
2-6-2
Sec. 2.38. Special Assessment Funds
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the Finance Director as a special fund
to be applied only to the payment of the improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued therefor,
together with interest thereon, for which the assessment was made, and said money shall be used for
no other purpose, unless to reimburse the Village for the money expended for such improvement.
Payments on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with the statutes, and the Finance
Director shall keep these books and accounts in such a manner so that proper prorations in payments
of principal and interest can be made and ascertained.
Sec. 2.39. Checks - Transfer of Funds
All checks drawn by the Finance Director must be signed by the President and countersigned by the
Village Clerk or Treasurer, stating the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable,
and the person to whom payable; and no money shall be otherwise paid except as may be provided
by statute. Money shall not be transferred by the Finance Director from one fund to another, after it
has been received, nor appropriated to any other purpose other than that for which it has been
collected or paid, except as may be ordered by the Board of Trustees in manner and form prescribed
by statute.
2-7-1
ARTICLE VII. POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 2.40. Creation
There is hereby created and established the Police Department of the Village of Burr Ridge. The
Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police, Deputy Police Chief, the ranks of sergeant and
corporal and such other police officers whose number shall from time to time be determined by the
Board of Trustees. (Amended by A-781-03-03)
Sec. 2.41. Appointment of Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief
A. There is hereby created the position of Police Chief, who shall be appointed by the Board of
Trustees. The Police Chief shall report to the Village Administrator. (A-781-01-03)
B. There is hereby created the position of Deputy Police Chief pursuant to the authority granted
by Section 10-2.1-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4. Such position shall
be an exempt rank immediately below that of Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall
appoint the Deputy Chief from the ranks of corporal and sergeant, and said individual shall
have at least five (5) years of full-time service as a Police Officer with the Village’s Police
Department. The Deputy Chief shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police, and, if
removed from the position of Deputy Chief by the Chief of Police, shall revert to the rank
held immediately prior to appointment to the Deputy Chief position. The Deputy Chief of
Police shall have such duties as may be assigned by the Chief of Police. There shall be no
more than one Deputy Chief position within the Police Department. (A-781-01-03)
C. If a temporary absence or disability of the Chief of Police incapacitates the Chief from the
performance of duties, the Deputy Police Chief shall assume those duties. If the Deputy
Police Chief is unable to perform the duties of Chief of Police, the Village Administrator may
designate a member of the Police Department as Acting Police Chief. Immediately upon
such designation, the Village Administrator shall advise the Board of Trustees of the
reason(s) for designation of the Acting Police Chief and the expected duration of such
designation. (Added by A-781-03-03)
Sec. 2.42. Duties of Police Chief
The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by the Police Department of all its functions, and all
persons who are members of the department shall serve subject to the orders of the Police Chief.
Among other things, it shall be the duty of the Police Chief as follows:
1. To be the keeper of the Village jail and to have custody of all persons incarcerated therein;
2. To keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the department as
may be required by statute or ordinance;
3. To administer and manage all matters pertaining to the Police Department;
4. To prepare a proposed budget and to control and direct all expenditures to be made by the
Police Department;
5. To prepare periodic reports, in writing, to the Village Administrator on matters pertaining to
the Police Department;
2-7-2
6. To attend meetings of the Board of Trustees or other similar meetings when so requested
by the Village Administrator.
7. To act as the Village’s Emergency Management Liaison to the Office of Emergency
Management in Cook and DuPage Counties. (A-781-01-04)
8. To amend the Emergency Operations Plan, from time to time, for the purpose of properly
carrying out any and all of the duties imposed therein for the purpose of responding to
natural and man-made disasters. (A-781-01-04)
Sec. 2.43. Oath of Police Officers
All members of the Police Department shall, before entering upon duty as police officers, take and
subscribe an oath of office substantially in the following form: "I do solemnly swear that I will support
the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the
duties of the office of police officer of the Village of Burr Ridge to the best of my ability." Such oath
shall be subscribed and sworn to before some office authorized by the laws of this state to administer
oaths, and the certificates thereof shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
Sec. 2.44. Duties of Police – Generally
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department, including the Police Chief, to see to the
enforcement of this Code and all other ordinances of the Village and laws of the State of Illinois and to
preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest violators thereof.
It shall be the duty of all members of the Police Department, including the Police Chief, when on duty,
to devote their time and attention to the municipal affairs of the Village and to preserve the safety and
cleanliness thereof; and to this end, they shall execute and enforce this Code and all other ordinances
of the Village and all state laws. They shall take notice of all nuisances and at all times render all
necessary assistance to all Village departments in the abatement thereof. They shall take notice of the
impediments, obstructions and defects in the walks, streets, avenues, alleys and public places of the
Village, and shall remove the same or cause immediate notice to be given the proper person whose
duty it may be to attend to the same according to this Code and other ordinances of the Village.
Sec. 2.45. Powers of Police
The members of the police force of the Village shall have the power and authority within the Village
and outside the same when necessary and lawful, to serve and execute warrants and other process
for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with the violation of this Code or other
ordinances of the Village or any crime against the laws of the State of Illinois, or held for examination
or trial, or taken in execution for the commission of any crime. They shall have the power and
authority, and it shall be their duty, to serve and execute all civil process issued on behalf of the Village
by any court of proper jurisdiction; and while serving or executing or assisting in the service or
execution of any such warrant or process, they shall be vested with and have all the powers and
authority conferred on constables at common law and by the laws of this state.
They shall have the power, and it shall be their duty to arrest, on view, all persons in the Village found
in the act of violating this Code or other ordinance of the Village or of the State of Illinois, or aiding or
abetting any such violations and to bring such persons so arrested before the court and proper
jurisdiction to be dealt with according to law.
Sec. 2.46. Duty of Arresting Officers to Attend Trial
2-7-3
All members of the police force making arrests shall attend as witnesses when required by the court
where the trial may be had, and shall procure all necessary evidence in their power and furnish a list of
witnesses to the court. No police officer shall be entitled to any witness fee to be taxed against the
Village on any action for a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinances where the Village
is a plaintiff.
Sec. 2.47. Property Stolen, Seized, Abandoned or Found - Custody Thereof
The Police Chief shall be the custodian of all lost, confiscated, abandoned or stolen property in the
Village.
It shall be the duty of police officers to report and deliver to the Police Chief all property seized or found
by them immediately after the same shall have come into their possession, which property, with the
date of delivery and description of the same, and the name of the Police Officer depositing the same,
shall be placed in a file kept for that purpose by the Police Chief, who shall be responsible for the
same.
Sec. 2.48. Badge of Police Officers and Police Identification Card
Every member of the Police Department shall wear a suitable badge, to be furnished by the Village,
and any member who shall lose or destroy the same shall be required to pay the cost of replacing it.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any member of the Police Department who is on an assignment (e.g.,
undercover assignment) which necessitates not wearing their badge shall not be in violation of the
provisions of this Section, provided that their superior has authorized such member to not wear the
badge. When any member shall leave the department or is suspended, that person shall immediately
deliver to the Police Chief their badge, department-issued firearm, Burr Ridge Police identification
card, and all other articles in his or her possession belonging to the Village.
Sec. 2.49. Residency Requirements
The members of the Police Department, including the Chief of Police, need not be residents of the
Village of Burr Ridge either at the time of their appointment or during their employment as a member of
the Police Department.
2-8-1
ARTICLE VIII. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 2.50. Creation
There is hereby created the Department of Public Works. Said department shall consist of the
Superintendent of Public Works and such other assistants and employees as the Board of Trustees
may from time-to-time provide.
Sec. 2.51. Appointment of Superintendent of Public Works
There is hereby created the position of Superintendent of Public Works who shall be appointed by the
Board of Trustees. The Superintendent of Public Works shall report to the Village Administrator. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall be chosen on the basis of administrative and supervisory
qualifications, with special reference to actual experience in and knowledge of accepted practices in
respect to the duties of the position as hereinafter set forth. The Superintendent of Public Works shall
at a minimum possess a State of Illinois Class C Water License.
Sec. 2.52. Duties of the Superintendent of Public Works
The Superintendent of Public Works shall perform such duties and functions as may be provided for in
this Code or as the Village Administrator shall direct. Among other things, the duties of Superintendent
of Public Works shall be as follows:
1. To manage and control all matters pertaining to the Department of Public Works including streets,
water, sewer, forestry and building and grounds.
2. To direct the removal of any article or thing whatsoever which encumbers or obstructs any
street, avenue, alley or other public place in the Village.
3. To regulate and control the manner of using the streets, alleys, highways and public places
of the Village as directed or approved by the Board of Trustees, and the installation of utility
poles, posts, signs and other overhead structures, gas lines, water lines, or other pipes,
conduits and sewers authorized by law or the ordinances of the Village and to determine
location thereof.
4. To cause the prompt repair of the streets, alleys, highways and public places whenever
necessary.
5. To prepare a proposed budget for the department, and to control and direct all expenditures
to be made by the Department of Public Works.
6. To maintain all storm sewers and drains in any of the streets, alleys, avenues or public
places of the Village in good order and condition and clear and free from obstructions and
shall cause to be made such repairs thereof and of the receiving basins, culverts and
openings connected therewith as may from time to time become necessary.
7. To monitor the mode of piercing or the opening of any sewers, drains or water pipes in the
Village and the form, size and material of the connection made therewith. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall, subject to the direction of the Village Administrator,
have authority to grant permission to make lateral connections with said sewers, drains and
water pipes.
2-8-2
8. To attend meetings of the Board of Trustees or other similar meetings when so requested
by the Village Administrator and/or Board of Trustees.
9. To prepare periodic reports, in writing to the Village Administrator, on the work performed
and progress made by the Department of Public Works.
10. To supervise all forestry activities. To regulate and encourage the preservation, culture and
planting of shade and ornamental trees, plants and shrubbery in the parkways and other
public places and direct the pruning, trimming, spraying, cultivating and maintaining of such
trees, shrubs and plants. He shall advise owners and occupants of lots regarding the kind of
trees, plants and shrubbery and the method of planting best adapted to or most desirable on
particular streets and shall take such measures as may be deemed necessary for the
control and extermination of insects and other pests and plant diseases which may
injuriously affect trees, plants or shrubs that are now growing or may be hereafter growing in
the parkways and public places in the Village.
2-9-1
ARTICLE IX. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Sec. 2.53. Creation
There is hereby created the Community Development Department. Said department shall consist of
the Village Engineer/Community Development Director, the Building Commissioner, the Deputy
Building Commissioner and such other assistants and employees as the Board of Trustees may, from
time to time, provide.
Sec. 2.54. Appointment of Village Engineer/Community Development Director
There is hereby created the position of Village Engineer/Community Development Director who shall
be appointed by the Board of Trustees. The Village Engineer/Community Development Director shall
report to the Village Administrator.
Sec. 2.55. Duties of Village Engineer/Community Development Director
The Village Engineer/Community Development Director shall perform such duties and functions as
may be provided for in this Code or as the Village Administrator shall direct. Among other things, it
shall be the duty of the Village Engineer/Community Development Director as follows:
1. To manage and control all matters pertaining to the Community Development Department;
2. To prepare a proposed budget for the department and to control and direct all expenditures
to be made by the Community Development Department;
3. To ensure compliance with all building and zoning codes and subdivision regulations;
4. To coordinate all planning and engineering functions related to the growth and development
of the Village;
5. To serve as Staff for the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, coordinate all activities
therefor and provide additional staff for each as may be necessary from time to time;
6. To coordinate all activities regarding the subdivision of property and the construction of
required improvements, including the review of all plat documents and engineering plans for
compliance with the requirements of Village ordinances and state statutes; and
7. To coordinate all activities associated with the planning, engineering, development, and
construction of the Village's Annual Road Program.
2-10-1
ARTICLE X. BONDING
Sec. 2.56. Requirements as to Execution of Bond; Sureties
The bond of each officer and employee of whom a bond is required by State Statute or by this Code
shall be executed to the Village, with a surety conditioned for the faithful performance of their duties
and the payment of all monies received according to state statute or ordinances of the Village by virtue
of their office. The sum stated in such justification on the bond of any officer shall, in the aggregate,
amount to the penalty of such bond.
Any surety company licensed to carry on business in Illinois may be accepted by the Board of
Trustees as surety on such bonds. Individual sureties will not be accepted. The execution of the bond
shall be acknowledged by the officer and their surety before some person authorized to take
acknowledgement of deeds and a certificate of such acknowledgement made thereon.
After the approval of the bond by the Board of Trustees, the Clerk shall endorse thereon the date of its
approval and file same.
Sec. 2.57. Bond Schedule
The amount of the bonds required by this Code shall be as follows:
Village President……………………$2,500
Village Administrator………………. $2,500
Village Clerk…………………………$2,500
Village Treasurer……………………As required by statute
Director of Finance…………………. $2,500
All Others……………………………. $2,500
All bonds, except for the bond of the Village Clerk, shall be filed with the Village Clerk, and the Village
Clerk's bond shall be filed wit the Village Treasurer.
Sec. 2.58. Payment of Bond Premium
All premiums charged by the corporate sureties on bonds shall be paid by the Village out of its general
funds, and in no case by the individual furnishing the bond.
2-11-1
ARTICLE XI. MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Sec. 2.59. Time and Place
The Board of Trustees shall hold its regular meeting at least monthly at such time and place as the
Board of Trustees may from time to time establish; provided, however, that if the regular meeting date
as established by the Board of Trustees shall fall on Labor Day, Federal Memorial Day, the Fourth of
July, Thanksgiving, Christmas or New Year's Day, the Board of Trustees shall meet on the day
following unless otherwise provided for.
Sec. 2.60. Special Meeting
A special meeting may be called by the Village President or any three Trustees upon at least fortyeight
hours' notice to all Trustees and the President; provided that if all the Trustees are present at a
special meeting no notice of such meeting to the Trustees shall be necessary and such notice shall be
deemed waived. Meetings calls shall be in writing duly signed and shall be presented to the Village
Clerk who shall proceed immediately to prepare notices of such meetings and shall cause them to be
served on the Board of Trustees personally or by mail; such notices shall describe in brief the nature or
objects of the special meeting. Notice of any special meeting should also be provided in the manner
required by the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
Sec. 2.61. Committees
The Board of Trustees, may from time to time appoint committees of the Board of Trustees. All special
committees shall also be appointed by the Board of Trustees. Members of special committees need
not be members of the Board of Trustees.
Sec. 2.62. President
The Village President shall be the presiding officer at all regular and special meetings of the Board of
Trustees and at all times when the Board meets as a committee of the whole, and at all special
committees of which the President is a member.
Sec. 2.63. Deciding Vote
The Village President shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution, or motion, except: (1) where the
vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie; or (2) where one-half of the Trustees elected have voted in
favor of an ordinance, resolution, or motion, even though there is no tie vote; or (3) where a vote
greater than a majority of the Board of Trustees is required by the Illinois Municipal Code to adopt an
ordinance, resolution or motion. Nothing in this section shall deprive a President pro-tem from voting
in their capacity as Trustee.
Sec. 2.64. Ordinances - Voting - Approval – Veto – Teleconference Voting
Every ordinance and resolution shall be reduced to writing and presented to the Board of Trustees
before vote thereon by the members is taken.
On any item requiring a roll call vote, the concurrence of the majority of all members then holding
office, including the Village President, shall be required in order for any ordinance, resolution or motion
to pass; any other matter shall pass on the majority vote of all members present at a duly convened
meeting, provided there is a quorum, unless the statute authorizing the action specifically provides
otherwise.
2-11-2
All resolutions and motions (1) which create any liability against the Village, or (2) which provide for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money or (3) which authorize the sale of any Village property, and
all ordinances, shall be decided by a roll call vote, the result of which vote shall be recorded, and all
ordinances passed by the Village Board shall be deposited with the Village Clerk. If the Village
President approves them, the Village President shall sign them. Those of which the Village President
disapproves, shall return to the Board of Trustees, with written objections, at the next regular meeting
of the Board of Trustees occurring not less than five days after their passage. The Village President
may disapprove any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an
appropriation, and if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the Village President may
disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the Village
President fails to return any ordinance or resolution with written objections, within the designated time,
it shall become effective despite the absence of the signature of the Village President.
Any matter requiring a roll call vote at a meeting of the Board of Trustees may be voted on by an
absent Trustee or Trustees via conference telephone call between the absent Trustee (s) and the rest
of the Board present at the regular meeting under the following conditions:
(a) The absent Trustee(s) cannot be physically present at the regular meeting at which the
matter is put to a vote due to circumstances beyond the control of the Trustee (s).
(b) The absent Trustee(s) has (have) notified the Village President of the absence and the
reason for the absence at least 48 hours before the meeting is convened, whenever
practicable.
(c) The voice(s) of the absent Trustee(s) on the conference telephone call, after being identified
by the rest of the Board as belonging to the absent Trustee(s), shall be simultaneously
broadcast to the public present at the regular meeting and open to the media, and the
absent Trustee (s) shall also be able to hear any public comment regarding the issue elicited
at the meeting, if any, before the vote is taken.
(d) The absent Trustee(s), before voting, shall publically state the reason for not being present
at the regular meeting to vote in person.
(e) The Village Clerk shall record the manner of participation of a Trustee participating by
telephone conference call.
(f) The absent Trustee(s) shall not be counted in the determination of a quorum for the
meeting. (amended by A-781-1-98)
Sec. 2.65. Reconsideration - Passing Over Veto
Every resolution and motion specified in the preceding section, and every ordinance which is returned
to the Board of Trustees by the Village President shall be reconsidered by the Board of Trustees at the
next regular meeting. If after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Trustees shall agree at such
regular meeting to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion, notwithstanding the President's refusal to
approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on the question of passage over the President's veto
shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the journal.
Sec. 2.66. Quorum
A majority of the elected Trustees or three Trustees and the Village President shall constitute a
2-11-3
quorum of the Board of Trustees.
Sec. 2.67. Rules of Order
The following rules of order shall in all cases be adhered to, but the same may be suspended when no
objections are made, or upon a vote of a majority of the Board, except rules 4, 7, 12 and 15.
(Amended by A-781-2-95)
Rule 1. The order of business (“Agenda”) at all regular meetings of the Village Board shall
be as follows (in addition, typically any required public hearings will be conducted
immediately after the Roll Call or as otherwise provided in the legal notice for the
public hearing and scheduled Closed Sessions will be conducted following nonresident
comments).
(1) Call to Order.
(2) Roll Call.
(3) Residents Comments
(4) Consent Agenda-Omnibus Vote. An item shall be removed from the
Consent Agenda-Omnibus Vote at the request of any one Trustee or
anyone present at the meeting. A roll call shall be taken on the
approval of the Consent Agenda and recorded in the minutes as an
Omnibus Vote.
(5) The minutes of the proceedings of the last meeting shall be approved;
and, if necessary, the same shall be amended and approved.
(6) Ordinances.
(7) Resolutions.
(8) Considerations.
(9) Residents Comments
(10) Reports and communications of Village officials.
(11) Non-resident Comments
(12) Adjournment.
(Amended by A-781-01-15)
Rule 2. The President shall decide all questions of order and in all cases where these
rules are not applicable, the Village Board shall be governed by parliamentary law
as laid down in Robert's Rules of Order.
Rule 3. Members discussing a question shall address the President and no member shall
be deemed to have the floor until recognized by the President.
No person except a member of the Village Board, shall be permitted to address a
question before the Village Board unless by the consent of a majority of the Board
or unless the same is required by law.
Rule 4. The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon
all propositions to create any liability against the Village, or for the expenditure or
appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any member,
which shall be entered on the journal of its proceedings, and the concurrence of
majority of all the members of the Board of Trustees then holding office, including
the President, shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance or
proposition unless otherwise provided be statute; and provided, that it shall
require two-thirds of all the Trustees to sell any Village property.
2-11-4
Rule 5. All ordinances, resolutions and amendments thereto shall be reduced to writing
before action shall be taken thereon.
Rule 6. Standing and special committees, to whom matters have been referred by the
Board of Trustees, shall, in all cases, report in writing the facts related to such
matters and their opinion thereon, including minority opinions, if any.
Rule 7. Any report to the Board of Trustees shall be deferred for final action thereon, to
the next regular meeting of the Village Board after the report is made, upon the
request of any two Trustees present.
Rule 8. No bill obligating the Village shall be paid without the approval of the Board of
Trustees.
Rule 9. Every member who shall be present when a question is stated by the chair shall
vote thereon, unless excused by the Board, or unless the member shall be
directly or indirectly interested in the question, in which case the member shall not
vote. The vote of a member who has not been excused from voting, who passes
or refuses to vote, shall be counted as voting with the majority.
Rule 10. When a question is before the Board, no motion shall be in order but the following:
(1) To adjourn; (2) To table; (3) For the previous question; (4) To postpone
indefinitely; (5) To postpone to a certain time; (6) To commit; and (7) To amend.
These motions shall be privileged and have precedence in the order named, and
motions to adjourn, to table and for the previous question shall be voted on
without debate.
Rule 11. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order except (1) when a member is in
possession of the floor; (2) when the ayes and nays are being called; (3) when the
members are voting; (4) when adjournment was the last preceding motion; (5)
when it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken; and the
"previous question" shall be as follows: "Shall the main question now be put?"
Rule 12. No vote of the Board shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting
unless there are present at the special meeting as many Trustees as were
present when the vote was taken.
Rule 13. The Village Administrator shall prepare an agenda for each meeting of the Village
Board, including a Consent Agenda-Omnibus Vote. The Consent
Agenda-Omnibus Vote shall include all items of a routine and non-controversial
nature. The Village Administrator shall be responsible for determining what items
are subject to placement on the Consent Agenda-Omnibus Vote. The Consent
Agenda-Omnibus Vote shall include a specific enumeration of the various items
and the proposed action relating thereto. Any such item on the Consent
Agenda-Omnibus Vote is subject to removal at the request of any one Trustee or
any person present at the Board meeting as indicated above in Rule 1(4). A roll
call shall be taken on approval of the Consent Agenda-Omnibus Vote and
recorded in the minutes. The Village Clerk shall enter the words "Omnibus Vote"
in the journal in each case in lieu of entering the names of the members of the
Village Board and their respective votes on the passage of each item included in
2-11-5
the Consent Agenda-Omnibus Vote. Whenever the term "Consent-Agenda is
used, it shall be deemed to include the words "Omnibus Vote".
Rule 14. Ordinances and resolutions to be considered by the Board of Trustees shall be
presented to the Board of Trustees at the meeting at which action is proposed
thereon, but such ordinances and resolutions need not be read.
Rule 15. No item shall be added to the agenda and voted upon during the course of the
Board meeting, except such matters that could not have been reasonably placed
on the agenda prior to the meeting and for which there is a clear need to have the
matter heard on an expedited basis. (added by A-781-2-95)
Rule 16. Comments from non-resident/non-citizens will be heard at the portion of the
meeting set aside for “Non Resident Comments” on the Agenda. A Non-Resident
may be permitted to address items on the Agenda, if such person has a
demonstrable personal or financial interest in the Agenda item that is separate or
distinct from the interests of the general public. The President is authorized to
make such determinations, as needed. (Added by A-781-01-15)
Rule 17. A person (Resident or Non-Resident) is allowed up to five (5) minutes for their
comments during the applicable Comments portions of the meeting as set forth
above. (Added by A-781-01-15)
Rule 18. Further, in order to efficiently conduct its meetings and to timely and accurately
respond to questions from residents and non-residents, if a question is likely to
require Staff investigation of any kind, the person seeking to ask the question is
asked to first address it to the appropriate member of the Village’s Staff during
normal Village business hours. If the question is first addressed to the Village
Board at a public meeting and/or the Staff has not yet completed its investigation,
the Village President shall without further discussion (unless further discussion is
agreed to by the Village Board) refer the question to the Staff for appropriate input
and it will be responded to either directly to the person asking the question during
normal Village business hours or at an appropriate future Board meeting.
(Added by A-781-01-15)
Sec. 2.68. Meetings Open to Public
All regular or special meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be open to the public except when the
Board of Trustees holds a closed session or meeting, or portion thereof, in accordance with the Open
Meetings Act.
2-12-1
ARTICLE XII. BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 2.69. Appointment
There is hereby established a Board of Local Improvements for the Village which shall consist of the
Village President, who shall be the President of the Board of Local Improvements, and two members
of the Board of Trustees, who shall be designated by Ordinance approved by the Board of Trustees.
(A-781-1-01)
Sec. 2.70. Meetings - Powers and Duties
The Board of Local Improvements shall meet upon the call of the President. Twenty-four hours notice
of such meeting shall be given to each member provided that a meeting may be held when all
members are present without such notice providing all other legal notices have been given as required
by the Open Meetings Act. The Board of Local Improvements shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by the statutes of the State of Illinois.
2-13-1
ARTICLE XIII. LEGAL COUNSEL
Sec. 2.71. Legal Counsel
Legal counsel shall be retained by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees
to advise the Village on legal matters, to prosecute and defend legal actions, and draft legal
documents and furnish opinions. Said counsel shall be retained from time to time at the will of the
Board of Trustees for such compensation as they shall determine.
2-14-1
ARTICLE XIV. MUNICIPAL BUDGET ACT
Sec. 2.72. Adoption of Municipal Budget Act
The provisions of Sections 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois Municipal Code (Ill. Comp. Stat.
Chapter 64, Sections 8-2.9.1 through 8.2-9.10) (The "Municipal Budget Act") are hereby adopted in
lieu of the provisions of state law in connection with the adoption of an annual appropriations
ordinance, with such adoption to be effective at the beginning of the 1990-91 fiscal year of the Village.
The municipal budget officer shall be appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees, and shall take the oath and post the bond as required in Section 3-14-3 of
Chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. Such budget officer shall serve at the pleasure of the
Board of Trustees, and shall have the powers and duties set forth in Section 8-2-9.2 and 8-2-9.3 of
Chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time. The
passage of the annual budget, any revisions thereof, and all other matters relating thereto shall comply
with the provisions of the Municipal Budget Act.
Sec. 2.73. Preparation of Budget
The budget officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenues available to
the Village for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures
for the Village and all of the Village's departments, commissions and boards. Revenue estimates and
expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal
management practices and Section 8-2-9.3 of the Municipal Budget Act. The budget shall contain
actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two years immediately preceding the fiscal year
for which the budget is prepared. Said budget shall be adopted prior to May 1 of each fiscal year.
Sec. 2.74. Revisions to Budget and Delegation of Authority
The Board of Trustees may delegate authority to heads of Village departments, boards or
commissions to delete, add to or change or create sub-classes within object classes budgeted
previously to the department, board or commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for prior
approval by the budget officer as the Board of Trustees, upon a two-thirds vote of the Board of
Trustees, then holding office, may establish. By a vote of two-thirds of the members of the Board of
Trustees then holding office, the annual budget may be revised by deleting, adding to, changing or
creating sub-classes within object classes and object classes themselves. No revision of the budget
shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of
the revision.
2-15-1
ARTICLE XV. STATE OFFICIALS EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
(added by A-781-02-04)
Sec. 2.75. Adoption of State Act
The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40)
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the
“Act” in this Section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and
employees of the Village to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
Sec. 2.76 Solicitation of Gifts
The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act, by any
officer or any employee of the Village, is hereby prohibited.
A. Prohibition on Campaign Contributions. No elected official in the Village of Burr Ridge
shall accept any campaign contributions, as defined in Section 9-1.4 of the Illinois Election
Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4) and applicable regulations (26 Ill. Adm. Code Part 100), from any
person, applicant, liquor manager or entity listed on a Village of Burr Ridge liquor license
application which has been approved or is currently pending. This prohibition does not
apply to Class I Special Event Retailer licensees under this Code.
B. Prohibition on Sales from Commissioner. The Liquor Control Commissioner and
members of his/her immediate family may not sell or offer to sell to any person or entity
holding or applying for a liquor license, any product, thing or service which may be used by
the licensee in carrying on the licensed business. Immediate family (for purposes of this
subsection) shall mean the spouse, children, son-in-law or daughter-in-law, parent, parentin-
law or sibling or the Liquor Control Commissioner.
C. Gifts Included. In addition to those items defined as “Gifts” under Section 1-5 of the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/1-5), the term “Gift” is hereby defined to
further include the opportunity for the Liquor Control Commissioner or his/her immediate
family, to sell any product, thing or service, to a liquor licensee or applicant, with any
resultant benefit or profit to the Liquor Control Commissioner or his/her immediate family.
(Amended by Ordinance A-781-02-13)
Sec. 2.77 Offering of Gifts
The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the Village
under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 2.78 Participation in Prohibited Political Activities
The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by any officer or employee of the
Village, is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 2.79 Officer and Employee Defined
For purposes of this Section, the terms “officer” and “employee” shall be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS
430/70-5(c).
2-15-2
Sec. 2.80 Penalties
To the extent allowed by law, the penalties for violations of this Section shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
Sec. 2.81 Other Ordinances and Policies
This Section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which
regulate the conduct of Village officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing
ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this Section, however, the provisions of this Section
shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5 (a).
Sec. 2.82 Further Amendments to State Act
Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective date of this Section shall be
incorporated into this Section by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance,
offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Section by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village.
Sec. 2.83 Repealer if State Act Declared Unconstitutional
If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Section shall be
repealed as of the date that the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any
further appeals or rehearings. This Section shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
Corporate Authorities of the Village if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
Sec. 2.84 Partial Repealer
If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of
the remainder of the Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act
as adopted by this Section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this Section
relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the Village.
2-16-1
ARTICLE XVI. LOCAL GOVERNMENT TRAVEL EXPENSE CONTROL ACT
(Added by A-781-01-16)
Sec. 2.85 Definitions
Entertainment includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters, circuses, sporting events,
or any other place of public or private entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of
the program of event.
Public Business means expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose which is
required or useful for the benefit of the Village to carry out the responsibilities of Village business.
Travel means any expenditure directly incident to official travel by elected officials, officers and
employees of the Village, or by wards or charges of the Village, involving reimbursement to
travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing transportation or related services.
Sec. 2.86 Allowable Expenses
The Village shall only reimburse travel, meal and lodging expenses incurred by its elected officials,
officers and employees up to the maximum allowable amounts approved in the current year budget
or approved in advance by the Village Board, based upon and subject to the guidance established
in the Village’s Personnel Manual and Reimbursement Policy for Elected and Appointed Officials.
Sec. 2.87 Non-Allowable Expenses
No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by an elected Village official, officer
or employee shall be authorized unless the “Travel, Meal and Lodging Expenses Reimbursement
Request Form” provided by the Village has been submitted and approved. All documents and
information submitted with the form shall be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information
Act (5ILCS 140/1 et seq.).
Sec. 2.88 Alcohol
Alcohol is specifically excluded from reimbursement.
Sec. 2.89 Entertainment
The Village shall not reimburse any elected official, officer or employee for any activities which
would be considered entertainment. Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment,
but which are excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose
of the program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI Local
Government Travel Expense Control Act.
Sec. 2.90 Expenses Exceeding Maximum Allowances
Expenses for travel, meals and lodging of: (1) any elected official, officer or employee that exceeds
the maximum reimbursement allowed under the regulations adopted under Sec. 2.86 of this
Ordinance or (2) any member of the Village Board of the Village may only be approved by roll call
vote at an open meeting of the Village Board of the Village. However, in the event of an
emergency or other extraordinary circumstances, the Village Board may approve more than the
maximum allowable expenses set forth above.
2-17-1
ARTICLE XVII PSEBA (Public Safety Employee Benefits Act) Benefit Administration.
(added by A-781-01-17)
Sec. 2.91. Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to provide a fair and efficient method of determining the eligibility of a
Village employee for the benefits enumerated under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act, 820
ILCS 320/1, et seq., as amended (“PSEBA”). All benefits provided by the Village to employees
pursuant to the PSEBA shall be consistent with the PSEBA.
Sec. 2.92 Policy and Procedure for Administering Applications for PSEBA Benefits
A. Employees, or family member(s) of injured or deceased employees, who may quality for
PSEBA benefits must file a full and complete application in writing with the Village
Administrator.
B. A complete application shall include the following:
1. The applicant’s name and date of hire, detailed information regarding the incident for
which PSEBA benefits are sought, including information relating to how the injury
was sustained in the line of duty, including the date, time, place, nature of injury, and
other factual circumstances surrounding the incident.
2. The applicant’s firsthand knowledge explaining, to the Village’s satisfaction, how the
injury directly resulted from:
a. Response to fresh pursuit;
b. Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
c. Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
d. The investigation of a criminal act.
3. A signed unconditional PSEBA medical authorization release which authorizes the
Village to collect information related to the incident including, but not limited to,
disability pension proceedings, worker’s compensation records, and medical
records, and a complete list of the names and addresses for all health care providers
involved in the diagnosis, treatment, review or handling of the injury for which
PSEBA benefits are sought.
4. A signed unconditional PSEBA general information release specifying the name and
signature of the applicant or her/his authorized representative along with legal proof
of said representation and name and signature of witness authorizing the collection
of information necessary to review the application.
5. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses to the incident resulting
in the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought, along with any statements of the
witnesses which the applicant possesses, may obtain or is aware of.
6. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses the applicant intends to
call at the PSEBA hearing, along with their anticipated subjects of testimony and any
opinions the witnesses are expected to give.
2-17-2
7. Information and documentation filed with the Burr Ridge Police Pension Fund Board.
8. Information regarding other sources of health insurance benefits currently enrolled
in, received by, or available to the applicant and/or the applicant’s family members,
including the source of the benefits and the benefits provided or available.
9. Any other information supporting the PSEBA eligibility requirements.
C. The PSEBA application must be sworn to by the applicant and notarized to certify the
truthfulness of the application’s contents.
D. On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the Village, the completed
application shall then be submitted to the Village Administrator as the preliminary record,
and a copy of the same shall be date stamped and provided to the applicant.
E. Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the Village Administrator shall
set the matter for an administrative hearing before a hearing officer to make a determination
on whether to grant the application and provide the applicant with benefits under the
PSEBA.
F. The applicant shall be given written notice of the date for the administrative hearing not less
than ten (10) calendar days prior to the commencement of the hearing. If the applicant,
upon receiving written notice of the administrative hearing, cannot attend said date, the
applicant must contact the hearing officer in writing within seven (7) calendar days after
being served. The hearing officer shall establish an alternative hearing date within thirty (30)
calendar days of the original hearing date. The applicant’s failure to appear at the
administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA benefits.
G. The Village Administrator may delegate any of his/her authority, duties and obligations under
this Article XVII of Chapter 2 of the Municipal Code, in whole or part, to a designee, or
designees.
Sec 2.93 Policy and Procedure for Hearings for PSEBA Benefits
A. Hearing Officer: The Village Administrator shall be the hearing officer for hearings on
applications for PSEBA benefits. The hearing officer shall have all of the authorities granted
under the statute and common law relative to the conduct of administrative hearings,
including to:
1. Adopt, revise and enforce rules of procedure for hearings;
2. Preside over hearings;
3. Administer oaths;
4 Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of eligibility under
PSEBA;
5. Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
papers or documents upon the request of the applicant, the Village, the hearing
officer;
2-17-3
6. Rule upon objections to the admissibility of evidence;
7. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits in evidence
introduced at the hearing; and
8. Issue a final determination on applications for PSEBA benefits based on the
evidence presented at the hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and
shall include a written finding of fact, decision and order.
B. Hearing: Hearing for the determination of eligibility for benefits under PSEBA shall be
initiated by the Village after the submission of a full and complete PSEBA application, and a
determination by the hearing officer that it is appropriate to proceed with the hearing, which
determination shall include consideration of the status of any disability pension proceeding
related to the applicant and whether the disability pension proceeding has resulted in a final
and non-appealable decision. A hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether
the applicant is eligible for benefits under the PSEBA. If the applicant is found eligible, the
PSEBA benefits provided to the applicant shall be consistent with the PSEBA.
1. Record: Hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter, and a transcript of all
proceedings shall be made by said certified court reporter
2. Procedures: The Village and the applicant shall be entitled to representation by
counsel at hearings and may present witnesses, testimony and documents, may
cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance by the hearing
officer of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the
production of relevant documents. The hearing officer may issue subpoenas to
compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents
in his/her discretion.
3. Evidence: The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the extent practicable unless,
by such application, the hearing officer determines that application of the rule would
be an injustice or preclude the introduction of evidence of the type commonly relied
upon by a reasonably prudent person in the conduct of her/his affairs. Such
determination shall be in the sole discretion of the hearing officer.
4. Final Determination: A written determination by the hearing officer of whether the
applicant is eligible benefits under the PSEBA shall constitute a final administrative
determination for the purpose of judicial review under the common law writ of
certiorari. Motions to reconsider, set aside or challenge the final determination of the
hearing officer are not permitted.
5. Burden of Proof: At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall have the obligation
and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is eligible and qualified to receive
PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all hearings be by the preponderance of
the evidence.
Sec. 2.94: Eligibility for PSEBA Benefits:
A. Basic Group Insurance Plan: If an applicant is determined to be eligible for PSEBA benefits,
the applicant will be eligible to receive continued health coverage consistent with the PSEBA
under the Village’s basic group health insurance plan. The basic group health insurance
plan shall be the least expensive health plan offered to Village employees at the time
2-17-4
PSEBA benefits are awarded as determined solely by the Village from time to time. PSEBA
benefits do not include benefits not provided in the Village’s basic group health insurance
plan, such as, but not limited to, dental, vision, life insurance, etc.
B. Reduction or Elimination of PSEBA Benefits by Other Health Coverage: If an applicant
becomes eligible to receive health insurance benefits from any other source, including, but
not limited to, Medicare, the applicant’s PSEBA coverage may be reduced or eliminated as
determined by the Village consistent with PSEBA.
C. Affidavit of Continued PSEBA Eligibility: All recipients of PSEBA benefits from the Village
shall complete and return to the Village Administrator on an annual basis an affidavit
verifying the recipient’s continued eligibility for PSEBA benefits. The affidavit must be
completed and returned to the Village Administrator within (60) calendar days of written
notice from the Village. If the recipient does not complete and return the affidavit within the
time required, the Village Administrator shall give the recipient an additional written notice
providing an additional thirty (30) calendar days for the recipient to complete and return the
affidavit. Failure to return the affidavit within the time required shall result in the recipient
incurring responsibility for reimbursing the Village for premiums paid during the period the
affidavit is due and not filed.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 3
COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
ARTICLE I. Plan Commission
Sec. 1.1 Plan Commission Creation, Term and Powers
Sec. 1.2 Additional Powers
Sec. 1.3 Procedures
Sec. 1.4 Zoning Board of Appeals
Sec. 1.5 Alternate Member
ARTICLE II. Zoning Board of Appeals
Sec. 2.1 Zoning Board of Appeals, Creation, Term and Powers
ARTICLE III. Board of Fire and Police Commission
Sec. 3.1 Board of Fire and Police Commission Creation, Term and Powers
Sec. 3.2 Qualification and Removal of Members
Sec. 3.3 Organization of the Board
Sec. 3.4 Regular and Special Meetings
Sec. 3.5 Quorum
Sec. 3.6 Required Vote
Sec. 3.7 Meetings Open to the Public
Sec. 3.8 Compensation of Members
Sec. 3.9 Annual Report and Budget Request
Sec. 3.10 Appointments to Police Department
Sec. 3.11 Compliance with Laws
ARTICLE IV. Board of Police Pension Fund
Sec. 4.1 Board of Police Pension Fund Creation and Term
Sec. 4.2 Board Meetings
Sec. 4.3 Vice-President and Assistant Secretary
Sec. 4.4 Powers and Duties of Board
Sec. 4.5 Quorum
Sec. 4.6 Required Vote
Sec. 4.7 Meetings Open to the Public
Sec. 4.8 Annual List of Fund Payments
Sec. 4.9 Adoption of Rules
Sec. 4.10 Treasurer's Annual Report
Sec. 4.11 Report of Condition of Fund
Sec. 4.12 Compliance with Laws
ARTICLE V. Pathway Commission
Sec. 5.1 Pathway Commission Creation, Term and Alternate Member
Sec. 5.2 Chairperson
Sec. 5.3 Regular and Special Meetings
Sec. 5.4 Quorum
Sec. 5.5 Required Vote
Sec. 5.6 Meetings Open to the Public
Sec. 5.7 Duties
ARTICLE VI. E-9-1-1 Board
Sec. 6.1 Creation of Board
Sec. 6.2 Board Membership
Sec. 6.3 Quorum
Sec. 6.4 Required Vote
Sec. 6.5 Meetings Open to the Public
Sec. 6.6 Powers and Duties
Sec. 6.7 Emergency Telephone System Fund
ARTICLE VII. Canvassing Board
Sec. 7.1 Canvassing Board Created
Sec. 7.2 Chairperson
Sec. 7.3 Special Meetings
Sec. 7.4 Quorum
Sec. 7.5 Required Vote
Sec. 7.6 Meetings Open to the Public
Sec. 7.7 Duties
ARTICLE VIII. Environmental Quality Commission
(section added by A-678-1-97)
Sec. 8.1 Environmental Quality Commission Creation and Term
Sec. 8.2 Chairperson
Sec. 8.3 Regular and Special Meetings
Sec. 8.4 Quorum
Sec. 8.5 Required Vote
Sec. 8.6 Meetings Open to the Public
Sec. 8.7 Duties of the Commission
Last Revision A-678-01-15, 3-23-15
ARTICLE I. Plan Commission
Sec. 1.1 Plan Commission Creation, Term and Powers
The Plan Commission of the Village of Burr Ridge has been established under the provisions of the
Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, and all powers, functions and duties of said Plan Commission, and all
other matters relating thereto, are set forth in said Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance and such provisions
are herein incorporated by reference as a part of this Article I of Chapter 3.
Sec. 1.2 Additional Powers
The members of the Plan Commission, with the exception of the alternate member, shall each have
one vote on matters before it. The right to vote of the alternate member shall be as set forth in Section
1.5. In addition to those powers and duties set forth in the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, the
Commission shall have the following additional powers and duties:
A. Preparation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees of a Comprehensive Plan which
shall provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the inhabitants of Burr Ridge
and contiguous territory within one and one-half miles of its borders and the area within such
Comprehensive Plan may be adopted by ordinance as the official map of Burr Ridge. Such
plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which,
when adopted shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of Burr Ridge. Such
plan shall be advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by
ordinances duly enacted by the Board of Trustees. All requirements for public hearing, filing
of notice of adoption with the County Recorder of Deeds and filing of said plan and
ordinances with the Village Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by law;
B. Preparation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees of reasonable standards for
design of subdivisions governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets
and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street
lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection
and treatment:
C. Preparation and recommendation to the Board of Trustees of plans for specific
improvements in pursuance of/or changes in the Comprehensive Plan;
D. To aid Village officials in furthering improvements in keeping with the Plan and generally
promoting the realization of the Plan;
E. To arrange publicity concerning the Commission's activities to promote public
understanding;
F. To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or
groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated
planning for the area;
G. To exercise such other powers as are granted under Illinois statutes and as may be
conferred by the Village of Burr Ridge; and
H. To serve as the Zoning Board of Appeals with powers and duties as outlined in the Burr
Ridge Zoning Ordinance. (A-678-2-90)
3-1-1
Sec. 1.3 Procedures
The Plan Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as are consistent with Village ordinances
and State statutes. All Plan Commission meetings shall be recorded in written records which shall be
open to public inspection. The Plan Commission shall make recommendations as follows:
A. On subdivision development with the result that no plat of subdivision or resubdivision shall
be entitled to be recorded unless it complies with the provisions of the Village's Subdivision
Regulations Ordinance and also the standards of design of the Comprehensive Plan and
the official map as developed by the Plan Commission and as adopted by the Board of
Trustees.
B. On public improvements based on ordinances, plans and data furnished by the Village
relative to public improvements as it deems necessary for the consideration of the Board of
Trustees. (A-678-2-90)
Sec. 1.4 Zoning Board of Appeals
The members of the Plan Commission shall serve as members of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the
same capacity and for the same term of office as they serve on the Plan Commission. The Plan
Commission of the Village of Burr Ridge shall perform all of the duties provided for by ordinance and
by statutes of the State of Illinois reserved for the Zoning Board of Appeals. Procedures and
regulations pertaining to the operation of the Plan Commission as the Zoning Board of Appeals and all
powers, functions and duties thereto are set forth in the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance and are
incorporated by reference as part of this Article I of Chapter 3 of this Code. (A-678-2-90)
Sec. 1.5 Alternate Member
In addition, the President of the Board of Trustees, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees,
will appoint one additional member to the Plan Commission who shall be an alternate member of the
Plan Commission as follows. Such alternate shall be an ex-officio member of the Plan Commission
without power to vote when the full Plan Commission is at a particular meeting, but with full power to
participate in discussions before the Plan Commission. If any member of the Plan Commission is
absent at any meeting of the Plan Commission, the alternate Plan Commission member shall have the
power to vote on all matters before the Plan Commission at such meeting, and to participate in such
meeting as fully as if he or she was a full-time member of such Commission, including being counted
for purposes of determining a quorum. It is the intent of this provision that the alternate Plan
Commission member shall be appointed to eliminate the problems involved with reaching decisions on
matters before the Plan Commission because of absences occurring during meetings from time to
time. The term of the alternate Plan Commissioner shall be for a period of three (3) years from the
date of such member's appointment, or such lesser term as may be established by the Village
President in making the appointment of such alternate Plan Commission member.(678-2-90)
3-1-2
ARTICLE II. Zoning Board of Appeals
Sec. 2.1 Zoning Board of Appeals, Creation, Term and Powers
The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Burr Ridge has been established under the provisions of
the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, and all powers, functions and duties of said Zoning Board of
Appeals, and all other matters relating thereto, are set forth in said Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance and
such provisions are herein incorporated by reference as a part of this Article II of Chapter 3.
3-2-1
ARTICLE III. Board of Fire and Police Commission
(Article III added by A-678-1-90)
Sec. 3.1. Board of Fire and Police Commission Creation, Term and Powers
There is hereby created for the Village a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, which Board shall
function in conformity with Division 2.1 of Article 10 of Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised Statutes
(Ill.Rev.Stats., Ch. 124, Section 10-2.1 et seq.). Said Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
consist of three members, all of whom shall be appointed by the President, with the consent of the
Board of Trustees.
Any vacancies on the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be filled for the unexpired
remainder of the term of any member whose place has become vacant by appointment by the
President, by and with the consent of the Village Board.
Sec. 3.2. Qualification and Removal of Members
Of the three members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, all shall be residents of the
Village, and shall be considered officers of the Village, and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in such
amount as may be required by the President and Board of Trustees.
No person holding an office under the Village shall be a member of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners or the Secretary thereof. The acceptance of any such office by a member of the
Board shall be treated as a resignation of his or her office as a member of the Board or the Secretary
thereof. No person shall be appointed a member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners who
is related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the
Village. No more than two members of said Board shall belong to the same political party existing in
the Village at the time of such appointments and as defined in Section 10-2 of the State Election Code.
If only one or no political party exists in the Village at the time of such appointments, then State or
national political party affiliations shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation
shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the Board.
Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written charges, and after an
opportunity to be heard within thirty days in his, her or their own defense, before a regular meeting of
the Board of Trustees of the Village. A majority vote of the elected members of such governing body
shall be required to remove any such member from office.
Sec. 3.3. Organization of the Board
A. Chairman: At the first meeting in May of each and every year, the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall elect one of its members as Chairman of the Board for a one-year
term, or until such member's successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
B. Secretary: The said Board may employ a secretary or may designate one of its own
members to act as such. The Secretary shall keep the minutes of the Board's proceedings,
shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the Board, shall keep a record
of all examinations held and shall perform such other duties as the Board shall prescribe.
The Secretary shall receive as compensation for services a sum of money as determined by
the President and Board of Trustees.
Sec. 3.4. Regular and Special Meetings
The Board shall, in its discretion, establish a schedule of regular meetings, and shall give notice of
3-3-1
such schedule of regular meetings in accordance with the Open Meetings Act of the State of Illinois.
Special meetings of the Board may be called either by the chairperson or any two members of the
Board. Written notice of such special meeting shall be given to all members of the Board at least 24
hours in advance of any such special meeting unless such written notice is waived. In addition, notice
of such special meetings will also be given in conformance with the requirements of the Open
Meetings Act of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 3.5. Quorum
A majority of the Board constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all business.
Sec. 3.6. Required Vote
The vote required of the Board to approve any action shall be a majority of those present and voting at
any regular or special meeting provided that a quorum exists at any such regular or special meeting.
Sec. 3.7. Meetings Open to the Public
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public in accordance with the Open Meetings Act of the
State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided in said Open Meetings Act, and any person attending
any meeting shall have the right to be heard at the time and in the manner as approved by the Board.
The Board's secretary shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the Board, showing the vote of each
member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep all
other records of its official actions.
Sec. 3.8. Compensation of Members
No member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, except its Secretary, shall be paid any
compensation by the Village for the member's services.
Sec. 3.9. Annual Report and Budget Request
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall submit to the President a report on its activities and
of its rules in force, the practical effect thereof, and any suggestions which the Board believes would
result in greater efficiency in the Police Department, annually prior to the month of May of each and
every year. The Village President shall transmit such annual report to the Board of Trustees. The
Board shall also submit an annual budget request to the Village Board prior to the end of each fiscal
year.
Sec. 3.10. Appointments to Police Department
Appointment of the Chief of Police shall be made by the President and Board of Trustees pursuant to
authority granted by Section 10-2.1-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4. Appointment
to the exempt rank of Deputy Chief of Police shall be made by the Chief of Police as provided in
Section 2.41, Article VII, Chapter 2, of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code. The Board of Police
Commissioners shall make all other appointments in the Police Department pursuant to said Section
10-2.1-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4. (amended by A-678-01-03)
Sec. 3.11. Compliance with Laws
All actions and meetings of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be conducted in
accordance with all applicable Statutes of the State of Illinois now in force or hereafter enacted.
3-3-2
Article IV. Board of Police Pension Fund
Sec. 4.1 Board of Police Pension Fund Creation and Term
There is hereby created for the Village a Board of the Police Pension Fund, which Board shall function
in conformity with the provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 108 1/2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes
(Ill.Rev.Stats., Ch. 108 1/2, Section 3-101 et seq.). Said Board shall consist of five members who shall
administer the Pension Fund of the Police Department of the Village and designate the beneficiaries
thereof.
Two members of the Board shall be appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees of the Village.
The third and fourth members of the Board shall be elected from the active participants of the Pension
Fund by such active participants. The fifth member shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries of
the Pension Fund.
The election for Board members shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April at such place or
places in the Village and under the Australian ballot system and such other regulations as shall be
prescribed by the appointed members of the Board. The active Pension Fund participants shall be
entitled to vote only for the active participant members of the Board. All beneficiaries of legal age may
vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast
more than one ballot at such election. The term of the elected members shall be two years, beginning
on the second Tuesday of May after the election. The term of the remaining members of the Board
shall also be for two years beginning on the second Tuesday in May of each year, or until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any elected Board member, his or her successor shall
be elected for the unexpired term in a special election to be called by the Board and conducted in the
same manner as the regular biennial election.
Members of the Board shall neither receive nor have any right to receive any salary from the Pension
Fund for services performed as Trustees in that office.
Sec. 4.2. Board Meetings
Each year the Board shall hold regular quarterly meetings in July, October, January and April, and
special meetings as called by the President.
At the regular July meeting, the Board shall select from its members a President, Vice-President,
Secretary, and Assistant Secretary to serve for one year and until their respective successors are
elected and qualified.
Sec. 4.3. Vice-President and Assistant Secretary
The Vice-President shall perform the duties of President during any vacancy in that office, or during
the President's absence from the Village, or if the President by reason of illness or other cause is
unable to perform the duties of the office.
The Assistant Secretary shall act for the Secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of
such office.
Sec. 4.4. Powers and Duties of Board
3-4-1
The Board shall have the powers and duties stated in Sections 3-132 through 3-140.1 of Chapter 108
1/2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes in addition to the other powers and duties provided under Article 3
of Chapter 108 1/2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
Sec. 4.5. Quorum
A majority of the Board constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all business.
Sec. 4.6. Required Vote
The vote required of the Board to approve any action shall be a majority of those present and voting at
any regular or special meeting provided that a quorum exists at any such regular or special meeting.
Sec. 4.7. Meetings Open to the Public
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public in accordance with the Open Meetings Act of the
State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided in said Open Meetings Act, and any person attending
any meeting shall have the right to be heard at the time and in the manner as approved by the Board.
The Board's secretary shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the Board, showing the vote of each
member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep all
other records of its official actions.
Sec. 4.8. Annual List of Fund Payments
The Board shall submit to the Board of Trustees of the Village at the close of the Village's fiscal year a
list of persons entitled to payments from the Fund, stating the amount of payments, and their purpose,
as ordered by the Board. It shall also include items of income accrued to the Fund during the fiscal
year. This annual list shall be signed by the President and Secretary of the Board and attested under
oath. A resolution or order for the payment of money shall not be valid unless approved by the
majority of the Board members, and signed by the President and Secretary of the Board.
Sec. 4.9. Adoption of Rules
The Board shall adopt such necessary rules and regulations in conformity with the provisions of Article
3 of Chapter 108 1/2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, and shall publish and transmit copies of all such
rules from time to time to all pensioners and contributors to the Fund.
Sec. 4.10. Treasurer's Annual Report
On the second Tuesday in May of each year, the Treasurer and all other officials of the Village who
had the custody of any pension funds, shall make a sworn statement to the Pension Board and to the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village, of all monies received and paid out by them or on
account of the Pension Fund during the year, and the amount of funds then on hand and owing to the
Pension Fund. All surplus funds then remaining with any official other than the Treasurer shall be paid
to the Treasurer of the Village. Upon demand of the Pension Board, any official shall furnish a
statement relative to the official method of collection or handling of the pension funds. All books and
records of that official shall be produced at any time by such official for examination and inspection by
the Board.
Sec. 4.11. Report of Condition of Fund
The Board shall report to the Board of Trustees of the Village on the condition of the Pension Fund,
3-4-2
which report shall be made prior to the Board meeting held for the levying of taxes for the year for
which the report is made. In such report, the Board shall certify:
1. The assets in its custody at such time;
2. The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year from deductions
from the salaries of police officers, and from all other sources; and
3. The estimated amount required during said calendar year to (a) pay all pensions
and other obligations provided in Article 3 of Chapter 108 1/2 of the Illinois
Revised Statutes, and (b) to meet the annual requirements of the Fund as
provided in Section 3-125 of Chapter 108 1/2 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
Sec. 4.12. Compliance with Laws
All actions and meetings of the Board of Police Pension Fund shall be conducted in accordance with
all applicable Statutes of the State of Illinois now in force or hereafter enacted.
(Article IV added by A-678-1-90)
3-4-3
ARTICLE V. Pathway Commission
Sec. 5.1 Pathway Commission Creation, Term and Alternate Member
A. There is hereby created a Pathway Commission for the Village of Burr Ridge. This Board
shall consist of seven (7) voting members to be appointed by the Village President, subject
to approval of the Village Board.
B. The term of office of this Commission shall be for a period of three (3) years; however,
members appointed at the onset shall be for the following:
Three (3) members for a three-year term;
Three (3) members for a two-year term; and
Three (3) members for a one-year term (prior to 1997 amendment, the Commission
consisted of a total of 9)
Successors shall be appointed for three-year terms.
C. In addition, the Village President, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, will
appoint one additional member to the Pathway Commission who shall be an alternate
member of the Pathway Commission. Such alternate shall be an ex-officio member of the
Pathway Commission without power to vote when the full Pathway Commission is at a
particular meeting, but with full power to participate in discussions before the Pathway
Commission. If any member of the Pathway Commission is absent at any meeting of the
Pathway Commission, the alternate Pathway Commission member shall have the power to
vote on all matters before the Pathway Commission at such meeting, and to participate in
such meeting as fully as if he or she was a full-time member of such Commission, including
being counted for purposes of determining a quorum. It is the intent of this provision that the
alternate Pathway Commission member shall be appointed to eliminate the problems
involved with reaching decisions on matters before the Pathway Commission because of
absences occurring during meetings from time to time. The term of the alternate Pathway
Commission member shall be for a period of three (3) years from the date of such member's
appointment, or such lesser term as may be established by the Village President in making
the appointment of such alternate Pathway Commission member. (A-678-2-97)
Sec. 5.2 Chairperson
The President shall annually designate from the membership of said Pathway Commission a
chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary whose terms as such chairperson, vice-chairperson and
secretary respectively shall be for one (1) year each, except those first appointed shall serve in such
office until April 30, 1991.
Sec. 5.3 Regular and Special Meetings
The Commission shall, in its discretion, establish a schedule of regular meetings, and shall give notice
of such schedule of regular meetings in accordance with the Open Meetings Act of the State of Illinois.
Special meetings of the Commission may be called either by the chairperson or any three members of
the Commission. Written notice of such special meeting shall be given to all members of the
Commission at least 24 hours in advance of any such special meeting unless such written notice is
waived. In addition, notice of such special meetings will also be given in conformance with the
3-5-1
requirements of the Open Meetings Act of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 5.4 Quorum
The presence of the lessor of any four members of the Commission or a majority of the
Commissioners as may be appointed at any given time, shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
conducting any of the business of the Commission. If any member of the Pathway Commission is
absent at any meeting, the alternate Pathway Commission member may be counted for the purposes
of determining a quorum as set forth in Section 5.1. (A-678-01-15)
Sec. 5.5 Required Vote
The vote required of the Commission to approve any action shall be a majority of those present and
voting at any such regular or special meeting provided that a quorum exists at any such regular or
special meeting. The right of the alternate member to vote shall be as set forth in Section 5.1. (A-678-
2-97)
Sec. 5.6 Meetings Open to the Public
All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public in accordance with the Open Meetings Act
of the State of Illinois, and any person attending any meeting shall have the right to be heard at the
time and in the manner as approved by the Commission. The Commission's secretary shall keep
minutes of the proceedings of the Commission, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep all other records of its
official actions.
Sec. 5.7 Duties
It shall be the duty of said Pathway Commission to:
1. Develop and maintain a master plan for the development of hard surface, multi-use
pathways throughout the Village which will connect schools, community and recreation
centers, subdivisions and neighborhood shopping centers and which promote the need for
accessibility, safety and beautification.
2. Study all ordinances proposed by the President and Board of Trustees pertaining to hard
surface pathways. All proposed ordinances relating to hard surface pathways shall first be
referred to the Pathway Commission for its recommendations; provided, however, that this
requirement may be waived at any time in respect to any particular proposed ordinance by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Village Board Trustees then holding office.
3. To hold public hearings from time to time in relation to any matter pertaining to hard surface
pathways to obtain citizen input and generate interest in the community.
4. To report its findings and recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees from
time to time in writing.
3-5-2
ARTICLE VI. E-9-1-1 Board
Sec. 6.1. Creation of Board
An Emergency Telephone System Board shall be and is hereby established by the Corporate
Authorities of the Village.
Sec. 6.2. Board Membership
The Board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the Village President with the
consent of the Board of Trustees of the Village on the basis of their ability or experience. Members of
the Emergency Telephone System Board shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed
for their actual necessary expenses. Members of the Board shall serve for a term of one year.
Sec. 6.3. Quorum
A majority of the Board constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all business.
Sec. 6.4. Required Vote
The vote required of the Board to approve any action shall be a majority of those present and voting at
any regular or special meeting provided that a quorum exists at any such regular or special meeting.
Sec. 6.5. Meetings Open to the Public
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public in accordance with the Open Meetings Act of the
State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided in said Open Meetings Act, and any person attending
any meeting shall have the right to be heard at the time and in the manner as approved by the Board.
The Board's secretary shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the Board, showing the vote of each
member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep all
other records of its official actions.
Sec. 6.6. Powers and Duties
The Emergency Telephone System Board shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Planning a 9-1-1 system;
2. Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading or maintenance of
the system, including the establishment of equipment specifications and coding
systems;
3. Receiving monies from the surcharge imposed by Village Ordinance No. 615, as
amended, and from any other source, for deposit into the Emergency Telephone
System Fund ("the Fund");
4. Authorizing all disbursements from the Fund; and
5. Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for the implementation or
upgrade of the system.
Sec. 6.7. Emergency Telephone System Fund
All monies received by the Emergency Telephone System Board pursuant to a surcharge imposed
under Village Ordinance No. 615, as amended, shall be deposited into an Emergency Telephone
System Fund. The Treasurer of the Village shall be custodian of the Fund. All interest accruing on the
Fund shall remain in the Fund. No expenditures may be made from such Fund except upon the
3-6-1
direction of the Emergency Telephone System Board by resolution passed by a majority of all
members of the Board. Expenditures may be made only to pay for the costs associated with the
following:
1. The design of the Emergency Telephone System;
2. The coding of an initial Master Street Address Guide data base, and update and
maintenance thereof;
3. The repayment of any monies advanced for the implementation of the system;
4. The charges for Automatic Number Identification and Automatic Location
Identification equipment, and maintenance, replacement and update thereof;
5. The non-recurring charges related to the installation of the Emergency Telephone
System and the ongoing network charges; and
6. Other products and services necessary for the implementation, upgrade and
maintenance of the system. However, such costs shall not include personnel or
facilities, nor shall such costs include equipment which is not directly associated
with the 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System.
(Article VI added by A-678-1-90)
3-6-2
ARTICLE VII. Canvassing Board
Sec. 7.1 Canvassing Board Created
A. There is hereby created a Canvassing Board for the Village of Burr Ridge in accordance
with the provisions of the Illinois Election Code. This Board shall consist of the Village
President, the Village Clerk and one Trustee.
B. The Village President shall appoint (without the advice or consent of the Village Board) the
Trustee who shall serve on the Cnavassing Board as elections occur from time to time.
C. The Trustee who is appointed by the Village President shall serve only for the election for
which such Trustee has been appointed to the Canvassing Board. At each separate
election, the Village President shall appoint a Trustee, who may or may not have been the
Trustee appointed for the previous election.
Sec. 7.2 Chairperson
The Village President shall serve as chairperson and the Village Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the
Canvassing Board.
Sec. 7.3 Special Meetings
Special meetings of the Canvassing Board may be called either by the Village President or the Village
Clerk. Written notice of such special meetings shall be given to all members of the Canvassing Board
at least 24 hours in advance of any such special meeting unless such written notice is waived. In
addition, notice of any such special meeting will also be given in conformance with the requirements of
the Open Meetings Act of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 7.4 Quorum
The presence of any two members of the Canvassing Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of conducting any business of the Canvassing Board.
Sec. 7.5 Required Vote
The vote required of the Canvassing Board to approve any action shall be a majority of those present
and voting at any such special meeting provided that a quorum exists at such special meeting.
Sec. 7.6 Meetings Open to the Public
All meetings of the Canvassing Board shall be open to the public in accordance with the Open
Meetings Act of the State of Illinois, and any person attending any meeting shall have the right to be
heard at the time and in the manner as approved by the Canvassing Board. The Canvassing Board's
clerk shall keep minutes of the proceedings of the Canvassing Board, showing the vote of each
member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep all
other records of its official actions.
Sec. 7.7 Duties
It shall be the duty of said Canvassing Board to canvass the results of any general or special election
held by or for the Village of Burr Ridge and perform such other duties as may be required under the
Illinois Election Code and/or Illinois Municipal Code.
(Article VII added by A-678-1-91)
3-7-1
ARTICLE VIII. Environmental Quality Commission
(section added by A-678-1-97)
Sec. 8.1. Environmental Quality Commission Creation and Term
A. There is hereby created an Environmental Quality Commission for the Village of Burr Ridge.
This Commission shall consist of seven (7) voting members to be appointed by the Village
President, subject to approval of the Village Board.
B. The term of office of this Commission shall be for a period of three (3) years; however,
members appointed at the onset shall be for the following:
Three (3) members for a three-year term;
Three (3) members for a two-year term; and
One (1) member for a one-year term.
Successors shall be appointed for three-year terms.
Sec. 8.2. Chairperson
The President shall annually designate from the membership of said Environmental Quality
Commission a chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary whose terms as such chairperson, vicechairperson
and secretary respectively shall be for one (1) year each, except those first appointed
shall serve in such office until April 30, 1998.
Sec. 8.3. Regular and Special Meetings
The Commission shall, in its discretion, establish a schedule of regular meetings, and shall give notice
of such schedule of regular meetings in accordance with the Open Meetings Act of the State of Illinois.
Special meetings of the Commission may be called either by the chairperson or any three members of
the Commission. Written notice of such special meeting shall be given to all members of the
Commission at least 48 hours in advance of any such special meeting unless such written notice is
waived. In addition, notice of such special meetings will also be given in conformance with the
requirements of the Open Meetings Act of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 8.4. Quorum
The presence of any four (4) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
conducting any of the business of the Commission.
Sec. 8.5. Required Vote
The vote required of the Commission to approve any action shall be a majority of those present and
voting at any regular or special meeting provided that a quorum exists at any such regular or special
meeting.
Sec. 8.6. Meetings Open to the Public
All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public in accordance with the Open Meetings Act
3-8-1
of the State of Illinois, and any person attending any meeting shall have the right to be heard at the
time and in the manner as approved by the Commission. The Commission's secretary shall keep
minutes of the proceedings of the Commission, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact and such other information as required under
the Open Meetings Act, and shall also keep all other records of its official actions.
Sec. 8.7. Duties of the Commission
The duties of the Environmental Quality Commission shall be as follows:
1. To make recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees regarding possible ways
to improve, preserve and protect the environment, including all environmental issues
affecting the Village.
2. To advise the President and Board of Trustees of the source of any pollution or
contamination and the name of the person, firm or entity that may be causing
environmental pollution or contamination or that may be violating any statutes, laws, rules,
or regulations either of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or of any federal, state,
county or local agency.
3. After specifically approved by the President and Board of Trustees, to conduct investigations
and/or hold public hearings pertaining to all environmental issues affecting the Village.
4. To make recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees for the adoption of
Ordinances and to prepare and submit to the President and Board of Trustees, or to other
officials with the advice and consent of the President and Board of Trustees, Resolutions
and recommendations concerning local, state and national environmental issues.
5. To make recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees concerning materials,
programs, or other methods of increasing the awareness of the residents of the Village on
environmental issues.
6. To promote and extend cooperation and assistance to any like agencies created for similar
purposes and to promote the formation of similar boards in other communities or areas.
7. To cooperate with other boards and commissions of the Village to maintain and improve the
quality of life for the residents of the Village.
8. To perform such other duties and functions as may be requested of it by the Village Board of
Trustees.
3-8-2
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 4
ALARM SYSTEMS
Sec. 4.01 Purpose
Sec. 4.02 Definitions
Sec. 4.03 Permits Required
Sec. 4.04 Inspection
Sec. 4.05 Restrictions
Sec. 4.06 Revocation
Sec. 4.07 False Alarm Charge
Sec. 4.08 Village Liability Limited
Sec. 4.09 Penalties
Chapter 4 added by Ordinance 673, dated August 13, 1990
4-1
ALARM SYSTEMS
Sec. 4.01 Purpose
The purpose and intent of this ordinance was and is to provide an inducement to alarm users to
improve alarm reliability and to minimize false alarms and to defray a portion of the cost involved in
responding to false alarms.
Sec. 4.02 Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this Ordinance
shall be as follows:
4.02.1 Alarm Equipment Supplier:
Any person, firm or corporation that sells, leases or installs automatic protection devices or
signaling devices which transmit alarms upon receipt of a stimulus from a detection
apparatus or manually operated system.
4.02.2 Alarm User:
Any person, firm or corporation or organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm device is maintained.
4.02.3 Automatic Telephone Dialer:
An electrically operated instrument which automatically delivers a tape recorded voice
message over regular public telephone lines upon detection of intruders to the Burr Ridge
Police Department alarm or emergency lines.
4.02.4 False Alarm:
A visual and/or audible signal transmitted by an alarm device which indicates the existence
of an emergency situation when, in fact, no such emergency exists, and shall include any
activation of an alarm device by whatever means, but shall not include alarms resulting from
the following causes:
1. Criminal activity
2. Flooding, lighting or winds causing structural damage to the protected premise
3. Telephone line malfunction or electrical service interruption verified to the police
department by the utility within seven days
4.02.5 Signaling Device:
An electrically operated instrument which automatically sends a visual and/or audible signal
over a signal line to be registered by indicators at a monitor panel at the receiving terminal
or an instrument which sends a visual and/or audible signal to an indicator, siren or horn
mounted externally on the protected premise.
4-2
Sec. 4.03 Permits Required
No person shall install, operate, or maintain any automatic protection device or signaling device
without first obtaining a permit from the police department. Applications for permits shall be furnished
by the police department and shall be filed by the alarm user with the Chief of Police prior to the permit
being issued. Applications shall contain the name, address, telephone number and emergency
telephone numbers of the alarm user and equipment supplier as well as a description of the device
and the location wherein it is proposed to be installed. All installations shall comply with the Village of
Burr Ridge electrical code.
Sec. 4.04 Inspection
The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the right to inspect any device on the premises where it
is installed or to be used both prior and subsequent to the issuance of a permit at a reasonable time to
determine whether it conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 4.05 Restrictions
Beginning September 1, 1990, no new automatic telephone dialers may be placed in operation.
Automatic telephone dialers in service prior to September 1, 1990, shall be allowed to continue to
operate. It shall be unlawful for any user to operate an automatic telephone dialer except to such
numbers designated by the permit and that the contents of the recorded message shall be intelligible
and in a format appropriate for the nature of the alarm.
Sec. 4.06 Revocation
The Chief of Police or his designee may revoke or suspend any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter after giving written warning to permit holder and an opportunity for the permit
holder to be heard, upon a determination that the term or provisions of the permit or this chapter have
been violated or for failure to pay any applicable service charge of fee.
Sec. 4.07 False Alarm Charge
An alarm user shall be charged a service fee of $50.00 for each false alarm in excess of four in any
one year period, beginning May 1 and ending April 30, transmitted to the Police department by any
alarm device. Such service fee shall be remitted to the Village by the alarm user upon receipt of a
statement for such service fee, except no service charge shall be imposed for the first thirty days from
date of activation of a new alarm.
Sec. 4.08 Village Liability Limited
The Village shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarms received by the police
department are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the
Village shall not be liable for any defects in operation of devices, for any failure or neglect to respond
appropriately upon receipt of an alarm for such source, nor for failure or neglect of any person in
connection with the installation and operation of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals or the
relaying of such signals and messages. The Village shall incur no liability for its actions in the event it
finds it necessary to disconnect a device or revoke or suspend a permit. No special relationship is
entered into or implied between Village and alarm user when a premise is found unsecured and alarm
user cannot be contacted or user refuses to respond when contacted, and the officers leave the scene
of the premises unsecured, the Village or officers shall incur no liability by such action.
4-3
Sec. 4.09 Penalties
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$50.00 nor more than $750.00 for each violation. Such a fine shall be in addition to any other fee or
charge authorized pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(Amended by A-673-1-96)
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 6
ANIMALS
Article I. General Provisions.
Sec. 6-1-1 Cruelty.
Sec. 6-1-2 Dangerous animals.
Sec. 6-1-3 Noises.
Sec. 6-1-4 Prohibited animals.
Sec. 6-1-5 Killing dangerous animals.
Sec. 6-1-6 Diseased animals.
Sec. 6-1-7 Animal Waste.
Article II. Dogs and Cats
Sec. 6-2-1 Definitions.
Sec. 6-2-2 Animal Regulation Officer.
Sec. 6-2-3 Vaccination against rabies.
Sec. 6-2-4 Dogs running at large.
Sec. 6-2-5 Vicious dogs.
Sec. 6-2-6 Impoundment.
Sec. 6-2-7 Redemption or disposal of dogs or cats.
Sec. 6-2-8 Rabies control.
Sec. 6-2-9 Records.
Sec. 6-2-10 Female dogs and cats in heat.
Sec. 6-2-11 Keeping of certain dogs or cats declared a nuisance.
Sec. 6-2-12 Prohibited areas - dogs.
Sec. 6-2-13 Penalty.
Sec. 6-2-14 Payment to avoid prosecution.
6-1-1
ARTICLE I Animals
Sec. 6-1-1 Cruelty.
No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the Village in any way; any person who inhumanely beats,
underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
Sec. 6-1-2 Dangerous Animals.
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or any vicious animal of any kind to run at large
within the Village; exhibitions or parades of animals which are fierce in nature in the eyes of the law
may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the Chief of Police.
Sec. 6-1-3 Noises.
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of
the day or night.
Sec. 6-1-4 Prohibited animals.
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain cattle, swine, sheep or goats in the Village. No other animals
may be maintained in the Village for any purpose other than as pets except as otherwise permitted in
pet shops and animal hospitals.
Sec. 6-1-5 Killing dangerous animals.
The members of the police department, or any other person in an emergency, are authorized to kill
any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.
Sec. 6-1-6 Diseased animals.
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious disease shall be allowed to run
at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected; nor
shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except
under the supervision of the county health officer.
It is the duty of the county health officer to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such
treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of contagion or infection,
except in cases where only the state veterinarian is empowered to act, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with the county health officer or state veterinarian in the furtherance of their duties.
Sec. 6-1-7 Animal waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any animal to be on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by such person unless such person has in his immediate possession
a device for the immediate removal of excrement to a receptacle located upon property owned or
possessed by such person.
It shall be unlawful for any person in control of, causing or permitting any animal to be on any property,
public or private, not owned or possessed by such person to fail to immediately remove excrement left
by such animal to a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person.
6-2-1
ARTICLE II. Dogs and Cats
(section amended by A-231-1-97)
Sec. 6-2-1 Definitions.
Where used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section.
Dogs.
All domestic animals of the canine species.
Cats.
All domestic animals of the feline species.
Owner or keeper.
Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping a dog or cat within the Village either
temporarily or permanently, or permitting a dog or cat to be within the Village either temporarily or
permanently.
Kennel.
Any establishment engaged in the commercial business of breeding, showing, buying, selling or
boarding of dogs and cats.
Animal Regulation Officer.
All members of the Police Department.
Running at Large.
Any dog or cat shall be deemed to be running at large when it is off the premises of its owner or
keeper and not under adequate restraint of a competent person. A dog or cat is under adequate
restraint within the meaning of this chapter if it is on its owner's or keeper's premises; or under the
owner's or keeper's or other competent person's control on a stout leash not more than eight (8) feet in
length; or at heel near a competent person and obedient to that person's commands.
Competent person.
A person who is physically and mentally capable of managing and controlling a dog or cat which is his
or her responsibility while off the premises of the owner or keeper thereof.
Vicious dog.
(i) Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts, bites or attacks a human being or other
animal either on public or private property; (ii) any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency
or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or domestic animals; (iii) any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic
6-2-2
animal without provocation; (iv) any individual dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the
purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; (v) any individual dog which has been
found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three separate occasions; and (vi) no dog shall be deemed
"vicious" if it bites, attacks, or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces
anyone who has tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement or guard
duties.
Dangerous dog.
Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner, or a member
of its owner's family, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude
of attack upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
Enclosure.
A fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent
the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures
which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog. Such enclosure shall
be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be
designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure.
Impounded.
Taken into the custody of the public pound in the city or town where the vicious dog is found.
Run line.
A system of tying a dog in place with either rope or chain having a tensile strength of at least 300
pounds.
Sec. 6-2-2 Animal Regulation Officer.
The Animal Regulation Officer shall enforce animal regulations and perform such other duties as may
be prescribed by the Chief of Police.
Sec. 6-2-3 Vaccination against rabies.
Except as otherwise in this section provided, it shall be unlawful to own or keep within the Village any
dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian within the
preceding three years, or within the then calendar year; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful to keep an unvaccinated dog or cat which is under four months of age; and further provided,
however, it shall not be unlawful if said dog or cat has been vaccinated in accordance with the Illinois
Animal Control Act and lawful regulations promulgated thereunder. Evidence of vaccination shall be
the standard vaccination tag issued by Cook County or DuPage County, or a lawfully authorized and
licensed veterinarian, and worn around the neck of the animal.
Sec. 6-2-4 Dogs and Cats Running at Large.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat to run at large. For the purposes of this section, any
dog or cat not upon the premises of the owner or such other person having custody,
possession or control over any such dog or cat which is not on a leash and under the control
of a person physically able to control it, shall be deemed to be running at large. All dogs and
6-2-3
cats found to be running at large shall be promptly impounded by the Chief of Police or any
person authorized by him for this purpose.
(b) Any person owning, having custody, possession or control over any dog or cat which
violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an unlawful act.
Sec. 6-2-5 Vicious dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has been found to be a vicious
dog unless such dog is at all times kept in an enclosure or on a run line. The only times that a vicious
dog may be allowed out of the enclosure or off the run line are (1) if it is necessary for the owner or
keeper to obtain veterinary care for the vicious dog or (2) to sell or give away the vicious dog or (3) to
comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that said vicious dog is securely
muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three
feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the
vicious dog.
Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not confined to an enclosure or on a
run line shall be impounded by the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in such area and shall
be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection.
Any owner or keeper of a vicious dog who shall sell or give away, or who shall possess with the intent
to sell, any vicious dog shall give written notice to the person who will be receiving the vicious dog that
said dog has been found to be a vicious dog.
Sec. 6-2-6 Impoundment.
Dogs and cats found running at large or found abandoned, shall be taken up by the Police Department
and impounded. A record shall be made of same, entering the breed, color and sex, and whether
licensed or not and the name and address of the owner or keeper, if known. Such dogs or cats so
impounded will be confined in a humane manner. All such dogs or cats not claimed by the owner
thereof shall be held for a period of not less than 24 hours and thereafter shall be turned over to the
appropriate County agency. DuPage County is hereby designated as the official facility for
impoundment, release and disposal of such dogs or cats where appropriate.
Sec. 6-2-7 Redemption or disposal of dogs and cats.
Any dog or cat so impounded may be redeemed by the owner or keeper thereof by the payment to the
Village of an impounding fee of five dollars ($5.00) plus the cost of catching and the cost of keeping
such dog or cat while impounded. Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, no dog or
cat suspected of having rabies shall be released within less than ten days following its impounding.
Any such dog or cat shall be held and dealt with in the manner hereinafter provided. (A-231-2-97)
Sec. 6-2-8 Rabies control.
Whenever the Police Department receives information that any person has been bitten by a dog or
other animal, the Chief of Police or his authorized agent shall have such dog or other animal confined
and observed by a licensed veterinarian. Such veterinarian shall report, in writing, to the appropriate
Rabies Control Office of either Cook or DuPage County within 24 hours after the dog or other animal is
confined by him the owner's name, address and date of confinement, the breed, description, age and
sex of the dog or other animal. Such veterinarian shall confine the dog or other animal for ten days
and notify the appropriate Rabies Control Office in writing of the final disposition of the dog or other
6-2-4
animal at the termination of the period of confinement. If, however, the licensed veterinarian is
presented evidence that such dog or other animal has been inoculated against rabies within the time
prescribed by law prior to the biting, such dog or other animal shall be confined in the house of its
owner or in a manner that will prohibit such dog or other animal from biting any person for a period of
ten days, unless in the judgement of the licensed veterinarian circumstances are such that the dog or
other animal should be confined elsewhere. At the end of the 10 day period, the dog or other animal
shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian. It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any
person has been bitten by a dog or other animal to fail or refuse to notify the Police Department
promptly. It is unlawful for the owner of such dog or other animal to sell or give away or otherwise
dispose of such dog or other animal that is known to have bitten a person until it is released by the
Police Department or its authorized agent. It is unlawful for the owner of such dog or other animal to
refuse or fail to comply with the written or printed recommendations of such licensed veterinarian in
any particular case. The written or printed recommendations shall, if possible, be delivered in person
by the Police Department or its properly authorized agent. If such recommendations cannot be
delivered in person, they shall be mailed by regular mail, postage pre-paid, and addressed to the
owner of the dog or other animal. The affidavit or testimony of the police officer or other properly
authorized agent of the Police Department who delivered or mailed such recommendations shall be
prima facie evidence of the receipt of such recommendations by the owner of the dog or other animal.
Any expense incurred in the handling of any dog or other animal, including the fees of any
veterinarian, shall be borne by the owner.
Sec. 6-2-9 Records.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to keep or cause to be kept accurate records of all
impoundments and other dispositions of all dogs or cats coming into its custody.
Sec. 6-2-10 Female dogs and cats in heat.
The owner or keeper of any female dog or cat shall not permit or suffer such dog or cat, while in heat,
to be upon any sidewalk, street, parkway, alley, or other public place, or upon any private premises,
other than the premises of the owner or keeper, or, if outdoors, upon any unfenced part of the
premises of the owner or keeper which is closer to a sidewalk, street, parkway, alley, or other public
place than ten feet.
Sec. 6-2-11 Keeping of certain dogs or cats declared a nuisance.
It is hereby declared a nuisance to keep within the Village any dog or cat which disturbs the peace and
quiet of any neighborhood by habitual barking, howling, whining, or yowling, or to keep on the
premises a female dog or cat in heat which causes other dogs or cats to disturb the peace and quiet of
any neighborhood by habitual barking, howling, whining, or yowling.
Sec. 6-2-12 Prohibited areas - dogs and cats.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to permit the dog or cat to be in any public
park in the Village, whether on a leash or not.
Sec. 6-2-13 Penalty.
a. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the penalty for violation for any provision of this
article shall be as provided in Section 1.05 of Chapter 1 of this Code.
b. The violation of any of the provisions of Section 6-2-4 or 6-2-12 shall be punished by a fine
6-2-5
of not less than $10.00 for the first offense in a calendar year, not less than $15.00 for the
second offense in a calendar year, and not less than $25.00 for the third offense in a
calendar year; provided, however, that the fine for a violation of Section 6-2-4 or Section
6-2-12 with respect to a fierce, vicious, or dangerous dog shall not be less than $50.00, and
in addition, any such dog may be held impounded in accordance with Section 6-2-6. No fine
pursuant to this subsection shall exceed $750.00. (Amended by A-231-1-96)
c. The violation of Section 6-2-10 shall be punished by a fine not less than $25.00 nor more
than $750.00 and the court may, upon such conviction, order the offending dog or cat,
committed to a kennel at the owner's expense until the animal's period of heat shall
terminate. (Amended by A-231-1-96)
d. In addition to the fine for violation of Section 6-2-11, the court may order such dog or cat
removed from the Village forthwith.
Sec. 6-2-14 Payment to avoid prosecution.
A person charged with a violation of Section 6-2-4 (dogs and cats not to run at large) and Section
6-2-12 (prohibited areas) may avoid prosecution by making payment to the Village of the sum of
$10.00 if payment is made within ten (10) to thirty (30) days after the date of the charge. If the
violation constitutes a second offense, or subsequent, within the same calendar year, a court
appearance is required.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 7
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
ARTICLE 1. Purpose, Scope and Definitions
Sec. 7.01 Purpose
Sec. 7.02 Definitions
ARTICLE II. Enforcement
Sec. 7.03 Enforcement Officer Designated
Sec. 7.04 Duties of the Enforcement Official
ARTICLE III. Base Flood or 100-Year Frequency Flood Elevation
Sec. 7.05 General
Sec. 7.06 SFHA’S
Sec. 7.07 Unincorporated Areas
Sec. 7.08 AH or AO Zones
Sec. 7.09 A Zone
ARTICLE IV. Regulations - Flood Fringe Areas
Sec. 7.10 Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe Areas - General
Sec. 7.11 Development Permit
Sec. 7.12 Application
Sec. 7.13 Review
Sec. 7.14 Control Plans
Sec. 7.15 Other Permits
Sec. 7.16 Preventing Increased Damages
Sec. 7.17 Use of Fill
Sec. 7.18 Compensatory Storage
ARTICLE V. Regulations - Floodways
Sec. 7.19 General
Sec. 7.20 Development Permit
Sec. 7.21 Application
Sec. 7.22 Review
Sec. 7.23 Preventing Increased Damages and a List of Appropriate Uses
Sec. 7.24 Engineering and Mitigation Criteria
Sec. 7.25 Development Activities in Delegated Communities Requiring State Review
Sec. 7.26 Other Permits
Sec. 7.27 (Deleted)
Sec. 7.28 Permits for Dams
Sec. 7.29 Activities That Do Not Require a Registered Professional Engineer's Review
ARTICLE VI. Occupation and Use of SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not Identified
Sec. 7.30 General
Sec. 7.31 Development Permit
Sec. 7.32 Base Elevation
Sec. 7.33 Other Permits
Sec. 7.34 Preventing Increased Damages
Sec. 7.35 Riverine SFHA's
Sec. 7.36 Compensatory Storage
ARTICLE VII. Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Flood Areas
Sec. 7.37 General
Sec. 7.38 (Deleted)
Sec. 7.39 Hazardous Materials
Sec. 7.40 Water Supply Systems
Sec. 7.41 Carrying Capacity and Notification
Sec. 7.42 Protecting Buildings
Sec. 7.43 Building on Land Fill
Sec. 7.44 Elevated Buildings
Sec. 7.45 Flood Proofed Buildings
Sec. 7.46 Non-Conforming Structures
ARTICLE VIII. Other Development Requirements
Sec. 7.47 General
Sec. 7.48 Review
Sec. 7.49 Base Flood Standard
Sec. 7.50 Public Grounds
Sec. 7.51 Unincorporated Areas
ARTICLE IX. Variances
Sec. 7.52 General
Sec. 7.53 Standards
Sec. 7.54 Notification of Risk
Sec. 7.55 Historic Sites or Buildings
ARTICLE X. Disclaimer of Liability
Sec. 7.56 General
ARTICLE XI. Remedies
Sec. 7.57 Violation
Sec. 7.58 Penalties
Sec. 7.59 Insurance Suspension
Sec. 7.60 Additional Penalties
ARTICLE XII. Repeal, Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Sec. 7.61 General
Sec. 7.62 Separability
APPENDIX A. Designated Floodways
Last revision A-891-01-08, July 14, 2008
7-1-1
ARTICLE 1. Purpose, Scope and Definitions
See. 7.01 Purpose
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1,
5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2 (1994). The purpose of this Chapter is to
maintain this Village's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential
losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters,
conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related
land resources. This Chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18g Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act.
To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or
creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood-damaged public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations; and
To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the Village by fulfilling the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44
CFR 59-79, as amended.
To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect
aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and
enhance community and economic development.
Sec. 7.02 Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
Act "An Act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the State of Illinois",
615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
Applicant Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
Appropriate Use Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and will be
considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are as specified in Article V of
this Chapter.
Base Flood The flood having a one-percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year frequency flood event. Application of
the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in Sections 7.05 through 7.09 of this Chapter.
7-1-2
Building A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The
term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated
building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use.
Channel Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area,
flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway,
which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows,
either perennially or intermittently.
Channel Modification Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials
of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring),
widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation
from the bottom or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of channel
modification involving a significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving
relocation of the existing channel (e.g. straightening).
Compensatory Storage An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage
within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or
structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage
can increase off -site floodwater elevations and flows.
Conditional Approval of a Designated Floodway Map Change Preconstruction approval by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction
approval, pursuant to this Part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an Appropriate
Use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as
previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) A letter which indicates that FEMA will revise
base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an
effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-built plans are
submitted and approved.
Control Structure A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the
structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface elevation.
Dam All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and
appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or diverting water or creating a
pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
Designated Floodway The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain
adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and
convey the existing 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in
stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10 percent increase in
velocities. The floodways are designated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as prepared by FEMA as listed in Appendix A of this Chapter. To
locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated floodway boundary should
be scaled off the designated floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks
common to both maps. IDNR/OWR should be contacted to determine the exact location of the
designated floodway boundary where interpretation is needed.
Development Any man-made change to real estate, including:
7-1-3
(a) Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a
building;
(b) Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on site for less than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready
for highway use.
(c) Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects;
(d) Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
(e) Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
(f) Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel
modification, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other non-agricultural
alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste;
(g) Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or
surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as
re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening,
plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or
construction of levees.
Elevation Certificates A form published by the FEMA that is used to certify the elevation to
which a building has been elevated.
Erosion The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
Exempt Organizations Organizations which are exempt from this ordinance per Illinois
Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of government.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79 effective as
of September 29, 1989. This incorporation does not include any later editions or amendments.
Flood A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
Flood Frequency A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a
stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
7-1-4
Flood Fringe That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated floodway.
Flood insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the Special Flood
Hazard Area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and
floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
Floodplain That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or
below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation. Floodplains may also include
detached Special Flood Hazard Areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). The floodplains are those lands subject to inundation by the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The SFHA's are generally identified as such on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
denoted in Appendix A herein.
Floodproofing Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodproofing Certificate A form published by FEMA that is used to certify that a building has
been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.
Freeboard An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of
safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
Historic Structure Any structure that is:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to
the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on the State Inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic
Preservation Agency;
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Calculations Engineering analysis which determine expected flood
flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resource.
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is
not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or
FIRM.
7-1-5
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodways as shown on an effective
FHBM or FIRM.
Manufactured Home A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. The term manufactured homes also includes park trailers, travel
trailers and other similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mitigation Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which
floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples
of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel
restoration. Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure’s susceptibility
to flooding.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision Manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April 1,
1990.
NGVD National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the National
Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929.
Natural When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the existing
surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A natural stream tends to follow
a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not
been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of
the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the stream caused by
filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as
the channel meanders and vegetation is reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be
restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
Ordinary High Water Mark (OHWM) The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence
and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion,
destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other
easily recognized characteristics.
Public Flood Control Project A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a
public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings and structures which includes a
hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing
in this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
Public Bodes of Waters All open public streams and lakes capable of being navigated by
watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and
streams which in their natural condition were capable of being improved and made navigable, or
that are connected with or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters, and submerged
lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
7-1-6
Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer A vehicle which is:
(a) Built on a single chassis:
(b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c) Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. (Rev. 11-89)
Registered Land Surveyor A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois, under The Illinois
Land Surveyors Act (225 ILCS 330/1, et seq.)
Registered Professional Engineer An engineer registered in the State of Illinois under The
Illinois Professional Engineering Act (225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.)
Repair, Remodeling or Maintenance Development activities which do not result in any
increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the dimensions of a
structure.
Retention/Detention Facility A retention facility stores stormwater runoff without a gravity
release. A detention facility provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of
this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
Riverine SFHA Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on
stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to
flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
Runoff The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the
surface of the ground or collected in channels or conduits.
Sedimentation The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials either on other
ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified channel or ponding and shown on a Flood
Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, AO, Al-30, AE, A99, AH, VO,
V30, VE, V, M, E, D, or X.
Structure The results of a man-made change to the land constructed on or below the ground,
including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition to a building;
installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a
travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days, unless they are fully licensed and ready for
highway use.
Substantial Damage A building is considered substantially damaged when it sustains damage
from any cause (fire, flood, earthquake, etc.), whereby the cost of fully restoring the structure
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the pre-damage market value of the structure, regardless of
the actual repair work performed.
Substantial Improvement Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (1) before the
improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored,
7-1-7
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a
structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a “historic
structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
Transition Section Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow crosssection
to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
7-2-1
ARTICLE II. Enforcement
Sec. 7.03 Enforcement Officer Designated
The Village Engineer shall be the designated Enforcement Officer and be responsible for fulfilling
all of the duties listed in Section 7.04. The Enforcement Officer shall be a Registered
Professional Engineer under the employ or contract of the Village.
To fulfill those duties, the Enforcement Officer first should use the criteria listed in Article III, Base
Flood Elevations, to determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. Once
it has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the Enforcement Officer must
determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within
a SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe,
the Enforcement Officer shall require that the minimum requirements of Article IV of this Chapter
be met. If the site is within a floodway, the requirements of Article V shall be met. If the site is
located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and
approved, the minimum requirements of Article VI shall be met.
In addition, the general requirements of Article VII shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of Articles IV, V, or VI. The Enforcement Officer shall assure that all subdivision
proposals shall meet the requirements of Article VIII.
If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Enforcement Officer shall review the
requirements of Article IX to make sure they are met. In addition, the Enforcement Officer shall
complete all notification requirements.
In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this Chapter, the
Enforcement Officer may take any and all actions as outlined in Article XI.
Sec. 7.04 Duties of the Enforcement Officer
The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of
this Chapter which shall include the following:
1. Determining the Floodplain Designation. Check all new development sites to
determine whether they are in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). If they are in a
SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one (1)
square mile. Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA
(with a drainage area less than one square mile), indicating that the development
would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which
would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain and
floodway and be subject to the remaining Sections of this Chapter.
2. Enforcement Officer Review. If the development site is within a floodway or in a
floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more
than one (1) square mile then the Enforcement Officer shall review the development for
compliance with the requirements of Articles V and VI and state in writing that the
development meets the requirements of Articles V and VI.
3. Dam Safety Requirements. Ensure that an IDNR/OWR permit has been issued or a
letter indicating no permit is required, it the proposed development activity includes
construction of a dam as defined in Section 7.02. Regulated dams may include weirs,
restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
7-2-2
4. Other Permit Requirements. Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local
permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit.
5. Plan Review and Permit Issuance. Ensure that all development activities within the
SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the Village meet the requirements of this Chapter, and;
issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter
and other regulations of this community when the development meets the conditions of
this Chapter.
6. Inspection Review. Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this Chapter.
7. Elevation and Floodproofing Certificates. Maintain in the permit files an Elevation
Certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of a
residential or non-residential building or the elevation to which a non-residential
building has been floodproofed, using a Floodproofing Certificate, for all buildings
subject to Article VII of this Chapter.
8. Records for Public Inspection. Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon
request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or
state permit documents, variance documentation, Conditional Letter of Map Revision,
Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment and “as built” elevation and flood
proofing and/or elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this
Chapter.
9. State Permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
IDNR/OWR for all development projects subject to Articles V and VI of this Chapter,
unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the Village. However, the
following review approvals are not delegated to the Village and shall require review or
permits from IDNR/OWR:
a. Organizations which are exempt from this Chapter, as per the Illinois Revised
Statutes;
b. IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in Section
7.02 and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects, including
projects of the Village and Cook and DuPage Counties, except for those
projects meeting the requirements of Section 7.29.
c. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not
a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood
profile, per Section 7.24(e);
d. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to Section 7.24(d);
e. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory
storage as indicated in Section 7.24(a, b and h);
f. Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes
and streams;
g. Any changes in the Base Flood Elevation or floodway locations; and,
7-2-3
h. Base Flood Elevation determinations where none now exist.
10. Cooperation with Other Agencies. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain
management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway
data and to improve the administration of this Chapter. Submit data to IDNR/OWR and
the FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for
the National Flood Insurance Program. Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to
this Chapter.
11. Promulgate Regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter, subject however to the review
and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any Chapter changes.
7-3-1
ARTICLE III. Base Flood or 100-Year Frequency Flood Elevation
Sec. 7.05 General
This Chapter's protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance Study for the Village, Du
Page, and Cook Counties. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not
available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing
data available in the Illinois State Water Survey’s Floodplain Information Repository that has
been approved by IDNR/OWR and FEMA. When a party disagrees with the best available data,
he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better
data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA.
Sec. 7.06 SFHA’S
The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs shall be as delineated on the
100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the Village, Du Page, and Cook Counties
prepared by FEMA as denoted on Appendix A, and such amendments to such studies and maps
as may be prepared from time to time.
Sec. 7.07 Unincorporated Areas
The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated Cook and DuPage Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Village or that may be annexed into the Village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Cook or Du Page Counties prepared by FEMA as
denoted on Appendix A, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
Sec. 7.08 AH or AO Zones
The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an "AH Zone"
or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of
the Village.
Sec. 7.09 A Zone
The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs
delineated as an "A Zone" on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village shall be according to
the best existing data available in the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information
Repository. When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a backwater
model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the
hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-1 TR-20. or HIP, or by
techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for
estimating peak flood discharges. Along any watercourses draining more than one (1) square
mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval. Once approved it must
be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository for filing. For a
non-riverine SFHA, the Base Flood Elevation shall be the historic Flood of Record plus three feet,
unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by IDNR/OWR for drainage
areas greater than one square mile. For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area
less than one square mile) which has been identified by the Enforcement Officer pursuant to
Section 7.04, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant utilizing a method as
approved in Section 7.09, with concurrence of the Enforcement Officer.
7-4-1
ARTICLE IV Regulations - Flood Fringe Areas
Sec. 7.10 Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe Areas – General
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage and
other applicable provisions of this Chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the
capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall
meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of Article VII.
Sec. 7.11 Development Permit.
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence
any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit from the Enforcement
Officer.
Sec. 7.12 Application
Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Enforcement
Officer. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing
property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in M.S.L., 1929 adj. datum or
N.G.V.D. and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of Article VII of this Chapter.
Sec. 7.13 Review
Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Enforcement Officer shall compare the
elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development
located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood
Insurance Rate Map and which has not been filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance
Rate Map without a permit as required by this Chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not
subject to the requirements of this Chapter. The Enforcement Officer shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
Sec. 7.14 Control Plans
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan
shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and
erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include
a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
Sec. 7.15 Other Permits
The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other
federal, state and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for
this type of activity. The Enforcement Officer shall not issue a permit unless all other local, state
and federal permits have been obtained.
7-4-2
Sec. 7.16 Preventing Increased Damages
No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.
Sec. 7.17 Use of Fill
If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation,
the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA
for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
Sec. 7.18 Compensatory Storage
Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be
occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The
excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or
structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain
storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-
year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
7-5-1
ARTICLE V Regulations - Floodways
Sec. 7.19 General
This Section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building
modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway shall be as delineated on
the designated floodway maps prepared by FEMA as denoted on Appendix A. Only those uses
and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications
shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of Article VII.
Sec. 7.20 Development Permit
No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence
any development in a floodway without first obtaining a development permit from the
Enforcement Officer and IDNR/OWR.
Sec. 7.21 Application
Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the Enforcement
Officer. The application shall include the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the
designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or
unincorporated area;
c. Name of stream or body of water affected;
d. Description of proposed activity;
e. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
f. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity
g. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the
applicant;
h. Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the
application form;
j. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
k. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him
(her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying
each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests
therein.
l. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
7-5-2
(i) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway,
boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical
scale, and north arrow;
(ii) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and
proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work,
elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or N.G.V.D., or North
American Vertical Datum, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage
and flood control easements, location of any channels and any existing or
future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation
channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable
body of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and
dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation
of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale.
(iii) Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the work
as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales
(horizontal and vertical).
(iv) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan
shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance;
(v) A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed
change in the designated floodway location.
m. Any and all other federal, state and local permits or approval letters that may be
required for this type of development.
n. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the
proposed work will meet the permit criteria of Article V.
o. If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100 year frequency flood elevation
will change due to the proposed project, the application will not be considered complete
until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the designated floodway map
change. No structures may be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved
by FEMA.
p. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to
scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground elevations and all changes
in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway
limits; sealed by a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered
land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of Article VII of this Chapter.
q. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the
following information:
7-5-3
(i) A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
(ii) A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to
accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
(iii) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible
alternative identified in Section 7.24(d)(i) of this Section would have on the
physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;
(iv) An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering cumulative
effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected.
Sec. 7.22 Review
The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other
federal, state, and local permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The
Enforcement Officer shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal and state
permits have been obtained. The Enforcement Officer shall review and approve applications
reviewed under this Section.
Sec. 7.23 Preventing Increased Damages and a List of Appropriate Uses
The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are Appropriate Uses, which will not
cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and
welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or
permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this Chapter. Only those
Appropriate Uses listed in 92 Illinois Adm. Code 708 will be allowed. The approved Appropriate
Uses are as follows:
a. Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements
relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish
and wildlife;
b. Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or
shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and improvements
related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water
dependent uses;
c. Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
d. Underground and overhead utilities;
e. Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems, including any related
fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the
direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall
maximum) that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage.
f. Detached garages, storage sheds, or other non-habitable accessory structures that will
not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage;
7-5-4
g. Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any
modification thereto;
h. Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
(i) The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed
1.0 foot; or
(ii) The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility parking lot, formally
agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and accepts liability
for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank flooding
events.
i. Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive non-erosive slope
toward a watercourse.
j. Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures, including the
construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or construction of
floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the
outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than ten (10) feet away from the exterior
wall of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements
to the structure.
k. The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building, provided that the
outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was damaged to 50 percent
or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the building will be protected
from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
l. Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the enclosed floor area of
the building below the 100-year frequency flood elevation, and which will not block
flood flows including but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and
second story additions. If the building improved to 50 percent or more of the market
value before the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building
will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
m. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures,
fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to
accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including
landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as
specifically defined above as an Appropriate Use.
Sec. 7.24 Engineering and Mitigation Criteria
Within the designated floodway as identified on the designated floodway maps designated by
IDNR/OWR, the construction of an Appropriate Use, will be considered permissible provided that
the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in
writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and
provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of Article VII of this chapter:
a. Preservation of Flood Conveyance, so as not to Increase Flood Stages Upstream. For
appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-stream structures or dams,
all effective designated floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for
7-5-5
all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating
effective designated floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration:
(i) Designated floodway conveyance,
“K”= 1.486 AR 2/3
n
where “n” is Manning’s roughness factor,
“A” is the effective flow area of the cross-section, and
“R” is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.
(See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow,
1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York).
(ii) The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used for both existing and proposed
conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal, state or
local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover.
(iii) Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective
designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and contraction
ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR
through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions
may be used with the same efficiency:
(a) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the
water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length.
(b) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the
water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length.
(c) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream
length shall be used.
(d) Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections with
rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the
designated floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(e) All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
b. Preservation of Floodway Storage so as Not to Increase Downstream Flooding.
Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway storage lost due
to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any
related flood control projects. Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal
to at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage
lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be
replaced. The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between the
7-5-6
proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All
designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All designated floodway storage
lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed
10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the
location of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate to
IDNR/OWR through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations
that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. There shall be no reduction
in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such
modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
c. Preservation of Floodway Velocities so as Not to Increase Stream Erosion or Flood
Heights. For all Appropriate Uses, except bridges or culverts or on stream structures,
the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or designated
floodway velocities or stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event. In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for the
purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may
be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by
the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
d. Construction of New Bridges or Culvert Crossings and Roadway Approaches. The
proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than
0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained
within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within
recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood
stages greater than 0. 1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR, to obtain a permit
for a dam waiver.
(i) The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using
the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater
conditions for the flood study specified in Article III of this Chapter. Culverts
must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart for the
Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U. S.
DOT/Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways
calculation procedures.
(ii) Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per Section 7.24(b).
(iii) Velocity increases must be mitigated per Section 7.24(c).
(iv) If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or
commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
(v) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the
existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by Sections 7.23
through 7.29.
(vi) All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per
Section 7.24(h).
7-5-7
e. Reconstruction or Modification of Existing Bridges, Culverts, and Approach Roads.
(i) The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification
shall be constructed with no more than 0. 1 foot increase in backwater over
the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-
year event, if the existing structure is not a source of flood damage.
(ii) if the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood
damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the applicant's
engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce
the existing backwater, taking into consideration the effects on flood stages
on upstream and downstream properties.
(iii) The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of
flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance with
92 Ill. Adm. Code Part 708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois)
and submitted to the IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence before a permit
is issued.
f. On-Stream Structures Built for the Purpose of Backing Up Water. Any increase in
upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared to the existing conditions,
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained
within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within
recorded flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR/OWR, for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water
in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as
defined in Section 7.02 shall meet the permitting requirements of 92 Ill. Adm. Code Part
702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a
modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be
demonstrated that:
(i) The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood
control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention;
(ii) The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species,
which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for
spawning;
(iii) The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or
habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes,
appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a pre-sedimentation basin;
(iv) A non-point source control plan has been implemented in the upstream
watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is
more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in
which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream
municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
(v) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Article V.
7-5-8
g. Flood Proofing of Existing Habitable, Residential and Commercial Structures. If
construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the
outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than 10
feet from the outside of the building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance
will not be required for floodproofing activities.
h. Excavation in the Floodway. When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and
culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and
culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other Appropriate Uses,
transition sections shall be provided for the excavation. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency.
(i) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water
should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal for
every four feet of the flooded stream's length;
(ii) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water
should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot horizontal
for every one foot of the flooded stream's length; and
(iii) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of
one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length shall be used;
(iv) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream
of the transition sections.
i. If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
(i) There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish
its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of water
affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, flood
proofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the floodplain,
clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side
buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is
to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife
habitat;
(ii) Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly
improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may be
destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
(iii) The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way
which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the body
of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
(a) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as
closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, crosssection,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been
previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions
7-5-9
should be incorporated into channel modification design, where
practical.
(b) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the
upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that
they will prevent erosion.
(c) One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible.
Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to
one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading
and stabilization effects of the vegetation.
(d) Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for
construction of the channel.
(e) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper
than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for
bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate
the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering
techniques, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches.
Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction rubble
should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(f) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon
completion of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent
material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior
to establishment of the vegetative cover.
(g) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such
as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features
shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas
and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be
established, where appropriate.
(h) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the
modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of
downstream water quality.
(i) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items
of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
(j) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel
enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an
increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion
control project.
(k) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there
shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside
the floodway as a result of the modification; and
7-5-10
(iv) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of Article V.
j. Seeding and Stabilization Plan. For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and
stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
k. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Measures. For all activities in the floodway, including
grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is potential for erosion of exposed soil,
soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the
following criteria:
(i) The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum
vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time
soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days prior to
the initiation of improvements.
(ii) Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded
areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be provided
within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and
within 15 days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade, but will
remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days.
(iii) Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant
grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of eroded
sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices
include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches, and
sediment traps and basins.
(iv) A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be preserved and/or
re-established, where possible, along existing channels (See Section 7.24(r).
Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream
crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion.
Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized
immediately.
(v) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and
implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the
"Green Book" and “The Illinois Urban Manual” (NRCS, 1995).
l. Public Flood Control Projects. For public flood control projects, the permitting
requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to
IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will
not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project rightof-
way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event.
m. General Criteria for Analysis of Flood Elevations.
(i) The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated floodway study,
referenced in Article III, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If
the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed,
IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the
appropriate base conditions data to use.
7-5-11
(ii) If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the proposed
construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream
with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the designated floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations.
(iii) If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private
owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
n. Conditional Letter of Map Revision. If the Appropriate Use would result in a change in
the designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision and
receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway change
before a permit is issued. The final designated floodway map will not be changed by
FEMA until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging, or
excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. In the
case of non-government projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county
in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional designated
floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. No filling, grading,
dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval is issued. After
initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no activities shall take place until a final
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
o. Professional Engineer's Supervision. All engineering analyses shall be performed by
or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.
p. For all activities in the floodway involving construction within 25 feet of the channel, the
following criteria shall be met:
(i) A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least 25 feet of
the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
(ii) Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an
Appropriate Use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established upon
completion of construction.
After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and issuance
of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision, construction as necessary to
change the floodway designation may proceed, but no buildings or structures or other
construction that is not an Appropriate Use may be placed in that area until the
designated floodway map is changed and a final Letter of Map Revision is received.
The designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as-built" plans.
7-5-12
Sec. 7.25 Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State Review.
For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the following criteria shall be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit by a
community or county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway.
a. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to Section
7.24(d).
b. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source
of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to
Section 7.24(e).
c. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to Section
7.24 (a, b and h).
d. The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in Section 7.02) and all
other state, federal or local units of government projects, including projects of the
municipality or county.
e. An engineer’s determination that a proposed bridge affected by backwater from a
downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller opening.
f. Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood profiles.
g. Projects in public bodies of water.
Sec. 7.26 Other Permits
In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter, a development permit for a site located in a
floodway shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation
that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. No permit
from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the Division has delegated this responsibility to the Village.
Sec. 7.27 (Deleted)
Sec. 7.28 Permits for Dams
Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam as defined in Section
300.12 per 92 Illinois Adm. Code Part 702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an
IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. if the Enforcement Officer finds a
dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify
the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office. If the Enforcement Officer finds a dam which is believed to
be in unsafe condition, the Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam,
IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
Sec. 7.29 Activities That Do Not Require a Registered Professional Engineer's Review
The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer’s review.
Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter, including the mitigation
requirements.
7-5-13
a. Underground and overhead utilities that:
(i) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(ii) Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the floodway, or
(iii) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or
encasement is buried a minimum of 3’ below the existing stream bed, and
(iv) Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated 100-year
frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of an existing
bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting towers shall
be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not catch debris.
(v) Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway
areas, including the stream banks shall be restored to their original contours
and seeded or otherwise stablilized upon completion of construction.
(vi) A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution as
defined by the Environmental Protection Act 415 ILCS 5 (1992 State Bar
Edition) shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of
water to be crossed.
(vii) An Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electric Safety Codes, and
federal requirements for clearance must be met.
b. Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that:
(i) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope, and
(ii) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(iii) Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
c. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored
playground equipment and patios at grade.
d. Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
(i) Does not exceed 1000 feet in length.
(ii) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(iii) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of the
stream channel or bank of the lake.
(iv) Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the
preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high
channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete,
7-5-14
construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
e. Temporary stream crossings in which:
(i) The approach roads will be 1/2 foot or less above natural grade.
(ii) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water
above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or outfall
invert.
(iii) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least 2’ below the top of
the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-erosive material, such as
rip-rap or gravel.
(iv) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as
possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
(v) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year
after authorization.
7-6-1
ARTICLE VI Occupation and Use of SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not Identified
Sec. 7.30 General
In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones) where no floodways
have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been
established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted
unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage
of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
Sec. 7.31 Development Permit
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence
any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the
Enforcement Officer. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by
the Enforcement Officer. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to
scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevator at the lowest
floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of Article VII of
this Chapter. The application for a development permit shall also include the following
information:
a. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the
designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be in an incorporated or
unincorporated area;
c. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
d. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a minimum:
(i) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway,
boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or numerical
scale, and north arrow;
(ii) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and
proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or work,
elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or N.G.V.D. adjacent
property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water),
floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a
graphical or numerical scale;
(iii) Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of floodwater and
engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including
principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and
proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood
elevation, I00-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
7-6-2
(iv) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan
shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
e. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the
proposed work will meet the criteria of Section 7.34.
f. Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approvals that may be required for
this type of development.
Sec. 7.32 Base Elevation
Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois State Water Survey's
Floodplain information Repository, the Enforcement Officer shall compare the elevation of the
site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information
exist for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to Section 7.09.
Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood
elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map Identification is not in the SFHA, and therefore
not subject to the requirements of this Chapter. The Enforcement Officer shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
Sec. 7.33 Other Permits
The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other
local, state, and federal permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for
this type of activity. The Enforcement Officer shall not issue the development permit unless all
required local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
Sec. 7.34 Preventing Increased Damages
Preventing Increased Damages. No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been
determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity
or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic
functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this
Chapter.
Sec. 7.35 Riverine SFHA’s
Within all riverine SFHA’s where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards
shall apply:
a. The developer shall have a Registered Professional Engineer state in writing and show
through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering
requirements of Section 7.24 (a) through (l) for the entire floodplain as calculated under
the provisions of Section 7.09 of this Chapter. As an alternative, the developer should
have an engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that
engineering study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a designated floodway. Upon
7-6-3
acceptance of their floodway by the IDNR/OWR, the developer shall then demonstrate
that the project meets the requirements of Article V for the designated floodway. The
floodway shall be defined according to the definition in Section 7.02 of this Chapter.
b. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit
from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is not required from
IDNR/OWR.
c. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the IDNR/OWR has delegated permit
responsibility to the Village per 92 Illinois Adm. Code, Part 702 for designated
floodways.
d. Permits for Dams. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam Section 300.12 per 92 Ill Adm. Code Part 702 (Rules for Construction of Dams)
shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to
the start of construction of a dam. If the Enforcement Officer finds a dam that does not
have a IDNR/OWR permit, the Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify the
IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office. If the Enforcement Officer finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify the
owner of the dam and the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office and the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency (IEMA).
e. The following activities may be permitted without a Registered Professional Engineer's
review or calculation of a base flood elevation and designated floodway. Such
activities shall still meet the other requirements of this Chapter:
(i) Underground and overhead utilities that:
(a) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations, or
(b) Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the
floodway, or
(c) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or
encasement is buried a minimum of 3’ below the existing
streambed, and
(d) Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the estimated
100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord
of an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No
supporting towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be
designed so as to not catch debris.
(e) Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
(f) A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act 415 ILCS (1992
State Bar Edition) shall be provided with shut-off valves on each
side of the body of water to be crossed.
(g) An Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electric Safety Codes,
and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
7-6-4
(ii) Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(a) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope, and
(b) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
(c) Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall
location.
(iii) Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
(a) Does not exceed 1000 feet in length.
(b) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(c) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional area of
the stream channel by more than 10%.
(d) Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side slopes are
the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems.
Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action
necessitate the use of alternative stabilization measures, soil
bioengineering techniques, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble,
and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable
alternatives.
(iv) Temporary stream crossings in which:
(a) The approach roads will be 1/ 2 foot or less above natural grade.
(b) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the
water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage
tile or outfall invert.
(c) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least 2’ below
the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive
material, such as rip-rap or gravel.
(d) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as
soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
(e) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
one year after authorization.
(v) The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar structures;
(vi) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences),
patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade;
7-6-5
(vii) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as
playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below existing grade
that would not obstruct the flow of flood waters;
(viii) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70)
square feet in size, nor ten (10) feet in any one dimension (e. g., animal
shelters and tool sheds);
(ix) The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the
first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are located on the
upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do extend
beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of flood
waters;
(x) Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
(a) The affected length of stream is less than 1000 feet.
(b) The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream
channels, or
(c) The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that
of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
f. The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be
maintained.
Sec. 7.36 Compensatory Storage
Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be
occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation
volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In
the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the
areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
7-7-1
ARTICLE VII Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
Sec. 7.37 General
In addition to the requirements found in Articles IV, V and VI for development in flood fringes,
designated floodways, and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (Zones
A, AO, AH, AE, Al-A30, A99, VO, V1-V30, VE, V, M, E, D, or X), the following requirements shall
be met:
Sec. 7.38 (Deleted)
Sec. 7.39 Hazardous Materials
No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic
materials below the flood protection elevation (FPE).
Sec. 7.40 Water Supply Systems
New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste
disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or other above ground openings
located below the FPE are watertight.
Sec. 7.41 Carrying Capacity and Notification
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the Village shall notify
adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse.
Sec. 7.42 Protecting Buildings
All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain also known as a SFHA, and all buildings located
outside the 100-year floodplain but within the 500-year floodplain, shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the
following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building;
b. A structural alteration to an existing building that either increases the first floor area by
more than 20% or is a substantial improvement (exceeding the building's market value
by more than 50%). This alteration shall be figured cumulatively, beginning with any
alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1, 1990.
c. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an
existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply to returning a mobile
home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood
damage; and
d. Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days.
This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods.
7-7-2
Sec. 7.43 Building on Land Fill
A residential or non-residential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent land fill
in accordance with the following:
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation.
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one (1) foot deep before compaction
and should extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the foundation of the building before
sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood
protection elevation. However, the ten (10) foot minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to
hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill
shall not adversely effect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring
properties.
Sec. 7.44 Elevated Buildings
A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawlspace, stilts, piles, walls, or
other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters and not subject to damage by
hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent
openings shall be no more than one foot above existing grade, and consists of a
minimum of two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below
the Base Flood Elevation.
b. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to
flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure to known
hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
c. All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant
to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located
at or above the flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be
located below the flood protection elevation. When the building wall encloses open
space that is below the Base Flood Elevation, gravity storm and sanitary sewer
connections are specifically prohibited and overhead sewers are required for the
sanitary connections and sumps for the storm sewer connections.
d. The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for the parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement.
e. Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than 180
days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; and, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act
issued pursuant to 77 Illinois Administrative Code Part 870. In addition, all
manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation requirements:
7-7-3
1. In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved (a)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (b) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, (c) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or (d) in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred
substantial damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated
to or above the flood protection elevation.
2. In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured home
shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the base
flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches in height above grade and
supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength,
whichever is less.
f. Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet the elevation and
anchoring requirements of Sec. 7.44.e above unless:
I. They are on site for less than 180 consecutive days; and,
2. They are fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utility and service devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
Sec. 7.45 Flood Proofed Buildings
Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided
that a registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry
floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing
measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity. (Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the
purpose of this subsection.)
Sec. 7.46 Non-Conforming Structures
Tool sheds and detached garages on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed
with the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
a. The building is not used for human habitation.
b. All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be
constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a designated floodway shall
be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block the flow of floodwaters
and shall also meet the Appropriate Use criteria of Article V. In addition, all other
requirements of Articles IV, V and VI must be met.
c. The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
d. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
7-7-4
e. The building shall be valued at less than $7,500 and be less than 500 square feet in
floor size.
f. The building shall be used only for storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain
other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses.
g. The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of Sec. 7.44.a.
Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the more restrictive
Appropriate Use standards included in Article V. Non-conforming structures located in a
designated floodway may remain in use, and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with Sec. 7.23. A non-conforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or
other natural or man-made disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this Chapter.
7-8-1
ARTICLE VIII Other Development Requirements
Sec. 7.47 General
The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in
all official actions related to land management, use and development.
Sec. 7.48 Review
New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and Planned Unit
Developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed
developments are consistent with Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this Chapter and the need to
minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and Planned
Unit Developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a Registered Professional
Engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
Sec. 7.49 Base Flood Standard
Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit
developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home parks and additions to subdivisions
shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
Where this information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois State Water
Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation per Section 7.09 and the floodway delineation per the definition in
Section 7.02. The applicant's engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for review and
approval as best available regulatory data and then send it to the State Water Survey.
Sec. 7.50 Public Grounds
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a
manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever possible, the
floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
Sec. 7.51 Unincorporated Areas
The Board of Trustees shall not approve any Planned Unit Development (PUD) or plat of
subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
7-9-1
ARTICLE IX Variances
Sec. 7.52 General
No variances shall be granted to any development located in a designated floodway as defined in
Section 7.02. Whenever the standards of this Chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Enforcement Officer for a variance. The
Enforcement Officer shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the Board of Trustees.
Sec. 7.53 Standards
No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
a. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
b. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
c. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
d. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream uses and
functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a nuisance;
e. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental
stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or
repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
f. The provisions of Sections 7.16 and 7.34 of this Chapter shall still be met;
g. The activity is not in a designated floodway;
h. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and
i. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved,
including existing stream uses.
Sec. 7.54 Notification of Risk
The Enforcement Officer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements
of Article VII that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
a. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for
$100 of insurance coverage;
b. Increase the risks to life and property; and
c. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will
acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
Sec. 7.55 Historic Sites or Buildings
7-9-2
Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or historic structure as
defined in Section 7.02 “Historic Structures” may be granted using criteria more permissive than
the requirements of Sections 7.48 and 7.49, subject to the conditions that:
a. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure; and
b. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified
historic structure.
7-10-1
ARTICLE X Disclaimer of Liability
Sec. 7.56 General
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for designated
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods
of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This Chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will
be free from flooding or damage. This Chapter does not create liability on the part of the Village
or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this Chapter
or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
7-11-1
ARTICLE XI Remedies
Sec. 7.57 Violation
Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be
deemed to be a violation of this Chapter. Upon due investigation, the Enforcement Officer may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this Chapter exist. The Enforcement
Officer shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
Sec. 7.58 Penalties
If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
a. The Village may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction requiring
conformance with this Chapter or make such other order as the Court deems
necessary to secure compliance with the Chapter.
b. Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense.
c. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
d. The Village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
Sec. 7.59 Insurance Suspension
The Enforcement Officer shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act
to increase flood damages, and, therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance
Policy to be suspended.
The Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject
development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance
and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work
order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by
the Board of Appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall
state:
a. The grounds for compliant or reasons for suspension or revocation;
b. The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on his/her
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit
shall be suspended or revoked.
Sec. 7.60 Additional Penalties
Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy
any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
7-12-1
ARTICLE XII Repeal, Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Sec. 7.61 General
This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. Where this Chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
This Chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution
which the Village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.
Sec. 7.62 Separability
The provisions and sections of this Chapter shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of any
portion of this Chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
APPENDIX A
THE VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE AND
UNINCORPORATED COOK & DU PAGE COUNTIES
DATE OF F.I.S., F.I.R.M.,
FLOOD HAZARD,
OR FLOODWAY MAP
LOCATION
PANEL NO.
August 19, 2008 Cook County 17031 0466 (Panel 466 of 832)
17031 0467 (Panel 467 of 832)
17031 0468 (Panel 468 of 832)
17031 0469 (Panel 469 of 832)
17031 0577 (Panel 577 of 832)
17031 0581 (Panel 581 of 832)
17031 0582 (Panel 582 of 832)
17031 0583 (Panel 583 of 832)
17031 0591 (Panel 591 of 832)
December 16, 2004 Village of Burr Ridge
Du Page County
170071 0001 (Panel 1 of 1,3,5)
December 16, 2004 Village of Burr Ridge
Du Page County
170071 0003 (Panel 3 of 1,3,5)
170071 0005 (Panel 5 of 1,3,5)
December 16, 2004
Unincorporated
Du Page County
170197 0060 (Panel 60 of 65)
December 16, 2004
Unincorporated
Du Page County
170197 0065 (Panel 65 of 65)
Amended by A-891-01-08
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 8
STORM WATER RUN-OFF
ARTICLE I. Development in the Cook County Portion of the Village
Sec. 8.01 Permit Fee
Sec. 8.02 Adoption of Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance
Sec. 8.03 Authorized Administration Municipality
Sec. 8.04 Applicability
Sec. 8.05 Release Rate
Sec. 8.06 Channel System
Sec. 8.07 Calculation of Volume
Sec. 8.08 Reservoirs and Stormwater Storage Areas
Sec. 8.09 Wet Retention Stormwater Storage Areas - Additional Conditions
Sec. 8.10 Paved Storage Areas
Sec. 8.11 Watersheds - Portions of
Sec. 8.12 Engineering Plans
Sec. 8.13 Pre-development Construction
Sec. 8.14 Possible Recapture
Sec. 8.15 Trunk Sewers
Sec. 8.16 Erosion Control
Sec. 8.17 Final Engineering Plans - Compliance Requirements
Sec. 8.18 Developments in Flagg Creek Water Reclamation District (formerly Hinsdale Sanitary District)
Sec. 8.19 Maintenance
Sec. 8.20 Storm Water Calculations
Sec. 8.21 Building Permit - Compliance
Sec. 8.22 Development in the Cook County Portion of the Village
ARTICLE II. Development in the DuPage Portion of the Village
Sec. 8.23 Permit Fees
Sec. 8.24 Adoption of DuPage County Ordinance
Sec. 8.25 Partial Waiver Community
Sec. 8.26 Amendment of Section 15-111 of Article 9
Sec. 8.27 Amendment of Section 15-112 of Article 9
Sec. 8.28 Application of County Ordinance
Sec. 8.29 Reservoirs and Stormwater Storage Areas
Sec. 8.30 Wet Retention Stormwater Storage Areas – Additional Conditions
Sec. 8.31 Subdivision Plat Approval and Building Permit
Sec. 8.32 Blank
ARTICLE III – Best Management Practice Requirements throughout all Portions of the Village
Sec. 8.33 Best Management Practices
Sec. 8.34 Fee-in-lieu of Best Management Practice
APPENDIX A DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance
APPENDIX B Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance
SCHEDULE A Permit Fee Structure
SCHEDULE B Fee-in-lieu of BMP Structure
EXHIBIT A Stormwater Facility Maintenance Agreement
EXHIBIT B Maintenance Plan and Budget
Last Revision: Ordinance A-676-01-18, 07-23-18
8-1-1
Article I Development in the Cook County Portion of the Village
(section renumbered by A-676-01-14)
Sec. 8.01 Permit Fees
All applications for stormwater review shall be accompanied by a fee as outlined in the attached “Schedule A
– Permit Fee Structure”. (Added by A-676-01-14)
Sec. 8.02 Adoption of Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance
Except as otherwise provided for herein, the Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance which was
adopted on October 3, 2013, became effective on May 1, 2014, and was amended on July 10, 2014 and
February 15, 2018, hereinafter referred to as the Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance, which is
included herein as Appendix B to this Chapter 8, be and is hereby incorporated and adopted by reference as
the regulations of the Village of Burr Ridge governing regulation of all development of land within those
portions of the Village which are in Cook County. Such Cook County Ordinance has been on file and
available for public use, inspection and examination in the office of the Village Engineer for a period of at
least 30 days prior to the adoption of the Ordinance which incorporates such regulations by reference.
(Added by A-676-01-18)
Sec. 8.03 Authorized Administration Municipality
That for purposes of the enforcement and implementation of the Cook County Ordinance (Appendix B), the
Village of Burr Ridge shall be, until otherwise determined by the Village Board, an “Authorized Administration
Municipality” within the meaning of such term as set forth in the Cook County Watershed Management
Ordinance insofar as it relates to those portions of the Village which are in Cook County. (Added by A-676-
01-14)
Sec. 8.04 Applicability.
All developments shall meet the requirements specified for general stormwater and floodplain development,
site runoff, sediment and erosion control, and performance security. The controlled release and storage of
excess storm water run-off shall be required in combination for all nonresidential developments which exceed
one (1) acre in area, for all residential developments exceeding three (3) acres on which will or may exist
more than one habitable structure, and for all developments which have a proposed impervious area of sixty
(60%) percent or greater. (Amended by A-676-01-03)
When this ordinance is modified, by addition, deletion, or revision, or amendment, all sections of the revised
code shall apply to all proposed developments which had not received Preliminary Plat approval by the
Village Board in advance of the revision.
Sec. 8.05 Release Rate.
The controlled release of storm water run-off from all developments shall not exceed the existing safe storm
drainage capacity of the natural down-stream outlet channel or storm sewer system. The release rate shall
be an average value computed as a direct ratio to the tributary watershed area. In any case, this value shall
not exceed 0.15 cfs/acre from an area designed to provide storage from excess storm water, or at a
proportional rate of the most restrictive capacity of downstream channel, unless otherwise denoted in Section
4 below. The rate at which storm water run-off is transported into a designated storm water storage area
shall be unrestricted. Control structure piping shall consist of a shear gate restrictor with a bored orifice and
with an internal standpipe which is set at the High Water Level (HWL). The shear gate restrictor shall have a
chain and handle so that the restrictor can be opened in the event of a blockage. (Amended by A-676-01-08)
Sec. 8.06 Channel System.
A natural or man-made channel system shall be designed with adequate capacity to convey the storm water
run-off from all tributary upstream areas through or around the development. This system shall be designed
8-1-2
to carry the Base Flood as indicated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
Design of this system shall also take into consideration control of storm water velocity to prevent erosion or
other damage to the facility which will restrict its primary use. Depths of flow shall be totally under
governmental control. In the event that the area within this bypass channel is reshaped or restricted for use
as a floodway, the Village will cause removal or require the removal of such restrictions at the expense of the
party or parties causing said restriction.
Should the development contain an existing natural waterway, this land configuration shall be preserved as
part of the bypass channel system. If required, construction of a "low flow" system of storm sewers to carry
the minor storm run-off and reshaping of the channel to have maximum side slope ratio of four (4) horizontal
to one (1) vertical, and a bottom width adequate to facilitate maintenance and carry the flood run-off without
eroding velocities shall be included in the plans for land development.
Sec. 8.07 Calculation of Volume.
The required volume for storm water detention for developments greater than three (3) acres in area, shall
be calculated by means of a synthetic hydrograph and flood routing using technical release #55 (as
published by the Soil Conservation Service) and supplemented by the Illinois State Water Survey Bulletin 70
dated 1989 by Huff and Angel, or other acceptable methods approved by the Village Engineer. This volume
shall be provided for the excess storm water run-off that is tributary to the area designated for detention
purposes. The storm water release rate shall be considered when calculating the storm water storage
capacity. The control structure shall be designed to not exceed the storm water release rate. Storage
capacity obtained by excavating the natural ground within the one hundred (100) year flood plain shall not be
considered effective for storm water management. For developments three (3) acres or less in area and
greater than one (1) acre, storm water detention may be calculated using the rational method with a
maximum release rate of 0.15 cfs per acre.
Sec. 8.08 Reservoirs and Stormwater Storage Areas.
(Amended by A-676-01-08)
All stormwater storage facilities must be located in a separate outlot, with a unique P.I.N. and must be owned
by either a single party or by a formal association of property owners. Any and all maintenance for all
stormwater storage facilities on private property, and all fees and costs related thereto, whether wet bottom
or dry bottom, shall be the exclusive responsibility of the original owner or developer of he subdivision during
the development and completion thereof, and thereafter the subsequent owner(s) of the property or
subdivision wherein the stormwater storage facilities are located.
Dry bottom detention facilities shall be designed to serve a secondary purpose such as recreation, open
space, or other types of uses that will not be adversely affected by occasional flooding. A method of carrying
the low flow through these areas shall be provided. In addition, a system of drains may be provided with a
positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or other storm sewer facility.
Detention reservoirs and/or retention reservoirs shall be constructed to provide the required storage volume
denoted herein. Existing manmade or natural storage channels or reservoirs that exist prior to proposed
development shall not be used to offset the calculated storage requirement for the proposed development,
for all storms up to and including the 100-year event. (Added by A-676-1-91)
The combination of storage of the water from a one hundred (100) year storm and the design release rate
shall not result in a storage duration in excess of seventy-two (72) hours; however, release rate shall govern
as long as possible. Maximum depths of planned storm water storage shall not exceed four (4') feet unless
the existing natural ground contours and other conditions dictate greater storage depths, subject to approval
by the Village Engineer. Minimum grades for areas to be constructed shall be two (2%) percent and
maximum slopes shall be (25%) percent (four [4] units horizontally to one [1] unit vertically). Storage area
side slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land contours as practical.
8-1-3
If slopes greater than 4:1 are necessary to meet storage requirements or area restrictions, approval shall be
obtained from the Village Engineer, and erosion control shall be provided in addition to the protection
required to insure public health, safety and welfare.
Retaining walls may be used in order to enhance the appearance or volume of stormwater storage facilities.
The height of each retaining wall may not exceed 42 inches in height measured from the top of grade at the
bottom of the wall to the highest top cap of the wall. Retaining walls may not be constructed of poured
concrete, but must be constructed of segmented, landscape quality, retaining wall blocks, with capstones.
No portion of a retaining wall, including tie-backs or mesh, will be permitted to extend into a public utility
easement or Village right-of-way. When retaining walls are used, a minimum 12’ wide access path shall be
provided in order to ensure that maintenance equipment can access the bottom of the stormwater storage
facility. When tiered retaining wall systems are used, the engineering plans must include a detailed
landscaping plan. The landscaping plan shall indicate species, location, and number of plantings. Plantings
which will be placed below the 100 year High Water Level (HWL) must be suitable for use in submerged
locations. The maintenance of the plantings will be the responsibility of the Homeowners Association, and
should be included in the annual maintenance plan and budget. The landscape plan may be subject to
review by a Village landscape consultant, at the developer’s expense. All proposed landscaping below the
100 year High Water Level (HWL) must be approved by the Village Engineer and included in the annual
maintenance plan and budget. Perimeter landscaping of the outlot must be in accordance with Ordinance
#A-894-01-08.
Outlet control structures installed shall require little or no maintenance/attention for proper operation. Each
storm water storage area shall be provided with a method of emergency overflow in order to accommodate a
storm in excess of the one hundred (100) year return frequency, and to function as an overflow bypass in the
event that the low flow outlet is obstructed. This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to function
without maintenance/attention and shall become part of the natural or surface channel system described in
the preceding section. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design features. Both
outlet control structures and emergency overflow facilities shall be designed and constructed to fully protect
the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with the recommendations of the Village Engineer. Storm
water run-off velocities shall be kept to a minimum and turbulent conditions at an outfall control structure will
not be permitted without complete protection for the public safety in accordance with the recommendations of
the Village Engineer. The use of restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and shall be used only as a
last resort when no other method is feasible.
Sec. 8.09 Wet Retention Stormwater Storage Areas - Additional Conditions.
(Amended by A-676-01-08)
Wet retention stormwater storage facilities require on-going maintenance, repair, improvement, as
applicable, and the creation and continuance of a financing mechanism for long-term maintenance and
improvement activities, to remain fully functional and operational. Retention reservoir or wet bottom storm
water storage areas shall be designed to meet the requirements for detention reservoir or storage areas set
forth above in Section 8.05. A low flow conduit and a system of drains with a positive gravity outlet shall not
be required. However, the following additional conditions are required:
a) Wet detention facilities will be permitted only in residential subdivisions which include a minimum of
eight (8) lots, or commercial subdivisions with four (4) lots.
b) Any and all maintenance for such wet detention facilities on private property, shall be the exclusive
responsibility of the owner(s) of the property or subdivision wherein the stormwater storage
facilities are located. All such subdivisions are responsible for the creation and operation of a
formal association of property owners to ensure the applicable maintenance and funding
responsibilities of this Chapter are met. Whether or not an association of property owners is
created or operated, as here required, the lot owners in a subdivision shall at all times be both
individually, and collectively, responsible for full compliance, and for all costs related thereto, with
all applicable requirements of this Chapter for the creation, maintenance and costs thereof, of the
establishment and operation of wet retention stormwater facilities within the subdivision.
8-1-4
c) The surface area of the normal pool should be designed at a ration of 25:1 to the tributary area to
enhance the cycling frequency of the pond. In no case shall the water surface area exceed one
tenth (1/10) of the tributary drainage area.
d) Shoreline protection shall be provided utilizing native and/or wetland plantings. The buffer zone
shall encompass the areas between the normal water level and the high water level, but in no case
shall the buffer zone be less than 5’ in width. The buffer zone must be designated and signed as a
no-mow zone. The landscape plan may be subject to review by a Village landscape consultant, at
the developer’s expense. All proposed landscaping below the 100 year High Water Level (HWL)
must be approved by the Village Engineer and included in the annual maintenance plan and
budget. Perimeter landscaping of the outlot must be in accordance with Ordinance #A-894-01-08.
e) Minimum normal water depth shall be five (5') feet. If the pond is to be stocked with fish, no less
than one quarter (1/4) of the pond area shall be a minimum of eleven (11') feet deep.
f) A 10’ wide safety ledge must be provided around the entire perimeter of the basin. The ledge shall
be located 1’-2’ below the normal water level. The safety ledge must be planted with emergent
wetland plantings.
g) A sedimentation basin 1.5’ deeper than the design depth of the basin shall be provided at the
upstream end of the pond.
h) The inflow pipe must discharge into a forebay with a minimum size of 10% of the water surface
area. The forebay must be established with native wetland plants.
i) Where feasible, facilities shall be provided to permit the pond level to be lowered by gravity flow for
cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance.
j) Control structures for storm water release shall be designed to operate at full capacity with
increases in the water surface level as required. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted with
final engineering plans.
k) Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation, shall be provided. Design calculations to
substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration facilities shall be submitted with final engineering
plans. Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be
prepared to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer.
l) In the event that the normal water level of the pond is raised for any reason, the volume remaining
for storage of excess storm water run-off shall still be sufficient to contain the one hundred (100)
year storm run-off.
m) Maintenance Agreement: A legally binding maintenance agreement will be executed, or recorded,
before the Final Plat is signed. The agreement, or the substantive provisions thereof, shall be
included in the property deed restrictions and homeowners association covenants, and shall be
included in the documents which are recorded with the County Recorder. The terms of the
agreement shall be binding upon all property owners, individually and collectively, following
creation of the association. The Village of Burr Ridge Stormwater Facility Maintenance Agreement
is attached hereto as Exhibit A.
n) Maintenance Plan and Budget: The developer shall develop and attach to the Declaration of
Property Owner’s covenants, a maintenance plan and budget. The maintenance plan and budget
shall more specifically describe the specific maintenance practices to be performed for the
perpetual maintenance, operation, inspection, and repair, and if applicable, possible replacement
of a part, or all, of the stormwater management facility. The Maintenance Plan and Budget shall
be prepared on the forms which are attached hereto as Exhibit B.
o) Maintenance funding mechanism: The Developer shall establish an escrow account for the
8-1-5
maintenance of the facility or facilities. The escrow account shall be established in the amount
of 15% of the initial construction costs of the stormwater facility. The escrow account must be
specifically defined for use regarding maintenance of the stormwater facility of facilities; no
other use of the funds can be permitted. The escrow account shall be deeded to the Property
Owners Association upon activation of the association. After incorporation by the Property
Owner’s association, the escrow account shall be supplemented annually with a sinking fund
from property owner association dues or property owner payments in accordance with the
approved maintenance schedule and budget. The annual contributions must include a
contribution of the annual maintenance cost in accordance with the approved maintenance plan
and budget, and an annual contribution toward reconstruction of the stormwater facility after 20
years. The Property Owner contribution schedule shall be structured such that 75% of initial
construction costs of construction shall be deposited in the escrow account within 10-years
following initial construction (such that the escrow account has 75% of initial construction costs
in addition to maintenance costs), and 100% of initial construction costs within 20-years. Any
funds drawn down as a result of annual maintenance shall be replaced in accordance with the
annual deposit schedule. The Homeower’s Association must submit a copy of the HOA budget,
annual report or audit, and an calculation of the average homeowner assessment (if not indicated
in the budget), to the Village of Burr Ridge, January 1st of each year.
p) Maintenance surety: Following completion and acceptance of the subdivision improvements, the
developer will be required to provide a separate maintenance surety, which will be retained for five
(5) years as a surety for maintenance of the pond. The escrow account shall be established in and
FDIC-insured account. As part of the escrow instructions with the establishment of the escrow
account, the Village must consent to the disbursement of funds from the escrow account to ensure
ongoing compliance with the maintenance plan and budget. Such consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld by the Village. The escrow instructions shall also allow the Village to
receive information from the escrow agent regarding the deposits to, disbursements from, and the
balance of the account, upon written request to the escrow agent from the Village.
q) Following 60 days written notice to the property owner(s) and/or association of property
owners, of any failure of such owners or association to fulfill any of their responsibilities under
this Chapter, the Village shall have the right, but no duty, to go upon any property to undertake
and complete any of the responsibilities imposed hereunder on the property owner(s) or upon
any association of property owners, for any private property upon which is located a wet
retention stormwater storage area. All costs of or related to any such work by the Village shall
be the responsibility of the property owners or association and shall be reimbursed to the
Village within 30 days of written notice from the Village for payment. If such costs are not paid
by the property owners or association within 30 days, the Village shall have the option to
pursue any and all remedies against any and all real property in the subdivision in the amount
of such costs, and until such costs are paid.
Sec. 8.10 Paved Storage Areas.
Paved surfaces that are to serve as storm water storage areas shall have minimum grades of one (1%)
percent and shall be restricted to storage depths of six (6") inch maximum. Rooftop storage shall be
designed with permanent type control inlets and parapet walls to contain run-off on the rooftop. Emergency
overflow areas shall be provided to insure that the weight of water stored will not exceed the structural
capacity of the roof. Release rate and storage volume requirements for paved storage areas shall be as
hereinabove outlined in Section 2 above. If a portion of an area within a storm water storage area is to be
paved for parking or recreational purposes, the paved surface shall be placed at the highest elevation within
the storage area as possible. Parking lot grades shall not exceed five (5%) percent. (Amended by A-676-1-
91)
Sec. 8.11 Watersheds - Portions of.
Where developments form only a portion of a watershed or contain portions of several watersheds, the
requirements for providing storage shall be based upon that proportion of the area being developed as
8-1-6
compared to the total watershed tributary to the storage area. Compensatory storage will be acceptable
whenever it is justified and feasible. As a watershed is developed with a series of storm water storage
facilities, due consideration will be given for calculation of the allowable release rate and capacity of the
natural or surface channel system as described in Section 3 above.
Sec. 8.12 Engineering Plans.
Plans, specifications, and all calculations for storm water run-off control as required hereunder, shall be
submitted to the Village Engineer for review and approval of a final plat, in the case of subdivisions and
planned residential developments over three (3) acres in size, or issuance of a building permit in all other
cases including residential developments over three acres if no plat is otherwise required or provided).
Where required by the Plan Commission, detailed calculations shall be submitted prior to approval of the
Preliminary Plat .(Amended by A-676-1-91)
Sec. 8.13 Pre-development Construction.
Where the development of a property presents the threat of flooding or damage by flash flood run-off to
downstream residents, the facilities for storm water run-off control shall be constructed prior to any
earthmoving or drainage construction on the project site including provisions for siltation as required.
Sec. 8.14 Possible Recapture.
The construction of the storm water control system shall be accomplished as part of the cost of land
development. If the amount of storage capacity can be increased to provide certain benefits to the
surrounding properties, negotiations for additional participation in the cost of such development may be
feasible.
Sec. 8.15 Trunk Sewers.
All trunk storm sewers (sewers required to service in excess of two [2] acres), shall be designed to carry, at
full unsurcharged flow, the waters from a storm considered to be of a once in ten (10) year frequency and
shall be sized to handle such an amount as such storm would deposit on the area served by the system.
Sec. 8.16 Erosion Control.
During the construction phase of land development, facilities shall be provided to prevent the erosion and
washing away of the earth. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted for review and approval
along with the Final Engineering Plans, in accordance with the applicable sections of the Village's Subdivision
Regulations Ordinance and/or Building Ordinance. (Amended by A-676-01-03)
These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements contained in
"Procedures and Standards for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois", October, 1981, as may be
revised, prepared by the Northeastern Illinois Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering Committee and
adopted by the Kane-Du Page Soil and Water Conservation District, which by reference is hereby expressly
made a part of this Ordinance. A copy of "Procedures and Standards for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control in Illinois" shall be kept on file with the Village and shall be made available for examination upon
request. The Village may waive specific requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the
information submitted is sufficient to show the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this
Ordinance. (Amended by A-676-1-90)
Sec. 8.17 Final Engineering Plans - Compliance Requirements.
Final engineering plans shall show complete details for all of the items covered in the Ordinance and shall be
submitted for review and approved prior to the start of construction.
Sec. 8.18 Developments in Flagg Creek Water Reclamation District (formerly Hinsdale Sanitary District).
8-1-7
Plans for developments within the jurisdictional limits of the Flagg Creek Water Reclamation District (formerly
Hinsdale Sanitary District) shall be submitted to the District for their approval prior to approval by the Village
Engineer. Developments within the Flagg Creek Water Reclamation District (formerly Hinsdale Sanitary
District) shall comply with all District storm water management and flood plain regulation ordinances.
Sec. 8.19 Maintenance.
The maintenance and operation of any detention facility will be done by the owners of the facility, who shall
record with the appropriate Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles restrictions and covenants running with
the land sufficient to provide for such maintenance and operation until such time as an alternative detention
facility or equivalent is approved by the Village. (amended by A-676-01-08)
Sec. 8.20 Storm Water Calculations.
The owner of any development or detention facility subject to this Ordinance shall submit for review, by the
Village Engineer, and approval by the Village Trustees, the methods of detention, methods of restricting the
rate of discharge and all the necessary computations and calculations and such plans and specifications as
may be required by the Village to determine compliance with this Ordinance.
Sec. 8.21 Building Permit - Compliance.
That the issuance of a building permit is contingent upon submission of adequate proof to the Village of Burr
Ridge that any development or detention facility will be constructed in such a manner so as to comply with
the terms and conditions of this Ordinance.
Sec. 8.22 Development in the Cook County Portion of the Village
Article I of this Chapter, entitled "Development in the Cook County Portion of the Village," shall apply only to
development within those portions of the Village located in Cook County. (Added by A-676-2-91)
8-2-1
ARTICLE II Development in the DuPage Portion of the Village
(section renumbered by A-676-01-14)
Sec. 8.23 Permit Fees
All applications for stormwater review shall be accompanied by a fee as outlined in the attached “Schedule
A – Permit Fee Structure” (Added by A-676-01-03)
Sec. 8.24 Adoption of DuPage County Ordinance
Except as otherwise provided for herein, the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain
Ordinance adopted on September 24, 1991, and as amended on June 14, 1994, April 23, 1996, November
12, 1997, June 22, 1999, June 13, 2000, March 25, 2003, January 27, 2004, June 8, 2004, March 8, 2005,
February 28, 2006, August 1, 2008, April 24, 2012, April 23, 2013 and by the addition of the “DuPage
County Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Ordinance” enacted May 26, 2009 hereinafter referred to
as the DuPage County Ordinance, which is included herein as Appendix A to this Article II of Chapter 8, be
and is hereby incorporated and adopted by reference as the regulations of the Village of Burr Ridge
governing regulation of all development of land within those portions of the Village which are in DuPage
County. Such DuPage County Ordinance has been on file and available for public use, inspection and
examination in the office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least 30 days prior to the adoption of the
Ordinance which incorporates such regulations by reference. (Amended by A-676-01-18)
Sec. 8.25 Partial Waiver Community
That for purposes of the enforcement and implementation of the DuPage County Ordinance (Appendix A),
the Village of Burr Ridge shall be, until otherwise determined by the Village Board, "a partial waiver
community" within the meaning of such term as set forth in the DuPage County Ordinance insofar as it
relates to those portions of the Village which are in DuPage County. (Added by A-676-2-91)
Sec. 8.26 Amendment of Section 15-111 of Article 9 (Renumbered by A-676-1-92)
That subsection 2 of Section 15-111 of Article 9 of the DuPage County Ordinance (Appendix A) be and is
hereby amended by adding thereto the following subsection e:
e. The parcels being redeveloped or developed are less than one acre in area but total less than 60
percent impervious area. For these parcels, detention may be computed using the rational
method with a release rate of 0.10 cfs/acre, with a 2 inch minimum orifice size. (Added by A-676-
2-91)
Sec. 8.27 Amendment of Section 15-112 of Article 9 (Renumbered by A-676-1-99)
That Section 15-112 of Article 9 of the DuPage County Ordinance (Appendix A) be and is hereby amended
by adding thereto subsections 6 and 7 thereof reading in their entirety as follows:
7. All trunk storm sewers (sewers required to service in excess of two (2) acres), shall be designed
to carry, at full unsurcharged flow, the waters from a storm considered to be of a once in ten (10)
year frequency and shall be sized to handle such an amount as such storm would deposit on the
area served by the system. (Amend. A-676-1-99)
8. Plans for developments within the jurisdictional limits of the Flagg Creek Water Reclamation
District (formerly Hinsdale Sanitary District) shall be submitted to the District for their approval
prior to approval by the Administrator. Developments within the Flagg Creek Water Reclamation
District (formerly Hinsdale Sanitary District) shall also comply with all District storm water
management and flood plain regulation ordinances. (Amend. A-676-1-99)
Sec. 8.28 Application of County Ordinance (Renumbered by A-676-1-92)
Any development of any land within DuPage County which is annexed by the Village after the effective date
8-2-2
of these amendments to Chapter 8 shall be required to comply with the DuPage County Ordinance. Any
preannexation agreement affecting any such annexation shall likewise contain a requirement that the
developer of the land comply with the provisions of the DuPage County Ordinance. (added by A-676-02-91)
Sec. 8.29 Reservoirs and Stormwater Storage Areas.
(added by A-676-01-08)
All stormwater storage facilities must be located in a separate outlot, with a unique P.I.N. and must be
owned by either a single party or by a formal association of property owners. Any and all maintenance for
all stormwater storage facilities on private property, and all fees and costs related thereto, whether wet
bottom or dry bottom, shall be the exclusive responsibility of the original owner or developer of he
subdivision during the development and completion thereof, and thereafter the subsequent owner(s) of the
property or subdivision wherein the stormwater storage facilities are located.
Dry bottom detention facilities shall be designed to serve a secondary purpose such as recreation, open
space, or other types of uses that will not be adversely affected by occasional flooding. A method of
carrying the low flow through these areas shall be provided. In addition, a system of drains may be
provided with a positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or other storm sewer facility.
Detention reservoirs and/or retention reservoirs shall be constructed to provide the required storage volume
denoted herein. Existing manmade or natural storage channels or reservoirs that exist prior to proposed
development shall not be used to offset the calculated storage requirement for the proposed development,
for all storms up to and including the 100-year event. (Added by A-676-1-91)
The combination of storage of the water from a one hundred (100) year storm and the design release rate
shall not result in a storage duration in excess of seventy-two (72) hours; however, release rate shall govern
as long as possible. Maximum depths of planned storm water storage shall not exceed four (4') feet unless
the existing natural ground contours and other conditions dictate greater storage depths, subject to approval
by the Village Engineer. Minimum grades for areas to be constructed shall be two (2%) percent and
maximum slopes shall be (25%) percent (four [4] units horizontally to one [1] unit vertically). Storage area
side slopes shall be kept as close to the natural land contours as practical.
If slopes greater than 4:1 are necessary to meet storage requirements or area restrictions, approval shall be
obtained from the Village Engineer, and erosion control shall be provided in addition to the protection
required to insure public health, safety and welfare.
Retaining walls may be used in order to enhance the appearance or volume of stormwater storage facilities.
The height of each retaining wall may not exceed 42 inches in height measured from the top of grade at
the bottom of the wall to the highest top cap of the wall. Retaining walls may not be constructed of poured
concrete, but must be constructed of segmented, landscape quality, retaining wall blocks, with capstones.
No portion of a retaining wall, including tie-backs or mesh, will be permitted to extend into a public utility
easement or Village right-of-way. When retaining walls are used, a minimum 12’ wide access path shall be
provided in order to ensure that maintenance equipment can access the bottom of the stormwater storage
facility. When tiered retaining wall systems are used, the engineering plans must include a detailed
landscaping plan. The landscaping plan shall indicate species, location, and number of plantings.
Plantings which will be placed below the 100 year High Water Level (HWL) must be suitable for use in
submerged locations. The maintenance of the plantings will be the responsibility of the Homeowners
Association, and should be included in the annual maintenance plan and budget. The landscape plan may
be subject to review by a Village landscape consultant, at the developer’s expense. All proposed
landscaping below the 100 year High Water Level (HWL) must be approved by the Village Engineer and
included in the annual maintenance plan and budget. Perimeter landscaping of the outlot must be in
accordance with Ordinance #A-894-01-08.
Outlet control structures installed shall require little or no maintenance/attention for proper operation. Each
storm water storage area shall be provided with a method of emergency overflow in order to accommodate
a storm in excess of the one hundred (100) year return frequency, and to function as an overflow bypass in
the event that the low flow outlet is obstructed. This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to
function without maintenance/attention and shall become part of the natural or surface channel system
8-2-3
described in the preceding section. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design
features. Both outlet control structures and emergency overflow facilities shall be designed and constructed
to fully protect the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with the recommendations of the Village
Engineer. Storm water run-off velocities shall be kept to a minimum and turbulent conditions at an outfall
control structure will not be permitted without complete protection for the public safety in accordance with
the recommendations of the Village Engineer. The use of restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and
shall be used only as a last resort when no other method is feasible.
Sec. 8.30 Wet Retention Stormwater Storage Areas - Additional Conditions.
(added by A-676-01-08)
Wet retention stormwater storage facilities require on-going maintenance, repair, improvement, as
applicable, and the creation and continuance of a financing mechanism for long-term maintenance and
improvement activities, to remain fully functional and operational. Retention reservoir or wet bottom storm
water storage areas shall be designed to meet the requirements for detention reservoir or storage areas set
forth above in Section 8.05. A low flow conduit and a system of drains with a positive gravity outlet shall not
be required. However, the following additional conditions are required:
a) Wet detention facilities will be permitted only in residential subdivisions which include a minimum
of eight (8) lots, or commercial subdivisions with four (4) lots.
b) Any and all maintenance for such wet detention facilities on private property, shall be the
exclusive responsibility of the owner(s) of the property or subdivision wherein the stormwater
storage facilities are located. All such subdivisions are responsible for the creation and operation
of a formal association of property owners to ensure the applicable maintenance and funding
responsibilities of this Chapter are met. Whether or not an association of property owners is
created or operated, as here required, the lot owners in a subdivision shall at all times be both
individually, and collectively, responsible for full compliance, and for all costs related thereto, with
all applicable requirements of this Chapter for the creation, maintenance and costs thereof, of the
establishment and operation of wet retention stormwater facilities within the subdivision.
c) The surface area of the normal pool should be designed at a ration of 25:1 to the tributary area
to enhance the cycling frequency of the pond. In no case shall the water surface area exceed
one tenth (1/10) of the tributary drainage area.
d) Shoreline protection shall be provided utilizing native and/or wetland plantings. The buffer zone
shall encompass the areas between the normal water level and the high water level, but in no
case shall the buffer zone be less than 5’ in width. The buffer zone must be designated and
signed as a no-mow zone. The landscape plan may be subject to review by a Village landscape
consultant, at the developer’s expense. All proposed landscaping below the 100 year High Water
Level (HWL) must be approved by the Village Engineer and included in the annual maintenance
plan and budget. Perimeter landscaping of the outlot must be in accordance with Ordinance #A-
894-01-08.
e) Minimum normal water depth shall be five (5') feet. If the pond is to be stocked with fish, no less
than one quarter (1/4) of the pond area shall be a minimum of eleven (11') feet deep.
f) A 10’ wide safety ledge must be provided around the entire perimeter of the basin. The ledge
shall be located 1’-2’ below the normal water level. The safety ledge must be planted with
emergent wetland plantings.
h) A sedimentation basin 1.5’ deeper than the design depth of the basin shall be provided at the
upstream end of the pond.
i) The inflow pipe must discharge into a forebay with a minimum size of 10% of the water surface
area. The forebay must be established with native wetland plants.
j) Where feasible, facilities shall be provided to permit the pond level to be lowered by gravity flow
8-2-4
for cleaning purposes and shoreline maintenance.
k) Control structures for storm water release shall be designed to operate at full capacity with
increases in the water surface level as required. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted with
final engineering plans.
l) Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation, shall be provided. Design calculations to
substantiate the effectiveness of these aeration facilities shall be submitted with final engineering
plans. Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities shall be
prepared to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer.
m) In the event that the normal water level of the pond is raised for any reason, the volume
remaining for storage of excess storm water run-off shall still be sufficient to contain the one
hundred (100) year storm run-off.
n) Maintenance Agreement: A legally binding maintenance agreement will be executed, or
recorded, before the Final Plat is signed. The agreement, or the substantive provisions thereof,
shall be included in the property deed restrictions and homeowners association covenants, and
shall be included in the documents which are recorded with the County Recorder. The terms of
the agreement shall be binding upon all property owners, individually and collectively, following
creation of the association. The Village of Burr Ridge Stormwater Facility Maintenance
Agreement is attached hereto as Exhibit A.
o) Maintenance Plan and Budget: The developer shall develop and attach to the Declaration of
Property Owner’s covenants, a maintenance plan and budget. The maintenance plan and
budget shall more specifically describe the specific maintenance practices to be performed for the
perpetual maintenance, operation, inspection, and repair, and if applicable, possible replacement
of a part, or all, of the stormwater management facility. The Maintenance Plan and Budget shall
be prepared on the forms which are attached hereto as Exhibit B.
p) Maintenance funding mechanism: The Developer shall establish an escrow account for the
maintenance of the facility or facilities. The escrow account shall be established in the amount
of 15% of the initial construction costs of the stormwater facility. The escrow account must be
specifically defined for use regarding maintenance of the stormwater facility of facilities; no
other use of the funds can be permitted. The escrow account shall be deeded to the Property
Owners Association upon activation of the association. After incorporation by the Property
Owner’s association, the escrow account shall be supplemented annually with a sinking fund
from property owner association dues or property owner payments in accordance with the
approved maintenance schedule and budget. The annual contributions must include a
contribution of the annual maintenance cost in accordance with the approved maintenance
plan and budget, and an annual contribution toward reconstruction of the stormwater facility
after 20 years. The Property Owner contribution schedule shall be structured such that 75%
of initial construction costs of construction shall be deposited in the escrow account within 10-
years following initial construction (such that the escrow account has 75% of initial
construction costs in addition to maintenance costs), and 100% of initial construction costs
within 20-years. Any funds drawn down as a result of annual maintenance shall be replaced in
accordance with the annual deposit schedule. The Homeower’s Association must submit a copy
of the HOA budget, annual report or audit, and an calculation of the average homeowner
assessment (if not indicated in the budget), to the Village of Burr Ridge, January 1st of each year.
q) Maintenance surety: Following completion and acceptance of the subdivision improvements, the
developer will be required to provide a separate maintenance surety, which will be retained for
five (5) years as a surety for maintenance of the pond. The escrow account shall be established
in and FDIC-insured account. As part of the escrow instructions with the establishment of the
escrow account, the Village must consent to the disbursement of funds from the escrow account
to ensure ongoing compliance with the maintenance plan and budget. Such consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld by the Village. The escrow instructions shall also allow the Village to
receive information from the escrow agent regarding the deposits to, disbursements from, and
8-2-5
the balance of the account, upon written request to the escrow agent from the Village.
r) Following 60 days written notice to the property owner(s) and/or association of property
owners, of any failure of such owners or association to fulfill any of their responsibilities under
this Chapter, the Village shall have the right, but no duty, to go upon any property to
undertake and complete any of the responsibilities imposed hereunder on the property
owner(s) or upon any association of property owners, for any private property upon which is
located a wet retention stormwater storage area. All costs of or related to any such work by
the Village shall be the responsibility of the property owners or association and shall be
reimbursed to the Village within 30 days of written notice from the Village for payment. If such
costs are not paid by the property owners or association within 30 days, the Village shall have
the option to pursue any and all remedies against any and all real property in the subdivision
in the amount of such costs, and until such costs are paid.
Sec. 8.31 Subdivision Plat Approval and Building Permit
That the approval of any subdivision plat and the issuance of any building permit are contingent upon
compliance with all appropriate requirements of the Village of Burr Ridge Stormwater Ordinance and of the
DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance (Appendix A), which Ordinance has
been duly adopted as a part of this Code. In the event of a conflict between prevailing Ordinances the more
stringent rule shall apply, as determined by the Village Engineer. (Amended by A-676-01-08))
8-3-1
ARTICLE III Best Management Practice Requirements throughout all portions of the Village
(section renumbered by A-676-01-14)
Sec. 8.33 Best Management Practices
All Developments which require storm water storage shall treat one hundred per cent (100%) of the
developed area for pollutants from the site in accordance with accepted practices and procedures.
Pollutant/sediment capture must occur through the means of manufactured Best Management Practices
(BMP’s). The manufactured BMP may consist of baffle box sediment traps of design and manufacture
approved by the Village Engineer, or other hydrodynamic sediment separation device if approved by Village
Engineer.
Manufactured BMP shall be placed on the last storm sewer segment upstream of the storm water storage
facility. Said Manufactured BMP shall be located in a manner which allows for ease of access for
maintenance purposes. All manufactured BMP’s shall meet the following minimum design parameters:
1. Storm Water Treatment Volume:
a. Systems should be designed to effectively treat the water quality storm (approximately
2.5 inches in a 24 hour time period in Northeastern Illinois) at a minimum. Effective
treatment is defined as 80% Total Suspended Solids (TSS) removal from the design
storm, with the TSS being defined as the PSD following:
Particle Size Distribution
Particle Size Percent by Mass
20 micron 20
60 micron 20
150 micron 20
400 micron 20
2000 micron 20
b. Effective treatment also constitutes removal of a minimum of 80% of the free floatable
hydrocarbons in the runoff device before bypass.
c. A bypass provision is required to divert the high-velocity, turbulent flows of large storm
events, as these intense flows exceed the scour velocity of the smallest particles being
targeted for removal. The bypass provision protects previously captured sediment and
contaminants from being re-suspended and discharged from the system under high
flow conditions.
d. An alternate sizing method such as US EPA SWMM may be utilized based on local
historical rainfall using a continuous simulation model. These sizing methods are
acceptable as long as they are consistent with removing 80% of the annual TSS, with
the TSS being defined by the Particle Size Distribution listed above.
e. Sizing must account for site drainage area, percent imperviousness, TSS loading, and
PSD (as listed above) or particle size distribution typical for that from the runoff site, if
substantiated through a geotechnical evaluation of the site, signed and stamped by a
IL licensed Professional Engineer.
f. Sizing methodologies shall provide calculations substantiating TSS removal efficiencies
and demonstrate correlation to field monitoring results using both particle size
distribution and TSS removal.
2. Retention of Accumulated Pollutants during Large Rainfall Events
8-3-2
The manufactured BMP device must retain accumulated pollutants (sediment and hydrocarbons)
during high flow conditions. Previously accumulated pollutants must not be re-suspended
(scoured) and discharged from the device. Certified laboratory or field monitoring results must
demonstrate that the system does not scour when the flow rate is 200%+ of the designed
operating rate and the sediment depth in the treatment chamber is 50% of the rated sediment
capacity. Particle size distribution for the sediment load shall conform to that listed above.
Sec. 8.34 Fee-in-lieu of Best Management Practice
A fee may be paid in lieu of Best Management Practice, if it can be demonstrated that site
conditions are such that there is no practical means of constructing a Manufactured BMP, or if it
can be demonstrated that the effectiveness of the BMP will be negligible based upon location,
downstream conditions, or site development methodology. Determination will be made by the
Village Engineer based upon the following criteria:
1. The proposed development shall not include the construction of a wet detention facility.
2. The proposed development shall not be located upstream from an existing wet
detention facility.
3. The proposed development shall not be located immediately upstream from a stream,
river, pond, lake, or other riparian water body
4. The proposed development shall not cause adverse impacts to downstream properties
if a BMP is not provided.
If determination is made that a BMP is not practical or effective, the developer shall contribute
fee-in-lieu monies in accordance with Chapter 8, Schedule B, of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
Fee-in-lieu monies must be contributed prior to the authorization of the Final Plat of Subdivision.
(A-676-02-07)
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 8
STORM WATER RUN-OFF
APPENDIX A
Village of Burr Ridge Ordinance A-676-2-91, adopted November 11, 1991 made the following changes to the DuPage County
Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance:
1. Article 9, Section 15-111, amended by adding subsection e, (see Section 8.23 of Chapter 8).
2. Article 9, Section 15-112, amended by adding subsections 6 and 7 (see Section 8.24 of Chapter 8). Renumbered to 7 and 8
by A-676-1-99.
The DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance is available at the front counter of the Village Office.
Appendix A – Page 1
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 8
STORM WATER RUN-OFF
APPENDIX B
Village of Burr Ridge Ordinance A-676-01-14, adopted April 28, 2014 adopted the Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance by
reference. The July 10, 2014 amendment to the CCWMO was adopted by the Village on July 13, 2015. The February 15 2018
amendment to the CCWMO was adopted by the Village of July 23, 2018. (amended by A-676-01-18)
The Cook County Watershed Management Ordinance is available at the front counter of the Village Office or at www.wmo.mwrd.org.
Appendix B – Page 1
Schedule A
Permit Fee Structure
(Amended by A-676-01-03)
Section 1: Stormwater Review in Cook and/or DuPage County
Except as provided in Section 2 hereof, all applications for stormwater review ("stormwater submittal" category)
shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the "Village of Burr Ridge," as follows:
A. Individual Road Project (per mile) $405 + $400 per mile of road development
B. Less than one acre proposed commercial site,
development or subdivision or any proposed
residential site, development or subdivision
of less than three acres ................................................................................................................. $ 540.00
C. Development on a single parcel not involving
a subdivision and/or greater than 5,000 square
feet disturbed................................................................................................................................. $ 200.00
D. One to five acre proposed commercial site,
subdivision or development or any proposed
residential subdivision or development of
at least three acres and not more than ten
acres ............................................................................................................................................. $1,215.00
E. Any five to ten acre proposed commercial
site, subdivision or development or any
proposed residential subdivision or
development of between ten to fifty acres ................................................................................... $2,105.00
F. Greater than ten acre proposed commercial
site, subdivision or development or any
proposed residential subdivision or
development of greater than fifty acres........................................................................................ $2,105.00
plus $10/acre over ten acres commercial or fifty acres residential
Riparian Area Mitigation (DuPage County only)........................................................................... $ 360.00
in addition to any applicable fee set forth above
Plans that are rejected and require a resubmittal shall be assessed an additional $100.00 for each resubmittal
review.
Section 2: Special Management Area Review in DuPage County
All applications for a review of a "special management area" (as that term is defined in Article 10 of Appendix A of
this Chapter 8) shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to "DuPage County Department of Environmental
Concerns," as follows:
Schedule A – Page 1
Flood Plain
A. Development in the regulatory flood
plain, outside of the regulatory
floodway, without stormwater detention........................................................................................ $ 490.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
B. Development in the regulatory flood
plain, outside of the regulatory
floodway, including stormwater detention..................................................................................... $ 640.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
C. Development in the floodway (except
utility crossings at existing grade) ................................................................................................ $1,360.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
D. Development in the regulatory flood plain
for utility crossings at existing grade ............................................................................................. $ 365.00
Wetlands
A. Wetland Impact Review fee
i Less than one acre site................................................................................................. $ 360.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
ii One to ten acre site....................................................................................................... $ 560.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
iii Ten to fifty acre site....................................................................................................... $ 760.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
iv Greater than fifty acre site ............................................................................................ $ 960.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
B. Wetland Mitigation (on-site or off-site)
i Less than 0.5 acre site................................................................................................. $1,180.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
ii 0.5 to two acre site....................................................................................................... $1,260.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
iii Two to five acre site..................................................................................................... $1,360.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
iv Greater than five acre site ........................................................................................... $1,460.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
C. Wetland Banking Review Fee........................................................................................................... $ 0.00
Based on the area to be and the acre cost of the individual bank plus the
appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
Schedule A- Page 2
The fees as outlined in section 2 are subject to a resubmittal fee if the submitted plans are rejected as determined
by the DuPage County Department of Environmental Concerns.
Section 3: Flood Plain Area Review in Cook County
All applications for a review of a "flood plain" (as that term is defined in Chapter 7 – Special Flood Hazard Area)
shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to "Village of Burr Ridge," as follows:
Flood Plain
A. Development in the regulatory flood
plain, outside of the regulatory
floodway, without stormwater detention........................................................................................ $ 490.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
B. Development in the regulatory flood
plain, outside of the regulatory
floodway, including stormwater detention..................................................................................... $ 640.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
C. Development in the floodway (except
utility crossings at existing grade) ................................................................................................ $1,360.00
plus the appropriate stormwater review fee required under Section 1
D. Development in the regulatory flood plain
for utility crossings at existing grade ............................................................................................. $ 365.00
Section 4: Variations
The fee for requesting any variation from the provisions of Chapter 8 is $1,360.00 plus the appropriate permit
review fees set forth in Sections 1, 2, and/or 3 above.
Section 5: Appeals
The fee for filing of an appeal under the provisions of Chapter 8 is $1,360.00. If the petitioner is successful in the
appeal, the entire appeal fee shall be refunded.
Section 6: Map Interpretation
As a service to the community, the Village, through the DuPage Department of Environmental Concerns, will
provide a written interpretation of the regulatory flood plain and wetland maps. The fee for providing any such
written interpretation is $65.00 for each real estate tax parcel of land.
Schedule A – Page 3
Schedule B
Fee-in-lieu of BMP Structure
(Added by A-676-02-07)
Subdivision developments which are identified for fee-in-lieu of Best Management Practice, in accordance with Chapter 8, Article III,
Section 31 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code, shall submit a fee, payable to the “Village of Burr Ridge,” as follows:
Single Family Home Developments:
Fee-in-lieu for single family home developments shall be $3,000 multiplied by the acreage of the lot (s).
Non-Residential Properties:
Fee-in-lieu for non-residential properties shall be $15,000 multiplied by the acreage of the lot.
Schedule B – Page 1
EXHIBIT A
(added by A-676-01-08
VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE
COUNTIES OF COOK AND DUPAGE
STORMWATER FACILITY MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
WHEREAS, The Property Owner recognizes that wet detention
stormwater management facilities (hereinafter referred to as “the facility” or “facilities”) must be maintained for the development
known as located in the jurisdiction of the Village of Burr Ridge, Cook
and DuPage Counties, Illinois; and,
WHEREAS, the Property Owner is the owner of real property more legally described on the attached Exhibit A, (hereinafter referred
to as “the Property”), and,
WHEREAS, the Village of Burr Ridge (hereinafter referred to as “the Village”) and the Property Owner, or its administrators,
executors, successors, heirs, or assigns, agree that the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village require that the
facilities be constructed and maintained on the property, pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 8 of the Burr Ridge Village Code;
and,
WHEREAS, the provisions of Chapter 8 of the Burr Ridge Village Code require that facility or facilities as shown on the approved
subdivision engineering plans be constructed and maintained by the Property Owner, its administrators, executors, successors,
heirs, or assigns.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, the mutual covenants contained herein, and the following terms
and conditions, the parties hereto agree as follows:
1. The facility or facilities shall be constructed by the Property Owner in accordance with the approved subdivision
engineering plans.
2. The Property Owner, its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, or assigns shall maintain the facility or facilities in
good working condition acceptable to the Village and in accordance with the Maintenance Plan attached hereto and
labeled as Exhibit B.
3. The Property Owner, its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, or assigns hereby grants permission to the Village,
its authorized agents and employees, reasonable access to enter upon the property and to inspect the facilities whenever
the Village deems necessary.
4. In the event the Property Owner, its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, or assigns fails to maintain the facility or
facilities as shown on the approved development plans in good working condition and in accordance with the
Maintenance Plan incorporated into this Agreement, the Village, with due notice, may enter the property and take
whatever steps it deems necessary to return the facility or facilities to good working order. It is expressly understood and
agreed that the Village is under no obligation to maintain or repair the facility or facilities and in no event shall this
Agreement be construed to impose any such obligation on the Village.
5. In the event the Village, pursuant to this Agreement, performs work of any nature, or expends any funds in the
performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, materials, and the like, the Property Owner shall
reimburse the Village within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof for all costs incurred by the Village hereunder. If not paid
within the prescribed time period, the Village shall have and are hereby granted the right to secure a lien against the real
property or the Property Owner(s) in the amount of such costs. The actions described herein are in addition to and not in
lieu of any and all legal remedies available to the Village as a result of the Property Owner’s failure to maintain the facility
or facilities.
6. It is the intent of this Agreement to insure the proper maintenance of the facility or facilities by the Property Owner;
provided, however, that this Agreement shall not be deemed to create or affect additional liability of any party for damage
alleged to result from or caused by stormwater runoff.
7. Sediment accumulation resulting from the normal operation of the facility or facilities will be considered. The Property
Owner will make accommodation for the removal and disposal of all accumulated sediments. Disposal will be provided
onsite in a reserved area(s) or will be removed from the site. Reserved area(s) shall be sufficient to accommodate for a
minimum of two dredging cycles.
8. The Developer shall establish an escrow account for the maintenance of the facility or facilities. The escrow account shall
be established in the amount of 15% of the initial construction costs of the stormwater facility. The escrow account must
be specifically defined for use regarding maintenance of the stormwater facility of facilities; no other use of the funds can
be permitted all other uses must be restricted. The escrow account shall be deeded to the Property Owners Association
upon activation of the association. The escrow account shall then be supplemented annually with a sinking fund from
homeowner association dues or property owner payments in accordance with the approved maintenance schedule and
budget. The annual contributions must include a contribution of the annual maintenance cost in accordance with the
approved maintenance plan and budget, and a contribution for reconstruction of the stormwater facility after 20 years.
The Property Owner contribution schedule shall be structured such that 75% of initial construction costs shall be
deposited in the escrow account within 10-years following initial construction (such that the escrow account has 75% of
initial construction costs in addition to maintenance costs), and 100% of initial construction costs within 20-years. Any
funds drawn down as a result of annual maintenance shall be replaced in accordance with the annual deposit schedule. The
escrow account shall be established in an FDIC-insured account. As part of the escrow instructions with the
establishment of the escrow account, the Village must consent to the disbursement of funds from the escrow account to
ensure ongoing compliance with the maintenance plan and budget. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld by
the Village. The escrow instructions shall also allow the Village to receive information from the escrow agent regarding
the deposits to, disbursements from, and the balance of the account, upon written request to the escrow agent from the
Village.
9. If at any time the Village accepts the facility for public management and maintenance, the portion of the sinking fund
based on initial construction costs shall be remitted to the Village at the time of acceptance.
10. The Property Owner, its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, or assigns shall use the Village of Burr Ridge
Standard Maintenance Inspection Reports attached to this Agreement as Exhibit B and by reference made a part hereof
for the purpose of a minimal annual inspection of the facility or facilities by a qualified inspector. A copy of the inspection
reports shall be submitted annually to the Village for its records.
11. The Property Owner, its administrators, executors, successors, heirs, or assigns hereby indemnifies and holds harmless
the Village and its authorized agents and employees for any and all damages, accidents, casualties, occurrences or
claims that may arise or be asserted against the Village from the construction, presence, existence or maintenance of the
facility or facilities by the Property Owner or the Village. In the event a claim is asserted against the Village, its authorized
agents or employees, the Village shall promptly notify the property owner and the Property Owner shall defend at its own
expense any suit based on such claim. If any judgment or claims against the Village, its authorized agents or employees
shall be allowed, the Property Owner shall pay for all fees and expenses in connection herewith.
12. This Agreement shall be recorded with the County Recorder of Cook or DuPage County, Illinois, and shall constitute a
covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the Property Owner, its administrators, executors, successors,
heirs, or assigns and any other successors in interest, including any homeowners association.
13. This Agreement may be enforced by proceedings at law or in equity by or against the parties hereto and their respective
successors in interest.
14. Invalidation of any one of the provisions of this Agreement shall in no way effect any other provisions and all other
provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
EXHIBIT A
VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE
COUNTIES OF COOK AND DUPAGE
STORMWATER FACILITY MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT
Witness the following signatures and seals:
SEAL
Company/Corporation/Partnership Name
By:
Type Name
Type Name
STATE OF
COUNTY OF
The foregoing agreement was acknowledged before me this day of 20 ,.,
by
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires:
VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE, ILLINOIS
By:
President/Mayor
STATE OF ILLINIOS
COUNTIES OF COOK AND DUPAGE
The foregoing agreement was acknowledged before me this day of 20 ,.,
by
NOTARY PUBLIC
My Commission Expires:
EXHIBIT B
(added by A-676-01-08)
VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE
COUNTIES OF COOK AND DuPAGE
MAINTENANCE PLAN AND BUDGET
Maintenance Plans and Budgets vary widely due to the size and unique characteristics of each storm water management system
proposed. This appendix is intended for use as a starting point in the development of an appropriate maintenance plan specific to
the size and components of each system.
Maintenance Plan and Budget for Name of subdivision
By:
Name of Development Company
A. Storm Water Management System Maintenance Plan
1. Responsibility
a. During construction, it is the above-named developer’s responsibility to perform maintenance.
b. Upon completion of construction, it will be the responsibility of property owner(s) and the [INSERT NAME OF
PROPERTY OWNER’S ASSOCIATION] to perform all maintenance.
c. The Master Deed and Homeowner’s Association Covenants will specify that routine maintenance of the storm water
facilities is solely the responsibility of the lot owners in the subdivision and the Homeowner’s Association. The
association is responsible for planning, budgeting, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, and replacing all portions of the
stormwater facility.
d. The Master Deed and Homeowner’s Association Covenants will specify that routine maintenance of the storm water
facilities must be completed within 60 days of receipt of written notification that action is required, unless other
acceptable arrangements are made. Emergency maintenance (i.e. when there is endangerment to public health,
safety or welfare) shall be performed immediately upon receipt of written notice. Should [INSERT NAME OF
PROPERTY OWNER’S ASSOCIATION] fail to act within these time frames, the Village of Burr Ridge may perform
the necessary maintenance and assess the costs against [INSERT NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER’S
ASSOCIATION].
2. Source of Financing
[INSERT NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER’S ASSOCIATION] is required to pay for all maintenance activities on a continuing basis.
3. Maintenance Tasks and Schedule
a. Table A describes maintenance tasks to be performed by the developer during construction. Table B describes
maintenance tasks to be performed by [INSERT NAME OF PROPERTY OWNER’S ASSOCIATION] after completion
of construction. Table C describes a sample budget for annual maintenance activity
b. Immediately following construction, the developer will have the storm water management system inspected by an
approved professional engineer to verify grades of the detention and filtration areas and make recommendations for
any necessary sediment removal.



BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 9
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sec. 9.01 Definitions
Sec. 9.02 Administration of Chapter/Application
Sec. 9.03 Review of Application/Compliance Investigations
Sec. 9.04 Grant/Denial of Application
Sec. 9.05 Inspections
Sec. 9.06 Suspension of Certificate
Sec. 9.07 Revocation
Sec. 9.08 Transfer of Certificate – Prohibited
Sec. 9.09 Exhibition of Films or Videos – Regulations
Sec. 9.10 Live Performances/Nudity
Sec. 9.11 Minors
Sec. 9.12 Advertising, Loitering and Lighting Regulations
Sec. 9.13 Hours of Operation
Sec. 9.14 Additional Prohibitions
Sec. 9.15 Exemptions
Sec. 9.16 Penalties Pertaining to Sexually Oriented Businesses
Sec. 9.17 Immunity From Prosecution
Sec. 9.18 Severability
9-1
CHAPTER 9
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sec. 9.01 Definitions
In the interpretation and construction of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless they
are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of Trustees or the context clearly requires
otherwise:
Sexually Oriented Businesses are those businesses defined as follows:
(1) “Adult Arcade”, means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more
still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image
producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
(2) “Adult Bookstore”, “Adult Novelty Store” or “Adult Video Store” means a commercial
establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade in any
one or more of the following, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to,
the sale or rental for any form of consideration of any one or more of the following:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”;
(b) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or
abuse of the user or others.
(c) An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve
the offering for sale rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” and still be
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being
categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long
as one of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some
form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe “specified
anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
(3) “Adult Cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant “bottle club,” carwash, automobile repair
or service business, maid service or similar commercial establishment or business, whether
or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features: (a) persons who appear
semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity; (b) live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” An “adult cabaret” also includes
any business which offers as part of its services or entertainment and for any type of
consideration, dancing with any patron intended for the sexual stimulation of the patron, by
9-2
an employee or person hired by the business, while the employee is in any state of dress or
undress.
(4) “Adult Motel” means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: (a) offers
public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closedcircuit
television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and which advertises the
availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the
public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including but not limited to,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or (b) offers a sleeping
room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours; or (c) allows a tenant or
occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours.
(5) “Adult Motion Picture Theater” means a commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
(6) “Adult Theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, or live performances which are characterized by
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”.
(7) “Escort” means a person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(8) “Escort Agency” means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or
advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other
consideration.
(9) “Massage Parlor” means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or
any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in
connection with “specified sexual activities”, or where any person providing such treatment,
manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes his or her “specified anatomical areas” or
massages the “specified anatomical areas” of the customer unless prescribed by a
physician or registered physical and massage therapist. The definition of sexually oriented
businesses shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a
licensed hospital, nor by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by
any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon,
chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
(10) “Semi-Nude Model Studio” means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a
state of semi-nudity or nudity is provided for money or any form of consideration to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons.
(11) “Sexual Encounter Establishment”, means a business or commercial establishment, that as
one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where
two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of “specified
9-3
sexual activities” when one or more of the persons is semi-nude or nude. The definition of
sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
Employee
A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or
not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business or is
paid solely by tips from customers.
Establishment
Includes any of the following:
(1) The Opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new Business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter;
(3) The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
(4) The relocation of any such sexually oriented business; or
(5) The addition of a sexually oriented business to an existing business which is not a sexually
oriented business.
Nudity of state of nudity
(a) The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, pubic region, or the
areola or nipple of the female breast; or (b) a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a
human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female breast.
Operator
Includes the owner, certificate holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any
certified or uncertified premises.
Public Building
Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the Village, any
special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United
States, which building is used for governmental purposes.
Public park or recreation area
Any public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited
to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land within the Village which
is under the control, operation, or management of the Village or the park and recreation authorities.
Religious Institution
9-4
Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities.
School
Any public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery
schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior
high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation
schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. School includes the school
grounds, administrative facilities, and the facilities used primarily for other purposes by the school.
Certified Premises
Any premises that requires a certificate that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
Certificate Holder
A person in whose name a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy to operate a sexually oriented business
has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a certificate.
Person
An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity of any kind.
Sexually Oriented Business
An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency or semi-nude or nude model studio.
Residential District or Use
An area containing single family homes, duplexes, townhouses, multiple family units, a mobile park or
subdivision and campground, as defined in the Village Zoning Ordinance.
Specified Anatomical Areas
Includes any of the following:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus,
or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
(2) Human Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities
Includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus,
or female breasts; or
9-5
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy; or
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
(5) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in
subdivisions (1) through (4) of this subsection.
Semi-Nude or Semi-Nudity
A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Substantial Enlargement of a Sexually Oriented Business
An increase in the floor areas occupied by the business by more than 15%.
Transfer of Ownership of Control of a Sexually Oriented Business
Includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities or objects signifying ownership, which constitute a substantial or
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, gift, or similar means;
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the
death of a person possessing the ownership or control.
Specified Criminal Act
Includes any criminal act or conduct as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, United States Code,
Criminal Code of any other State; Criminal Code of any United States Territory; or the Village of Burr
Ridge Code which is defined as or has as one of its elements, any of the following;
A. exploitation of a minor;
B. sexual penetration;
C. sexual touching;
D. pornographic images of a minor;
E. incest;
F. public sexual activity or indecency;
G. prostitution or solicitation of prostitution
H. tax evasion or criminal tax non-payment;
9-6
I. pimping;
J. pandering; and
K. attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy of any item on the foregoing list.
Sec. 9.02 Administration of Chapter/Application
The Community Development Director or his/her designee is responsible for granting, denying,
revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling Zoning Certificates of Occupancy for proposed or
existing sexually oriented businesses. The Community Development Director or his/her designee is
also responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a
certificate is being applied for complies with all location requirements of the Village of Burr Ridge
Zoning Code and/or all regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the
effective date of this Ordinance in the Village.
The Burr Ridge Police Department is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant
has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time period set forth.
The Village’s Code Enforcement Office is responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted or nonpermitted
sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable
statutes and ordinances.
(1) An application for a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy for a sexually oriented business must
be made on a form provided by the Village. Any person desiring to operate a sexually
oriented business shall file with the Village an original and two copies of a sworn certificate
application on such application form supplied by the Community Development Director or
his/her designee.
(2) The completed application shall contain the following information in addition to information
required in the corresponding provisions of the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, and shall be
accompanied by the following documents:
(i) If the applicant is:
(a) an individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any
aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is eighteen years of
age;
(b) a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the
names of all general partners, whether the partnership is general or
limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
(c) a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of
its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of Illinois, the names and capacity of all officers,
directors, employees and stockholders, if any, in charge of the day to
day operations of the sexually oriented business, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.
(ii) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name
other than that of the applicant; the applicant must state 1) the sexually oriented
9-7
business’s fictitious name and 2) submit the required Illinois registration
documents.
(iii) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to this
Ordinance has, within a two (2) or five (5) year period, as specified in this
Ordinance been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified
criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction.
(iv) Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals pursuant to this Ordinance
has had a previous Zoning Certificate of Occupancy under this Ordinance or any
other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the certificate was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of and reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation, and
whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to this Ordinance
has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or stockholder of a
corporation that is permitted under this Ordinance whose permit has previously
been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the Zoning Certificate of Occupancy was
denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of and reasons for the denial,
suspension or revocation.
(v) Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to this Ordinance
holds any other permits and/or licenses under this Ordinance or other similar
sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the
names and locations of such other permitted businesses.
(vi) The single classification of permit for which the applicant is filing.
(vii) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal
description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any.
(viii) The applicant’s mailing addresses and residential address.
(ix) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(x) The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security number, and his/her
State or federally issued tax identification number.
(xi) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram
need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale
or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six (6) inches.
(xii) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior
to application by an Illinois registered land surveyor depicting the property lines
and the structures containing any established existing uses regulated by this
Ordinance within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of
any established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or
recreation area or public building within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified;
and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or residential property
within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this Section, a
9-8
use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted.
(xiii) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual,
he/she must sign the application for a certificate as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each
individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the business must
sign the application for a certificate as applicant. If a corporation is listed as
Owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate
such a business, each individual having a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in
the corporation must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
(xiv) If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which shall exhibit on
the premises films, video cassettes, or other video reproductions which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then said person shall
comply with the application requirements stated in this Ordinance.
(3) Applicants under this Section shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement
application information required by this Section in the event that said information changes
in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said
continuing duty within the thirty (30) days from the date of such change, by supplementing
the application on file with the Community Development Director or his/her designee, shall
be grounds for suspension or revocation of a certificate.
(4) In the event that the Community Development Director or his/her designee determines or
learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a
proposed sexually oriented business, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact
and allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly complete the application. (The time period
for granting or denying a certificate shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant
is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.) In the event that the
applicant knowingly provides false information on the application form, this provision will not
apply.
(5) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this Ordinance and the
premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire and building
codes and laws.
(6) The applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable application fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing an application under this Section for the administrative
costs of processing an application.
(7) The fact that a person possesses other types of State or Village permits and/or licenses
does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a Zoning Certificate of
Occupancy.
(8) By applying for a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy, the applicant shall be deemed to have
consented to the provisions of this Chapter and the applicable provisions of the Burr Ridge
Zoning Ordinance and to the exercise by the Community Development Director or his/her
designee, the Village of Burr Ridge Police Department and all other Village agencies
charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the Village of their
respective responsibilities under this Chapter and those laws, ordinances and codes.
Sec. 9.03 Review of Application/Compliance Investigations
9-9
a. Upon receipt of an application for Zoning Certificate of Occupancy for a sexually oriented
business properly filed with the Village and upon payment of the non-refundable application
fee, the Village or its designee, shall immediately stamp the application as received and
shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the Village of Burr Ridge
Police Department and any other Village agencies responsible for enforcement of health,
fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually oriented business in
accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this Ordinance. Said
investigations shall be completed within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the
Village or its designee. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency
shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the
application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons therefor. The
Village of Burr Ridge Police Department shall only be required to certify the criminal records
request check required in Section 3 of this Ordinance. The Village of Burr Ridge Police
Department shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications.
b. A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed sexually
oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance,
regulation or other law in effect in the Village. After its indication of approval or disapproval,
each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the
Village or its designee.
Sec. 9.04 Grant/Denial of Application
a. The Community Development Director or his/her designee, shall grant or deny an
application for a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy within thirty (30) days from the date of its
proper filing. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth (30th) day, unless the applicant requests
and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted to begin
operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the Village or its
designee, notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons(s) for
that denial.
b. Grant of Application for Certificate
(1) The Community Development Director or his/her designee, shall grant the
application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection c hereof is
present.
(2) The certificate, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted and the address of the sexually oriented business.
The permit shall also indicate that the sexually oriented business whether
certified or not may be subject to Indecency laws pursuant to the United States
Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991).
The certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to
the sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
c. Denial of Application for Certificate
(1) The Community Development Director or his/her designee, shall deny the
application for any of the following reasons:
(a) An applicant is under eighteen years of age.
9-10
(b) An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is over due on his/her payment
to the Village or any other governmental body of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against him/her individually, or any taxes imposed
upon any corporation or partnership in relation to a business located in
the Village.
(c) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
certificate by the Village to operate a sexually oriented business within
the preceding twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose
Zoning Certificate of Occupancy has been revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
(d) An applicant has failed to provide information required by this Chapter
for the issuance of the certificate or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.
(e) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building
codes by the department or agency responsible under law for
investigating said compliance.
(f) The application or certificate fees required by this Chapter have not
been paid.
(g) An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in
compliance with, any of the provisions of this Chapter and the
provisions of the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, including but not
limited to the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented
business under the Village of Burr Ridge Zoning Code.
(h) The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance, or
court order.
(i) The applicant has a certificate under this Chapter which has been
suspended or revoked.
(j) An applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal” act for which:
(1) less than two (2) years has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, which
ever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense for the “specified criminal acts;”
(2) less than five (5) years has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense for the “specified criminal acts;”
(3) less than five (5) years has elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement,
whichever is the later date, if the applicant has been
convicted of two or more misdemeanor offenses for
9-11
“specified criminal acts” occurring within any twenty-four
month period;
(4) the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on disqualification of the applicant;
(5) An applicant who has been convicted of any “specified
criminal acts” may qualify for a Zoning Certificate of
Occupancy only when the time period required above in
Section 11 (j) has elapsed.
d. If the Community Development Director or his/her designee, denies the application, he/she
shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reasons(s) for the denial.
e. If a person applies for a certificate for a particular location within a period of twelve (12)
months from the date of denial of a previous application for a certificate at the location, and
there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be
expected to lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the
application shall be denied.
Sec. 9.05 Inspections
This Subsection shall be apply to all sexually oriented businesses applying for a Zoning Certificate of
Occupancy.
a. An owner or applicant shall permit representatives of the Code Enforcement Office, the
County Health Department, and the Fire Department to inspect the premises of a sexually
oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business or at any other reasonable time.
b. It shall be unlawful and a person who operates a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a certificate has been issued for said business under this Chapter and/or the
Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, or his/her agent or employee, commits a misdemeanor if
he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is
occupied or open for business or any other reasonable time.
c. The provisions of this Section do not apply to areas of an Adult Motel, as defined in this
Chapter, which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation.
Sec. 9.06 Suspension of Certificate
The suspension of a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy for a sexually oriented business shall be
governed by the following procedures.
a. The Community Development Director or his/her designee, shall suspend a certificate for a
period not to exceed sixty (60) days if he/she determines that a certificate holder, or an
employee of a certificate holder, has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this Chapter; or
9-12
(2) Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances (not
prescribed under the supervision of a licensed physician) while working on the
sexually oriented business premises; or
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises; or
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business
premises; or
(5) Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of any building, fire, health,
or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local,
said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or
agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such statute,
code, ordinance or regulation violation, the Village or its designee, shall promptly
notify the certificate holder of the violation and shall allow the certificate holder a
three (3) day period in which to correct the violation. If the certificate holder fails
to correct the violation before the expiration of the three (3) day period, the
Community Development Director or his/her designee, shall forthwith suspend
the certificate and shall notify the certificate holder of the suspension; or
(6) Engaged in a certificate transfer contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. In the
event that the Community Development Director or his/her designee, suspends a
certificate on the ground that a certificate holder engaged in a certificate transfer
contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, the Community Development Director
or his/her designee shall forthwith notify the certificate holder of the suspension.
The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of this Chapter
has been satisfied; or
(7) Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation; or
(8) Commits any crime on the premises; or
(9) Knowingly employs a minor.
b. The suspension shall remain in effect for the entire period of the suspension or until the
violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected,
whichever is later.
Sec. 9.07 Revocation
All sexually oriented businesses holding a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy shall be subject to
possible revocation of the certificate in accordance with the following:
a. The Community Development Director or his/her designee shall revoke a certificate if a
cause of suspension under this Chapter occurs and the certificate had previously been
suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
b. The Community Development Director or his/her designee, shall revoke a certificate upon
determining that:
(1) A certificate holder gave false or misleading material information in the
documents submitted during the application process; or
9-13
(2) A certificate holder or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; or
(3) A certificate holder or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises; or
(4) A certificate holder or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the certificate holder’s certificate was
suspended; or
(5) A certificate holder has been convicted of a “specified criminal act” for which the
time period required in this Chapter has not elapsed; or
(6) A person or persons commits an offense, occurring in or on the certified
premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been
obtained or which is shown to have occurred in the appropriate civil
administrative procedure, and the person or persons were employees of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact
that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
certificate; or
(7) A certificate holder is convicted of any tax violation; or
(8) A certificate holder or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other specified sexual
activities to occur in or on the certified premises; or
(9) A certificate holder has been operating more than one sexually oriented business
under a single roof.
c. When the Community Development Director or his/her designee, revokes a certificate, the
revocation shall continue for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If,
subsequent to revocation, the Community Development Director or his/her designee finds
that the basis for revocation under this Chapter has been corrected, the applicant shall be
granted a certificate if at least one year has elapsed since the date revocation became
effective. If the certificate was revoked for committing a specified criminal act, an applicant
may not be granted another certificate until the number of years required for committing
such violation has elapsed.
Sec. 9.08 Transfer of Certificate—Prohibited
A Zoning Certificate of Occupancy for sexually oriented businesses shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
a. A certificate holder shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
certificate at any place other than the address designated in the application for certificate.
b. A certificate holder shall not transfer his/her certificate to another person.
c. A certificate holder shall not transfer his certificate to another location.
d. Any attempt to transfer a certificate either directly or indirectly in violation of this Section is
hereby declared void and the certificate shall be deemed revoked.
9-14
Sec. 9.09 Exhibition of Films or Videos—Regulations
a. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than a
sexually oriented motel/hotel which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction which depicts “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy, the application shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the
location of one or more manager’s stations, the location of all overhead lighting
fixtures, the location of the booths, and designating any portion of the premises in
which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirtytwo
(32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight (8) feet.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which this certificate will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however,
each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions
sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.
(2) the application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station or booths may
be made without the prior approval of the Village or its designee.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to insure that at least
one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that
any patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager’s station to every area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have
two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall
be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area
of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at
least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must
be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of
any agents and employees present on the premises to insure that the view area
specified in Subsection 5 above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials or persons at all times and to
insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to this Section.
(7) It shall be the duty of the owners, operator, and of any agents and employees
present on the premises, to ensure that no viewing room may be occupied by
more than one person at any one time.
9-15
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to an
illumination of not less than two (2.0) foot candle as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present on the premises to insure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the
premises.
(10) It shall be the duty of the owners, operator, and of any agents and employees
present on the premises, to ensure that no act of sexual intercourse, oral sexual
contact, or any other sexual contact, including masturbation, as defined in 720
ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., occurs in or on the licensed premises.
(11) At no time may any door be attached to the viewing rooms or booths as
specified in this Section, and it shall be the duty of owners and the operator, and
of any employees and agents present on the premises, to ensure that no doors
are placed on the rooms as specified in this Section.
(12) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and of any agents and employees
present on the premises, to ensure that no openings of any kind exist between
viewing rooms or booths. It shall also be a duty of the owners and operator, and
of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that no
openings or holes of any kind, commonly referred to as “glory holes” be made or
attempted to be made by any person between viewing rooms, booths, restrooms,
or any other room on the premises.
b. A person having a duty under Section 10(A) commits a misdemeanor if he/she knowingly
fails to fulfill that duty.
Sec. 9.10 Live Performances/Nudity
A sexually oriented business which features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or
live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities shall comply with the following regulations to receive a Zoning Certificate of
Occupancy. It is unlawful for an owner, certificate holder, or operator, and all agents and employees,
to fail to ensure compliance with these regulations.
a. A person shall not appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or engage in a live
performance which is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities except upon a stage elevated at least thirty-six (36) inches above
floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area thereof within which the
person appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or performs, shall be a distance of at
least six (6) feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may be present.
The stage or designated area thereof shall be separated from the area in which patrons
may be located by a barrier or railing the top of which is at least four (4) feet above floor
level. No person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or engaging in such live
performances or patron may extend any part of his or her body over or beyond the barrier
or railing.
b. An employee may not touch the breast, buttocks, or genitals of a patron, nor may a patron
touch the breast, buttocks, or genitals of an employee.
9-16
c. A patron may not place any money on the person or in or on the costume of any employee.
d. A person below the age of eighteen (18) years may not observe or appear in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity or in such live performances on the premises of a sexually oriented
business.
e. A sign, in a form to be prescribed by the Community Development Director and
summarizing the provisions of paragraphs A, B, C, and D of this Section, shall be posted
near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly
visible to patrons upon entry.
Sec. 9.11 Minors
No person shall allow any of the following acts to occur on the sexually oriented business premises:
a. Admittance of a person under eighteen (21) years of age to the business premises;
b. A person under eighteen (21) years of age to remain at the business premises;
c. A person under eighteen (21) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business
premises; or
d. A person who is under eighteen (21) years of age to work at the business premises as an
employee.
Any person who allows such conduct to occur on the premises of the sexually oriented business
commits a misdemeanor.
Sec. 9.12 Advertising, Loitering and Lighting Regulations
All sexually oriented businesses must comply with the following:
a. Neither the business nor any person shall allow any portion of the interior premises to be
visible from outside the premises.
b. All off-street parking areas and premise entries of the sexually oriented business shall be
illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an
average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) foot candle of light on the parking
surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of
vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or
diagram of the premises.
c. It shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator of a sexually oriented business to:
(1) initiate and enforce a no loitering policy within the external boundaries of the real
property upon which the sexually oriented business is located;
(2) post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property;
and
9-17
(3) designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such
property by visually inspecting such property at least once every ten (10) minutes
or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors.
d. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a certificate has
been issued for said business under this Chapter or the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, and
advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable federal or state
statute or local ordinance.
e. It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to
be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued for said business, and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or
performances at such sexually oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside
the premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of
such sexually oriented business.
Sec. 9.13 Hours of Operation
a. It shall be unlawful and to operate any sexually oriented business regardless whether or not
a certificate has been issued for said business, and allows such business to remain open
for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance,
make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any particular day.
b. It shall be unlawful to work as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a certificate has been issued for said business, said employee engages in a
performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service, or
solicits a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any particular day.
Sec. 9.14 Additional Prohibitions
In addition to the provisions found at other sections of this Chapter and the Burr Ridge Zoning
Ordinance, the following additional provisions shall also apply to sexually oriented businesses.
It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a Zoning Certificate of
Occupancy has been issued for said business, and said person knows or should know that:
a. The business does not have a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy; or
b The business has a certificate which is under suspension; or
c. The business has a certificate which has been revoked; or
d. The business has a certificate which has expired.
Sec. 9.15 Exemptions
a. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this Chapter that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
9-18
(1) By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
or
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(a) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
and
(b) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
(c) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time; and
(d) Where the class is a general art class (not limited to painting nudes)
consisting of at least 16 hours of training or instruction.
b. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this Chapter that an employee of a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is permitted under this Chapter, exposed
any specified anatomical area during the employee’s bona fide use of a restroom, or during
the employees bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees.
Sec. 9.16 Penalties Pertaining to Sexually Oriented Businesses
In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the Illinois Criminal Code, if a person fails or
refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the provisions of this Chapter pertaining to sexually
oriented businesses, such person upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed Seven Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($750.00) or by
imprisonment not to exceed six months (6) months, or both, in the discretion of the Court. Each
violation or non-compliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of
continued violation or non-compliance shall be considered as a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the Village from taking such other lawful action in
any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance.
such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for
injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
All remedies and penalties provided for in this Section shall be cumulative and independently
available to the Village and the Village shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in
this Section or other applicable law to the full extent allowed by law.
Sec. 9.17 Immunity From Prosecution
The Village and its designee, the Village of Burr Ridge Police Department and all other departments
and agencies, and all other Village officers, agents and employees, charged with enforcement of
State and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable,
good faith trespass upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority
conferred by this Chapter.
9-19
Sec. 9. 18 Severability
If any section, subsection or clause of this Chapter shall be deemed to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid, the validity of all remaining sections, subsections and clauses shall not be effected
thereby.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL EVENTS – PERMITS
Sec. 10.01 Purpose
Sec. 10.02 Definitions
Sec. 10.03 Exemptions
Sec. 10.04 Special Event Application
Sec. 10.05 Costs for Special Events
Sec. 10.06 Taxes
Sec. 10.07 Special Event Conditions
Sec. 10.08 Village Liability Limited
Sec. 10.09 Penalties
Chapter 10 added by Ordinance 1128, dated July 22, 2013
SPECIAL EVENTS – PERMIT
Sec. 10.01 Purpose
The primary purpose and intent of this ordinance is to promote an efficient and orderly approval
process for the planning, development and implementation of special events in the Village and to
add proper notification to affected parties.
Sec. 10.02 Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this
Ordinance shall be as follow:
10.02.1 Applicant
Any natural person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company,
corporation, limited liability company, institution, agency, government
corporation, municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, or any
officers, agents, employees or other representative, acting either for himself or
for any other person in any village; or any other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties other than the Village of Burr Ridge who submits an
application pursuant to this Chapter.
10.02.2 Application
Forms provided by the Village Clerk’s office for special events.
10.02.3 Village
The Village of Burr Ridge and its officers, agents, employees and
representatives.
10.02.4 Village Property
Public streets, sidewalks, right-of-way, or other property owned or controlled by
the Village.
10.02.5 Village Services
Services provided by Village Departments including but not limited to public
safety, crowd control, traffic control, management of the event site, road
closures, demarcation of no-parking tow zones, inspection services, garbage
removal, sanitation stations, and production of event materials and Village
website information.
10.02.6 Code
The Burr Ridge Municipal Code
10.02.7 Special Event
Covered special events shall be those events requiring street closures or
limitation or redirection of the regular traffic flow on a street, the closure of
parking facilities and/or the use of Village or public streets or property and
events that require the posting of “No Parking, Tow Zones” signage.
10-2
10.02.8 Private Event
An event located entirely on private property provided for an exclusive or
invited group of attendees, held on suitable premises, which does not exceed
occupancy permits, and which may or may not be intended for the general
public.
10.02.9 Special Events Coordinator
An individual appointed by the Village Administrator to coordinate applications
for special events.
10.02.10 Special Event Support Team
Representatives of various departments of the Village who will work with the
Special Events Coordinator to review special event permit applications and to
assist in the provision and coordination of Village Services for such events.
Sec. 10.03 Exemptions
The following are exempt from obtaining a special event permit:
a) The Village of Burr Ridge
b) The Burr Ridge or Pleasant Dale Park Districts provided the event is limited to Park
District property.
c) Educational institutions approved or authorized by the State of Illinois
d) Block parties, which are governed by Article II, Chapter 12 of this Code.
e) Private special events
Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in this Chapter, issuance of other permits or licenses may
be required depending on the nature of the event, including but not limited to permits/licenses for
activities like raffles or fireworks, food establishments and/or liquor licenses.
Sec. 10.04 Special Event Application
A special event permit application shall be available on the Village's website and from the Office of
the Village Clerk. The application shall include requirements for issuance of a special event
permit, including but not limited to those listed herein. In addition to the requirements set forth in
this Code and as set in the special event permit application, events may be subject to additional
conditions or restrictions deemed necessary and appropriate by the Village or its representatives.
10.04.1 Application Information
The application shall be accurately and completely filled out prior to
submission, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information
(attached on additional sheet(s) if needed):
a) Submission of the Village special event permit application. The
application form is available from the Village upon request.
10-3
b) A complete and accurate description of the event for which the permit
is applied and an estimate of anticipated attendees and/or
participants.
c) Information regarding whether alcohol consumption is planned, and if
so, the hours, location and type of alcohol planned to be served.
d) A description of provision for refuse needs for the event which shall
be in compliance with Village policies and Code provisions and State
law.
e) A description of restroom availability and maintenance for the event.
f) A description of the type and nature of any entertainment.
g) A certificate of general liability insurance, naming the Village of Burr
Ridge and its officers, employees, agents and representatives as
additional insureds, in a form and amount determined by the Special
Events Coordinator, or his/her designee, may be required. Whenever
a certificate of insurance is required, an additional insured
endorsement shall also be provided. Failure to provide the required
documentation will result in the automatic revocation of a special
event permit.
h) Information describing the accessibility plans for the event.
i) Information pertaining to the need for and/or use of any Village
amenities for the event.
j) Information regarding requests for Village services associated with
the event.
k) An individual or entity submitting an application for a major special
event must be vested with the legal authority to bind the applicant
and may be requested to supply evidence to that effect. Said
individual or representative shall certify and swear to the accuracy of
all statements and information contained in the application and that
the applicant is qualified in all respects to receive the permits applied
for.
l) A hold harmless, defense and indemnification agreement may be
required no less than 60 days prior to the Special Event. Failure to
provide the required documentation will result in the automatic
revocation of a special event permit.
10.04.2 Application Procedures
The following procedures shall apply to the application submittal, review and
approval:
a) The Village application form for a special event permit shall be
submitted to the Village’s Special Events Coordinator a minimum of
one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed event.
Applications submitted late may be considered on a case by case
basis, but may be rejected for untimeliness.
10-4
b) A special event support team, comprised of representatives of
various departments within the Village, led by the Special Events
Coordinator, shall review applications for proposed special event and
submit recommendations to the Board of Trustees regarding such
events and any requirements or conditions therefore. The Village
reserves the right to utilize any of its staff to review, inspect or
consult on any aspect of the special event.
c) Notification of Special Event: The Village, at its cost, will provide
written notification of the proposed event, including a narrative
summary of the event, to residents and businesses which may be
affected by such event. The Special Events Coordinator shall inform
the applicant of the date the application shall be considered by the
Board of Trustees so that such date may be included in the
notification. Such notice shall be provided not less than one (1)
weeks, and not more than four (4) weeks, prior to Board of Trustees’
consideration of the application.
d) Promotion of Village: Recognizing the importance of incorporating
and promoting positive local economic impact as part of special
events within the Village, the applicant shall work in a good faith
manner in order to encourage and facilitate overnight
accommodations and use of other community amenities within the
Village for the event.
e) Board of Trustees’ Review/Approval: A request for a special event
permit shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees by the Special
Events Coordinator for review and consideration. The Board of
Trustees, taking into consideration whether the event is to be held for
a lawful purpose, whether there is a reasonable basis to believe that
it will tend to cause a breach of the peace or unduly interfere with the
public use of public right-of-way or other public property, or whether it
will unduly interfere with the peace and quiet of the residents of the
Village, may approve the permit, deny the permit, or approve the
permit subject to such conditions or restrictions as it deems
appropriate.
f) Issuance of Special Event Permit: A special event permit can be
issued after it has been approved as set forth herein and after the
Special Events Coordinator is in timely receipt of the following items,
as applicable:
(1) a completed Village special event permit application,
signed and notarized;
(2) a certificate of insurance and additional insured
endorsements in a form and in amounts approved by the
Village, naming the Village and its officers, agents,
employees and representatives as additional insureds:
(3) a copy of a temporary liquor license issued by the Village’s
Liquor Commissioner, if applicable; and
(4) any other information or documentation deemed necessary
or appropriate.
10-5
All permits or licenses needed for the special events, other than a
liquor license if applicable, shall be included in the issuance of the
special event permit if the applicant has paid any applicable fees and
otherwise complied with the requirements for each such permit or
license. The Village reserves the right to inspect and oversee the
special event before, during and after the event to reasonably ensure
ongoing compliance with all legal requirements and specific permit
conditions, if applicable.
Sec. 10.05 Costs For Special Events
10.05.1 Applicant Costs
Applicant Costs. All costs of the special event shall be the responsibility of,
and shall be borne by the applicant. If services are provided or performed by
the Village, reimbursement shall be made by the applicant to the Village.
10.05.2 Village Costs – Reimbursement
Village Costs. The Village may issue the applicant a bill for costs incurred by
the Village, including but not limited to reasonable personnel costs attributable
to the special event and for any damage caused to public property. The
applicant shall be responsible for payment of said bill in full within the
timeframe specified on the bill. In the event that such payment is not made in
full in a timely manner, the Village may take or direct the necessary legal action
to obtain such payment. The reasonable costs and attorney’s fees resulting
from such action shall be added to the amount due and owning by the
applicant. Failure to timely pay bills for charge back services may result in
denial of future permits to the applicant or the applicant’s organization.
Sec. 10.06 Taxes
Vendors may operate and food and beverages may be sold at a Special Event if approved and
licensed as necessary by the appropriate county health department or agency. The Village
reserves the right to impose and require the collection of any applicable tax from any covered
vendor participating in a special event.
Sec. 10.07 Special Event Conditions
The following are made express conditions of the application and approval of any special event
permit:
a) Compliance with all applicable fire and safety regulations (Federal, State, County and
Village ordinances, rules, regulations and policies).
b) Adequate ingress and egress for attendees/participants. Any special events must ensure
that not less than two (2) exits leading to the outside, each not less than three (3) feet in
width and, if doors are present, they are required to open outward.
c) Compliance with any occupancy requirements/limits under State law or Village Code,
ordinance or regulation.
d) The nature, scope and operation of any special event shall be conducted in consideration
of the surrounding properties and so as not to cause significant adverse impact or
interfere with existing uses or development in the area. The Village reserves the right to
10-6
impose such additional restrictions as may be appropriate to minimize such adverse
effects.
e) No street or any public area can be used for a special event without the permission of the
Village and the provisions of this Chapter. Any parking anticipated by and/or related to
any special event shall be provided for by applicant with proper notice to and approval of
the village, location, and measures for proper traffic regulation and movement. As may
be needed, the applicant shall coordinate with the Special Events Coordinator for special
events to provide maps and information relative to parking and accessible parking.
f) The applicant shall be responsible for consulting with the Village and the Village police
department to ensure the provision of appropriate crowd and traffic control, and security,
as may be appropriate for the special event. Any security personnel utilized, whether
private or members of the Village police force, shall be at the cost of the applicant.
g) No smoking or alcohol shall be permitted at a special event except as allowed by Illinois
law or by Village Code or ordinance.
h) The Applicant for a special event shall, at its cost, provide written notification of the
approved event, including a narrative summary of the event, to residents and businesses
which may be affected by such event. The Special Events Coordinator shall review and
approve the narrative. Such notice shall be provided not less than two (2) weeks and not
more than (3) weeks prior to the event.
j) All activities associated with the special event shall be in compliance with applicable
Federal, State and Village laws and regulations. Such activities will also be subject to
any further conditions or requirements as may be determined appropriate and necessary
by the Special Event Coordinator or Village Administrator, or as required by Village Code
or Ordinance, including but not limited to the applicable provisions of the following:
Chapter 12, ROWs (Block Parties)
Chapter 17, Food Dealers (Food Establishment license)
Chapter 25, Liquor Control
Chapter 48, Raffles
Chapter 55, Signs (Temporary signage)
Chapter 60, Taxation (Amusement & Places for Eating Tax)
Building Ordinance Article VII (Fireworks)
Sec. 10.08 Village Liability Limited
As an integral and agreed-upon term and condition of any application for and approval of a special
event permit, as an implied term of any applicant for a special use permit, and hereby incorporated
into any such application by this reference, the applicant expressly agrees that while the Village
shall act in good faith to assist with and support special events, the Village shall not be liable to the
applicant or to any participant in any special event for an inadequate preparation or
implementation, or the quality of a special event, or for the satisfaction of the participants of the
special event. The Village shall incur no liability for its actions related to the event. No special
relationship of any kind is entered into or implied between Village and the applicant and the Village,
its officers, employees or agents shall incur no liability by any action or omission related to a
application for or staging of a special event.
In its discretion, depending on all circumstances, including the nature and size of the event, the
Village may require the applicant to execute an express waiver and hold harmless agreement, on a
form to be provided by the Village, as part of the approval of the special event permit.
10-7
Sec. 10.09 Penalties
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $50.00 nor more than $750.00 for each violation. Such a fine shall be in addition to any other
fee or charge authorized pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
10-8
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 11
COMMERCIAL FILMING PERMITS
Sec. 11.1 Purpose
Sec. 11.2 Scope of Regulations
Sec. 11.3 Definitions
Sec. 11.4 Exemptions
Sec. 11.5 Commercial Filming Permit Application
Sec. 11.6 Commercial Filming Events Fees and Costs
Sec. 11.7 Commercial Filming Permit Conditions
Sec. 11.8 Village Liability Limited
Sec. 11.9 Penalties
Chapter 11 added by Ordinance 1165, dated November 14, 2016
11-1
COMMERCIAL FILMING PERMITS
Sec. 11.1 Purpose
The primary purpose and intent of this ordinance is to promote an efficient and orderly approval
process for issuance of commercial filming permits, to ensure that commercial filming does not place
an undue burden on Village services or interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties.
Sec. 11.2 Scope of Regulations
No person or entity shall engage in commercial filming in the Village of Burr Ridge without first
obtaining a commercial filming permit issued by the Village Administrator in compliance with the terms
and conditions herein. All activities related to said commercial filming permit shall be subject to the
requirements set forth in this Code. A commercial filming permit also may be subject to additional
conditions or restrictions deemed necessary and appropriate by the Village Administrator or the
Administrator’s authorized representatives.
Sec. 11.3 Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this Ordinance
shall be as follows
11.3.1 Applicant
Any natural person, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation,
limited liability company, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal corporation,
district or other political subdivision, or any officers, agents, employees or other
representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in any village; or any other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties other than the Village of Burr
Ridge who submits an application pursuant to this Chapter.
11.3.2 Application
Forms provided by the Village Clerk’s office for commercial filming.
11.3.3 Village
The Village of Burr Ridge and its officers, agents, employees and representatives.
11.3.4 Village Property
Public Streets, sidewalks, right-of-way, or other property owned or controlled by the Village
11.3.5 Village Services
Services provided by the Village including but not limited to public safety, crowd control,
traffic control, road closures, inspection services, or garbage removal.
11.3.6 Code
The Burr Ridge Municipal Code
11-2
11.3.7 Commercial Filming
Digital or film recording of a visual image or sound for the primary purpose of producing
movies, television programs, commercials, training films, documentaries, or similar products
for distribution or broadcasting.
Sec. 11.4 Exemptions
The following are exempt from obtaining a commercial filming permit:
11.4.1 The Village of Burr Ridge
11.4.2 Other local government taxing districts with jurisdictional boundaries shared with the Village
of Burr Ridge such as schools, parks and fire districts provided the commercial filming
activity is limited to property owned by the respective government district.
11.4.3 News media organizations filming for coverage of current events and where no product
intended for distribution.
11.4.4 Filming and photography completely indoors with no exterior lighting, equipment or vehicles
except those typically associated with an otherwise authorized use of the property.
11.4.5 Filming and photography by individuals for personal use where such filming and
photography does not involve the use of lighting, equipment and vehicles typically
associated with commercial filming and photography.
Sec. 11.5 Commercial Filming Permit Application
Commercial filming permit applications shall be available on the Village’s website and from the Office
of the Village Clerk. The application shall include all information necessary for issuance of a
commercial filming permit, including but not limited to the following:
11.5.1 Designation of a permit applicant and primary contact person with their name, address,
phone number and email address.
11.5.2 A complete and accurate description of the purpose of the commercial filming activity, the
type of production, and the intended audience
11.5.3 A detailed description of the location of the commercial filming activity including public and
private property, location of filming activities, and location of parking and storage of vehicles
and equipment.
11.5.4 A complete schedule for the commercial filming activities including all days and time of day
that commercial filming actives will occur including days and times when vehicles or
equipment may be parked or placed on public property.
11.5.5 A schedule of the number of people participating in the commercial filming activity.
11.5.6 A description of portable restroom or refuse collection facilities that may be utilized.
11.5.7 At the discretion of the Village Administrator, a certificate of general liability insurance,
11-3
naming the Village of Burr Ridge and its officers, employees, agents and representatives as
additional insureds, in a form and amount determined by the Village Administrator, or his/her
designee, may be required. Whenever a certificate of insurance is required, an additional
insured endorsement shall also be provided.
11.5.8 Detailed information pertaining to the need for and/or use of any Village services including
traffic management, street or lane closures and public safety enforcement.
Sec. 11.6 Commercial Filming Event Fees and Costs
11.6.1 Administrative Fee: All applications for a commercial filming permit shall be accompanied
by a $250 non-refundable fee to cover basic administrative costs for review and issuance of
the permit.
11.6.2 Deposit for Cost Incurred: Prior to issuance of the permit, the Village Administrator shall
estimate all expenses that may be incurred by the Village to ensure public safety during the
commercial filming event. The applicant shall provide a deposit equal to 125% of the
estimated cost.
11.6.3 Refund/Payment for Costs Incurred: Upon conclusion of the commercial filming activities,
the applicant shall notify the Village Administrator and request a balance summary of costs
and fees. The Village Administrator shall refund any unused funds or request payment if the
costs incurred exceeded the deposit. If the applicant fails to request balancing of the
deposit within 30 days after issuance of the permit (or some other time that may be agreed
upon in advance), the applicant shall forfeit any unused deposit funds. The applicant shall
be responsible for payment of said bill in full within the timeframe specified on the bill. In the
event that such payment is not made in full in a timely manner, the Village may take or direct
the necessary legal action to obtain such payment. The reasonable costs and attorney’s
fees resulting from such action shall be added to the amount due and owed by the applicant.
Sec. 11.7 Commercial Filming Permit Conditions
The following are made express conditions of the application and approval of any commercial filming
permit:
11.7.1 Compliance with all applicable fire and safety regulations (Federal, State, County and
Village ordinances, rules regulations and policies).
11.7.2 Compliance with any occupancy requirements/limits under State law or Village Code,
ordinance or regulations
11.7.3 The nature, scope and operation shall be conducted in consideration of the surrounding
properties and so as not to cause significant adverse impact or interfere with use and
enjoyment of surrounding properties. The Village reserves the right to impose such
additional restrictions as may be appropriate to minimize such adverse effects.
11.7.4 No street or any public area may be used without the permission of the Village and the
provisions of this Chapter. Any parking anticipated by and/or related to commercial filming
shall be provided for by applicant with proper notice to and approval of the village, location,
and measures for proper traffic regulations and movement.
11.7.5 The applicant shall be responsible for consulting with the Village and the Village police
11-4
department to ensure the provision of appropriate crowd and traffic control, and security, as
may be appropriate. Any security personnel utilized, whether private or members of the
Village police force, shall be at the cost of the applicant
Sec. 11.8 Village Liability Limited
As an integral and agreed-upon term and condition of any application for and approval of a
commercial filming permit, as an implied term of any applicant for a commercial filming permit, and
hereby incorporated into any such application by this reference, the applicant expressly agrees that
while the Village shall act in good faith to assist with and support commercial filming, the Village shall
not be liable to the applicant or to any participant for an inadequate preparation or implementation.
The Village shall incur no liability for its actions related to the commercial filming event. No special
relationship of any kind is entered into or implied between Village and the applicant and the Village, its
officers, employees or agents shall incur no liability by any action or omission related to an application
for or staging of a commercial filming event.
In its discretion, depending on all circumstances, including the nature and size of the event, the Village
may require the applicant to execute an express waiver and hold harmless agreement, on a form to be
provided by the Village, as part of the approval of the commercial filming permit.
Sec. 11.9 Penalties
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$50.00 nor more than $750.00 for each violation. Such a fine shall be in addition to any other fee or
charge authorized pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 12
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTIES
ARTICLE I. Purpose, Scope, Definitions, Supervision and Penalty
Sec. 12.01 Purpose and Scope
Sec. 12.02 Definitions
Sec. 12.03 Supervision
Sec. 12.04 Duty of Enforcement
Sec. 12.05 Penalty
ARTICLE II. Streets, Sidewalks, and Driveways
Sec. 12.06 Construction and/or Alteration Requirements
Sec. 12.07 Repairs
Sec. 12.08 Traffic Control
Sec. 12.09 Private or Commercial Use
Sec. 12.10 Use and Obstruction Restriction
Sec. 12.11 Authority to Remove Obstructions
Sec. 12.12 Damage to Pavements
Sec. 12.13 Defects
Sec. 12.14 Vehicles on Sidewalks and Parkways
Sec. 12.15 Driveways
ARTICLE III. Excavations or Disruptions of Right-of-Way
Sec. 12.16 Permit Required; Application
Sec. 12.17 Permit Fee
Sec. 12.18 Insurance and Bond Requirements
Sec. 12.19 Indemnity
Sec. 12.20 Traffic Control
Sec. 12.21 Manner of Excavation
Sec. 12.22 Excavation Restoration
Sec. 12.23 Supervision and Inspection
Sec. 12.24 Exemptions
ARTICLE IV. Snow Removal
Sec. 12.25 Emergency During Heavy Snow Storm
Sec. 12.26 Sidewalks
Sec. 12.27 Obstruction Restriction
ARTICLE V. Trees and Shrubs
Sec. 12.28 Planting and Removal
ARTICLE VI. Public Lands
Sec. 12.29 Hours of Operation
Sec. 12.30 Golf and Archery Prohibited
Sec. 12.31 Fires Prohibited
ARTICLE VII Personal Wireless Cellular Services and Facilities
Sec. 12.32 Purpose
Sec. 12.33 Interaction with Other Code Provisions and Laws
Sec. 12.34 Definitions
Sec. 12.35 Zoning
Sec. 12.36 Permits; Application Process
Sec. 12.37 Construction
Sec. 12.38 Permit Duration
Sec. 12.39 Height Limitations
Sec. 12.40 General Requirements
Sec. 12.41 Stealth, Concealment and Design Standards
Sec. 12.42 Reservation of Village Utility Pole Space
Sec. 12.43 Applicability of Existing Agreements
Sec. 12.44 Collocation on Village Owned Infrastructure
Sec. 12.45 Notice of Sale or Transfer
Sec. 12.46 Abandonment
Sec. 12.47 Dispute Resolution
Sec. 12.48 Indemnification
Sec. 12.49 Insurance
Sec. 12.50 Maintenance of Small Wireless Facilities
Sec. 12.51 Revocation of Permit
Sec. 12.52 Exceptions to Applicability
Last Revision: Ordinance A-946-01-18, July 23, 2018
12-1
ARTICLE I. Purpose, Scope, Definitions, and Supervision
Sec. 12.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures for accessing,
constructing, altering, and/or maintaining public ways and properties within the Village’s
jurisdiction for the purpose of improving and protecting the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare of the people.
Conflicts with Other Ordinances. This Ordinance supersedes all Ordinances or parts of
Ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this Ordinance, the utility shall comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State
laws or regulations.
Sound Engineering Judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when
administering this Ordinance and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements
expressed in this Ordinance when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed
to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its public ways and properties for the protection of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Sec. 12.02 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Ordinance and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms
listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this
Section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI American National Standards Institute.
Applicant A person applying for a permit under this Ordinance.
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials.
Backfill The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
Bore or Boring To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or
electrical conductor.
Clear Zone The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for
safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable
slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic
volumes and speeds and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO
Roadside Design Guide.
Code The Municipal Code of the Village of Burr Ridge.
Construction or Construct The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration,
enlargement, demolition, modification, or abandonment in place of facilities.
Disrupt the Right-of-Way For the purposes of this Ordinance, any work that obstructs the rightof-
way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use.
12-2
Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement
(whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to
vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles
or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
Emergency Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using
or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety
of the general public.
Equipment Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate
construction of facilities.
Excavation The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or lying bare by digging.
IDOT Illinois Department of Transportation.
Ordinance(s) The Ordinance(s) of the Village of Burr Ridge.
Parkway Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
Pavement Cut The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction
of a facility.
Permittee That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to this Chapter.
Practicable That which is performable, feasible, or possible, rather than that which is simply
convenient.
Public Property Any real or personal Village property including Village land, buildings, fixtures,
and other structures or improvements that is not defined as right-of-way.
Restoration The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the
construction of a facility.
Right-of-Way Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for
roadway or utility purposes, including utility easements in which the Village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate, or permit the location of facilities other than those of the Village.
"Right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically
described above and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures, and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
Roadway or Street That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders or curbs.
Sidewalk A hard surface path designated for pedestrian use and usually located parallel and at
the side of a roadway.
Shoulder A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the
pavement edge and providing an area for vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the
pavement.
Sound Engineering Judgment A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering
principles, practices, and experience.
Structure Anything which is constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on
the ground.
12-3
Village The Village of Burr Ridge.
Village Code The Code of the Village of Burr Ridge.
Village Engineer The Village Engineer of the Village of Burr Ridge.
Sec. 12.3 SUPERVISION
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways and grounds in the Village shall be
under the supervision of the Village Engineer. He or she shall have supervision over all work
therein, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinance
provisions relating to such public places (except traffic ordinances) and is hereby authorized to
enforce such ordinances.
Sec. 12.4 DUTY OF ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of the police department and the Village Engineer to see that the
requirements contained in this chapter are in all cases complied with.
Sec. 12.5 PENALTY
Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter may be fined in an amount not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00):
Interpretation. For purposes of this Chapter and in determining the appropriate amount due
hereunder:
1. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which the violation occurs or continues.
2. All violations of any provision of this Chapter that are committed by the same
person, or any firm controlled by such person, shall be counted, regardless of
whether or not the violations occur at the same location.
3. Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation shall be deemed a
violation.
4. For purposes of determining the number of multiple violations, a violation of a
construction regulation shall include all violations of this Chapter.
ARTICLE II Streets, Sidewalks, and Driveways
Sec. 12.6 CONSTRUCTION AND/OR ALTERATION REQUIREMENTS
No Streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways and grounds in the Village shall be
constructed, altered, repaired, improved in whole or in part except as set forth in this chapter. In
the event there are no specific provisions of this chapter regulating any particular action in this
regard than no such action shall be commenced until referred to the Village Engineer for
approval of such action.
Specifications. All street and sidewalk pavement shall be constructed in conformity with the
specifications established by the Village Board of Trustees. All streets shall be constructed in
accordance with the Village zoning ordinance and specifications in the Illinois Department of
Transportation Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as amended from time to time.
12-4
Sidewalk Grades. All sidewalks shall incline upward from the outer edge toward the line of
buildings or lots at the rate of one inch (I ") in four feet (4'). Sidewalks shall be placed 0.4’ higher
than top of curb or 0.8’ higher than edge of pavement if no curb is present.
Sec. 12.7 REPAIRS
Reserved.
Sec. 12.8 TRAFFIC CONTROL
Applicability. Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public
place or making any excavation or opening in the same shall maintain suitable traffic control
measures in accordance with IDOT standards and specifications to prevent injury of any person
or vehicle by reason of such work. All barricades shall be protected by suitable lights at
nighttime. Any resultant defect in any pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury. The
provisions of this Section shall apply to every person who shall be engaged in building any
service from any building to any public utility, and also shall apply to every person who shall do
or perform any work causing an obstruction on any public or private streets.
Disturbance. It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed
to protect or mark any pavement defect or excavation or opening in any public street, alley, or
sidewalk.
Sec. 12.9 PRIVATE OR COMMERCIAL USE
General. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as
space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale or for any private purpose, or for any
person to write, place or mark any signs or advertisements on any such street, sidewalk, or
public place except as regulated by Chapter 55 of the Burr Ridge Village Code titled “Signs” and
Chapter 56 titled “Solicitors and Peddlers”.
Street Closings For Recreational Purposes/Block Parties. The Village Administrator may
authorize the barricading and closing of streets for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours
for recreational purposes including block parties when the following conditions have been met:
1. A petition has been filed requesting such closing executed by seventy five percent
(75%) of the property owners or lessees adjacent to the streets affected or as formally
requested by the effected subdivision homeowners association.
2. The Chief of Police has advised the Village Administrator that the closing will not create
a traffic hazard or otherwise interfere with public safety.
3. The Chief of the appropriate Fire District has advised the Village Administrator that the
closing will not create a fire hazard.
4. That the closing will not unduly inconvenience the residents of the neighborhood or
subdivision involved.
5. That the recreational purpose be nonprofit.
Sec. 12.10 USE AND OBSTRUCTION RESTRICTION
General. Except as otherwise provided for herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or
maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or property.
12-5
Encroachments. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure that encroaches
on any public street or other public property.
Drains. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or damage any drain in any public street or other public
property. It shall be unlawful to install or maintain any point discharge drains (i.e. downspouts,
sump pumps, etc.) that encroaches on any public street, right of way, or other public property
unless said point discharge drain is connected directly to the public storm sewer as permitted by
the Village Engineer. A permit issued in advance from the Village Engineer is required to
connect to the public storm sewer.
Poles And Wires. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or wires over any public
street, alley, or other public way without obtaining, in advance, approval thereof from the Village
Engineer as regulated by Chapter 14 of the Burr Ridge Village Code titled “Utilities in the Right of
Way”.
Gas Pumps. It shall be unlawful to erect, place, or maintain any gasoline pump or tank on any
public street or other public property.
Openings. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening in any public street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public property without obtaining, in advance, a permit therefor from the Village
Engineer.
Materials. It shall be unlawful to store, deposit or cause to be deposited, and/or process any
bricks, bottles, glass, stone, lumber, leaves, grass clippings, offal, ashes, dirt, garbage, produce,
paper, snow or any other matter either temporarily or permanently thereon which may cause
harm to the pavement or injury to any person or animals, or otherwise create a public nuisance
or obstruction on any street, sidewalk or other municipal property or cause a diminution of
possible use thereof.
Street Crosswalks. All crosswalks in the Village shall be kept free from any vehicles or other
obstructions, except so far as may be necessary in crossing the same.
Sprinkler Systems. Private sprinkler systems are allowed in the public parkway at the owner’s
risk and exempt from any permitting requirement. Repair of any damage of said private sprinkler
system placed in the public parkway shall be the responsibility of the system owner. The Village
reserves the right to remove sprinkler systems from the public parkway if deemed an obstruction
by the Village Engineer.
Electronic Dog Fences. It shall be unlawful to install or maintain an electronic dog fence on any
public parkway. (A-946-01-03)
Sec. 12.11 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE OBSTRUCTIONS
The Village Engineer or his or her designee is authorized to cause any obstruction,
encroachment, or other item that may be in violation of the provisions of this code to be removed
and/or restore any areas disturbed after five (5) days' notice served upon the owner, agent, or
person in possession of the premises where such violation occurs. In the event of an
emergency, as determined by the Village Engineer or his or her designee, or in the event the
owner, agent, or person in possession of said premises cannot be located, then the Village
Engineer may cause such removal and/or restoration summarily and without notice. The owner,
agent, or party causing such violation shall pay all expenses and costs of such removal and/or
restoration in addition to any other penalty provided by this code.
Sec. 12.12 DAMAGE TO PAVEMENTS
12-6
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or damage any newly laid
street, sidewalk or alley pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade; or
to damage any street, sidewalk or alley pavement.
Sec. 12.13 DEFECTS
Reserved.
Sec. 12.14 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS AND PARKWAYS
No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or
duly authorized temporary driveway or for routine maintenance, utility or emergency service or
for special delivery or pick up involving goods or customer services. This section does not apply
to any vehicle moved exclusively by human power nor to any motorized wheelchair.
Sec. 12.15 DRIVEWAYS
Driveways shall be installed as regulated by the Burr Ridge Village Building and Zoning
Ordinances as modified from time to time except as regulated in the list below:
1. All driveway approaches within the Village right of way must be constructed of a
permanent dust free hard surface material such as asphalt, concrete, or brick pavers.
2. No driveway approach shall be constructed or used so as to impede the flow of surface
water in the street gutter or drainage.
3. No driveway approach shall be constructed or used for the sole purpose as a parking
space.
4. Parked vehicles shall not protrude into the street at a driveway approach so as to
impede the flow of traffic or extend over the sidewalk so as to interfere with the
movement of pedestrians.
5. The parkway shall not be used as a parking area.
6. Any unusual driveway materials such as stamped or colored concrete or asphalt or
specialty material pavers located within the right of way that are damaged by Village
utility and street operations are to be repaired at the driveway owners expense with the
understanding the Village may reimburse owner for the normal cost of asphalt or
concrete as determined by the Village Engineer.
7. Any new driveway built for a new building accessing a street improved with perimeter
curbs shall include cutting the existing curb or replacement of said curb with a
depressed curb. This requirement shall apply to new driveways built for new
residential and non-residential buildings on all streets with curbs regardless of the type
of curb that exists prior to installation of the driveway.
ARTICLE III Excavations or Disruptions of Right-of-Way
Sec. 12.16 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or disrupt the right-of-way in any
street, alley, parkway, or other public place in the Village without having first obtained a permit as
herein required, and without complying with the provisions of this Chapter.
12-7
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Engineer and shall describe the
location of the intended excavation or disruption of the right-of-way, the size thereof, the purpose
therefor, the time to complete the work, the person doing the actual excavating work or disruption
of the right-of-way, and the name of the person for whom the work is being done. The
application shall also contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances
relating to the work.
If the applicant is applying for a building permit as part of the excavation or disruption of the rightof-
way then no separate excavation or disruption of the right-of-way permit, insurance, or bond
requirement will be required.
Sec. 12.17 PERMIT FEE
No permit authorizing an excavation or disruption of the right-of-way as provided in this Chapter
shall be issued until the fee therefor has been paid to the Village in the amount of two percent
(2%) of the estimated cost of construction within the right of way with a minimum fee of $70.00
unless applicant is applying for a building permit as part of the excavation or disruption of the
right-of-way then no separate fee will be required.
Sec. 12.18 INSURANCE AND BOND REQUIREMENTS
Insurance: No such permit shall be issued unless the applicant has filed with the Village Engineer
an insurance certificate. This certificate shall be maintained for the duration of the project. The
minimum scope and limits of insurance are set forth below.
I. Minimum Scope of Insurance
Coverage shall be at least as broad as:
i. Insurance Services Office Commercial General Liability occurrence form CG
0001 with the Village of Burr Ridge named as additional insured; and
ii. Owners and Contractors Protective Liability, (OCP) policy (if required) with
the Village as insured; and
iii. Insurance Service Office Business Auto Liability coverage form number CA
0001, Symbol 01 “Any Auto”; and
iv. Workers’ Compensation as required by the Labor Code of the State of Illinois
and Employers’ Liability insurance.
II. Minimum Limits of Insurance
Permit applicant shall maintain limits no less than:
i. Commercial General Liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit per
occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. The
general aggregate shall be twice the required occurrence limit. Minimum
General Aggregate shall be no less than $2,000,000 or a project/contract
specific aggregate of $1,000,000.
ii. Business Automobile Liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit per accident
for bodily injury and property damage.
iii. Workers’ Compensation and Employers’ Liability: Workers’ Compensation
coverage with statutory limits and Employers’ Liability limits of $1,000,000
per accident.
iv. Builder’s Risk (if required): Shall insure against “All Risk” of physical damage,
including water damage (flood and hydrostatic pressure not excluded), on a
completed value, replacement cost basis.
III Deductibles and Self-Insured Retentions
Any deductibles or self-insured retentions must be declared to and approved by the
Village of Burr Ridge. At the option of the Village, either; the insurer shall reduce or
eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions as respects the Village, its
12-8
officials, agents, employees and volunteers; or the permit applicant shall procure a
bond guaranteeing payment or losses and related investigation, claim administration
and defense expenses.
Other Insurance Provisions
The policies are to contain, or be endorsed to contain, the following provisions:
i. General Liability and Automobile Liability Coverages
The Village of Burr Ridge, its officials, agents, employees and volunteers are
to be covered as insureds as respects: liability arising out of activities
performed by or on behalf of the permit applicant; products and completed
operations of the applicant premises owned, leased or used by the applicant;
or automobiles owned, leased, hired or borrowed by the applicant. The
coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of protection
afforded to the Village, its officials, agents, employees and volunteers.
The applicant’s insurance coverage shall be primary as respects the Village of
Burr Ridge, its officials, agents, employees and volunteers. Any insurance or
self-insurance maintained by the Village, its officials, agents, employees and
volunteers shall be excess of applicant’s insurance and shall not contribute
with it.
Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policies shall not affect
coverage provided to the Village, its officials, agents, employees and
volunteers.
The applicant’s insurance shall contain a Severability of Interests/Cross
Liability clause or language stating that applicant’s insurance shall apply
separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought,
except with respect to the limits of the insurer’s liability.
ii. Workers’ Compensation and Employers’ Liability Coverage
The insurer shall agree to waive all rights of subrogation against the Village,
its officials, agents, employees and volunteers for losses arising from work
performed by applicant for the Village.
iii. All Coverages
Each insurance policy required by this clause shall be endorsed to state that
coverage shall not be suspended, voided, cancelled, non-renewed,
amended, and/ or reduced in coverage or in limits except after thirty (30)
days prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, has been
given to the Village.
V. .Acceptability of Insurers
Insurance is to be placed with insurers with a Best’s rating of no less than A-, VII and
licensed to do business in the State of Illinois.
VI. Verification of Coverage
Permit applicant shall furnish the Village with certificates of insurance naming the
Village, its officials, agents, employees and volunteers as additional insureds, and with
original endorsements for each insurance policy are to be signed b a person authorized
by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The certificates and endorsements are
to be received and approved by the Village before any work commences.
VII. Contractors & Subcontractors
12-9
Permit Applicant shall include all contractors and subcontractors as insureds under its
policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each contractor. All
coverages for contractors shall be subject to all of the requirements stated herein.
VIII Assumption of Liability
The applicant assumes liability for all injury to or death of any person or persons
including employees of the applicant, any contractor or subcontractor, any supplier or
any other person and assumes liability for all damage to property sustained by any
person or persons occasioned by or in any way arising out of any work performed
pursuant to this agreement.
Performance Bond. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant therefor has deposited
with the Village a cash bond as follows: $500.00 for work that disturbs the parkway and/or curb
directly adjacent to applicant property; $2,000.00 for all water and/or sewer service connections;
and $5,000.00 for extension of public utilities or any other circumstance not otherwise indicated
herein. The bond is to ensure the proper restoration of the ground and pavement. If the
applicant fails to restore the excavation or disruption of the right-of-way site promptly, the Village
shall use the deposit for the restoration work. The deposit shall cover all street excavations or
disruption of the right-of-way of the applicant so long as the applicant is not in default in his
obligation to restore. (A-946-01-03)
The cash deposit shall remain on deposit until the completion of any restoration work involving a
street excavation or disruption of the right-of-way. If the restoration, at that time, is satisfactory,
the cash deposit shall be returned to the applicant, provided said deposit is not required as
security for other pending work of said applicant. If the applicant is applying for a building permit
as part of the excavation or disruption of the right-of-way then no separate bond requirement will
be required.
In the event the cash deposit is not adequate to complete the restoration work, the applicant shall
be responsible for the deficiency.
Sec. 12.19 INDEMNITY
To the fullest extend permitted by law, the permit applicant hereby agrees to defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the Village, its officials, agents and employees, against all injuries, deaths,
loss, damages, claims, patent claims, suits, liabilities, judgements, cost and expenses, which
may in anywise accrue against the Village, its officials, agents and employees, arising in whole or
in part or in consequence of the performance of this work by the applicant, its employees, or
subcontractors, or which may in anywise result therefore, except that arising out of the sole legal
cause of the Village, its agents or employees; the applicant shall, at its own expense, appear,
defend, and pay all charges of attorneys and all costs and other expenses arising therefore or
incurred in connections therewith, and, if any judgement shall be rendered against the Village, its
officials, agents and employees, in any such action, the applicant shall, at its own expense,
satisfy and discharge the same.
Permit applicant expressly understands and agrees that any performance bond or insurance
policies required, or otherwise provided by the applicant, shall in no way limit the responsibility to
indemnify, keep and save harmless and defend the Village, its officials, agents and employees
as herein provided.
Sec. 12.20 TRAFFIC CONTROL
Any person making or maintaining any excavation or disruption of the right-of-way in any public
area shall maintain adequate traffic control as outlined in Section 12.8.
12-10
Traffic access on the public streets shall be maintained at all times by the contractor performing
the excavation or disruption of the right-of-way, unless the Village Engineer authorizes the
closing of a street. If for good and sufficient reasons the street must be closed to traffic, the
contractor may request in writing to the Village Engineer permission for the street closing. If the
Village Engineer determines such closing is warranted, the contractor shall provide all necessary
traffic control to reroute traffic.
Sec. 12.21 MANNER OF EXCAVATION
General. It shall be unlawful to make any excavation or disruption of the right-of-way in any way
contrary to or in violation with the terms of the permit. Proper bracing shall be maintained to
prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and the excavation or disruption of the right-of-way
shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which extends beyond the opening at the
surface.
No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables, or conduits which in any way may be endangered or
affected by the making of such excavation or disruption of the right-of-way. The contractor shall
be responsible for notifying all public utilities of its intent to excavate or disrupt of the right-of-way.
No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any trees, shrubs, or the roots thereof.
Tunneling is prohibited.
Sidewalks. If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users.
Time Limit. Each permit for excavation or disruption of the right-of-way shall be for a stated
period not to exceed thirty (30) days after the commencement of work. If at the time of the
application it is known that the restoration and excavation or disruption of the right-of-way will
exceed this period, then it must be so stated on the permit and approved by the Village Engineer.
Restoring Surface. Any person making an excavation or disruption of the right-of-way in any
public street, alley, parkway, or public place shall restore the surface. For parkways four (4”)
inches of top soil and sod will be the standard. In all other respects the surface shall be restored
to its original condition.
Sec. 12.22 EXCAVATION RESTORATION
All holes or trenches in the street are to be saw cut and the width of the cut in the pavement must
exceed the width of the excavation by at least two feet (2') on all sides. All street excavations
shall be backfilled with sand, screenings or crushed stone and compacted in layers of one foot
(1'), which shall be tamped and compacted before proceeding with the next layer.
When the pavement is replaced, the patch must bear on undisturbed earth a minimum of one
foot (1') on all sides. If the existing pavement is concrete, the patch shall be concrete the same
thickness as the original, tied to the original concrete with 18” dowel bars. If the existing
pavement is bituminous asphalt, the patch shall be composed of six inches (6") of bituminous
base course (MS-1700) and two inches (2”) of bituminous surface which shall be placed and
compacted level with the existing pavement surface.
Any openings in a paved area of a street shall be repaired and the surface relaid by the permittee
in compliance with this Chapter and subject to the supervision of the Village Engineer. If such
work is not done within seven (7) calendar days after restoration is possible, the Village may
restore the surface and charge the cost thereof to the permittee.
Sec. 12.23 SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION
12-11
The Village Engineer, or his agent, shall inspect all excavations or disruption of the right-of-way
in the Village. The contractor shall notify the office of the Village Engineer at least twenty four
(24) hours before the commencement of any excavation or disruption of the right-of-way and
shall call the office of the Village Engineer for inspection of the backfilling operation as it
progresses and inspection of the patch before it is poured or placed.
Stop Work Order. In any case where work is done under a permit authorizing excavation or
disruption of the right-of-way on and street, alley, sidewalk or other Village property, which work
is contrary to the approved plan, or any law or ordinance, the Village Engineer shall have power
to stop such work and to order all persons engaged therein to stop and desist therefrom. Such
work shall not be resumed until a $200 inspection fee has been paid to the Village and
satisfactory assurance has been given to the Village Engineer that work will be done properly
and lawfully and according to the approved plan or until the Village Engineer has consented, in
writing, to the changes made in such approved plan. The Village Engineer may require a new
permit to be issued before work proceeds, for which permit the usual fee shall be paid by the
applicant doing such work. In case any excavation or disruption of the right-of-way work is
begun without a permit authorizing the same being issued therefore, the Village Engineer shall
have power to at once stop such work and to order any and all persons engaged therein to stop
and desist there from until the proper permit is issued at twice the normal fee.
Sec. 12.24 EXEMPTIONS
The provisions of this Chapter relative to securing permits shall not apply to officers, contractors,
or employees of the Village engaged in doing work for the Village; nor to persons or corporations
which are operating under a franchise or grant from the Village if such franchise provides for the
making of excavations or disruption of the right-of-way without securing a permit therefor; nor to
utilities regulated by Chapter 14 of the Burr Ridge Village Code titled “Utilities in the Right of
Way”. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to sprinkler system or mailbox installations,
seal coating and similar superficial improvements to driveways, or for a project where a building
permit or a grading permit is active.(A-946-01-03)
ARTICLE IV Snow Removal
Sec. 12.25 EMERGENCY DURING HEAVY SNOW STORM
Emergency Declared. An emergency is hereby declared to exist within the Village whenever
snow falls or accumulates to a depth of two (2) inches or more during any period of twenty-four
(24) hours or less. Such emergency shall continue to exist for a period of forty-eight (48) hours
or until such earlier time as snow plowing and removal operations have been declared as
completed by the Village Engineer.
Parking Prohibited. During such an emergency it shall be unlawful for any person to park, or
cause to be parked, any vehicle of any kind or description on any street, provided that vehicles
may be stopped not longer than fifteen (15) minutes for loading or unloading of passengers or
thirty (30) minutes for loading or unloading of materials at all places where such parking is
otherwise permitted.
Vehicle Removal. Whenever any police officer or employee of the Village shall find a vehicle
standing upon a street in violation of this article he may require the owner or operator to move, or
cause the same to be moved, to a location not in violation of this article. In the event of the
failure on the part of said owner or operator to move said vehicle or in the event such owner or
operator cannot be located, such officer or employee shall cause said vehicle to be removed and
impounded and held until such time as the costs for removal and impounding shall be paid by the
owner or operator.
12-12
Sec. 12.26 SIDEWALKS
Reserved.
Sec. 12.27 OBSTRUCTION RESTRICTION
It shall be unlawful to store, deposit or cause to be deposited, and/or process any snow or ice
either temporarily or permanently thereon which may cause harm to the pavement or injury to
any person or animals, or otherwise create a public nuisance on any street, sidewalk or other
municipal property.
ARTICLE V Trees and Shrubs
Sec. 12.28 PLANTING AND REMOVAL
Planting and removal of trees and shrubs within the Village right of way and on public property
shall be as regulated by Chapter 57 of the Burr Ridge Village Code titled “Trees”.
ARTICLE VI Public Lands
Sec. 12.29 HOURS OF OPERATION
Public land and property (other than streets, parkways, alleys and sidewalks) owned by the
Village shall be open for use between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. only; provided, however, that for programs or events sponsored or approved by the Village,
or for which a Village permit has been issued, said hours of operation may be extended during
any such program or event and for a period of sixty (60) minutes following the conclusion of such
program or event.
Sec. 12.30 GOLF AND ARCHERY PROHIBITED
No person shall play or practice golf or archery on any Village owned property.
Sec. 12.31 FIRES PROHIBITED
Except in a structure or stove designed for cooking or warming purposes and then only when
permitted by the Village, no person shall light or build a fire on any Village owned property.
ARTICLE VII Small Wireless Facilities
Sec.12.32 PURPOSE
Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act
100-585), and in anticipation of a continued increased demand for placement of small wireless
facilities of the type regulated by the Act both within the public rights-of-way and in other
locations within the jurisdiction of the Village, the Village Board has found it to be in the best
interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the Village to adopt the code
amendments set forth in this Chapter in order to establish generally applicable standards for the
design, permitting, location, construction, deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair
12-13
and removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights-of-way and in other
locations within the jurisdiction of the Village so as to, among other things:
A. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village’s utilities and of
other utilities lawfully located both within public rights-of-way and in other locations
within the jurisdiction of the Village;
B. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small wireless facilities are
installed;
C. Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and prevent visual blight
in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are installed;
D. Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to small
wireless facilities;
E. Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic landmarks or
districts within the Village; and
F. Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not negatively impact public
safety and the Village’s public safety technology.
Sec. 12.33 INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS
A. Other Code Provisions. The provisions of this Chapter are intended to supplement
general requirements and standards relative to the siting of telecommunication facilities
and generally applicable requirements for construction within public rights-of-way set
forth elsewhere within this code, including but not limited to the regulations set forth in
Chapter 12,” Public Ways and Properties” and Chapter 14, “Construction of Utility
Facilities in the Rights-of-Way”. In the event of a conflict, however, the provisions of
this Chapter shall control in all matters involving small wireless facilities, as defined
below.
B. State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, a wireless provider shall
comply with the requirements of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without
violating such federal or State laws or regulations.
Sec. 12.34 DEFINITIONS: As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
“Act” means the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585).
"Antenna" means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio
frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
"Applicable codes" means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes,
including the National Electric Safety Code.
"Applicant" means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
"Application" means a request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate
small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such
collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
12-14
"Authority" means the Village or other unit of local government that has jurisdiction and control for
use of public rights-of-way as provided by the Illinois Highway Code for placements within public
rights-of-way or has zoning or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
"Collocate" or "collocation" means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless
facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole, whether existing or new.
"Communications service" means cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33),
as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
"Communications service provider" means a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as
amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a
telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C.153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
"Fee" means a one-time charge.
"Historic district" or "historic landmark" means a building, property, or site, or group of buildings,
properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for
the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the
Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated
as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the
Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification
of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
"Law" means a federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local
ordinance or resolution.
"Micro wireless facility" means a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twentyfour
(24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that
has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven (11) inches.
"Permit" means a written authorization required by the Village or other permitting authority to
perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
"Person" means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association,
trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
"Public safety agency" means the functional division of the federal government, the State, a unit
of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this State, that
provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency
services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
“Public Utility” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities
Act, 220 ILCS 5/3-105.
"Rate" means a recurring charge.
12-15
"Right-of-way" means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public
sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. "Right-of-way" does not include
authority-owned aerial lines.
"Small wireless facility" means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i)
each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in
the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no
more than twenty-five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary
equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment
elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of
power and other services.
“Structural Engineer” means a person licensed under the laws of the State of Illinois to practice
structural engineering.
"Utility pole" means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar
function.
“Village” means the Village of Burr Ridge.
“Village Engineer” means that person appointed a Village Engineer or his/her designee.
"Village utility pole" means a utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
"Wireless facility" means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated
with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. "Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless facility" does not
include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated;
or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent
to or directly associated with an antenna.
"Wireless infrastructure provider" means any person authorized to provide telecommunications
service in the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment,
wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services
provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
"Wireless provider" means a wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless services provider.
This does not include, and expressly excludes, any person who is providing service to or for a
private niche market.
"Wireless services" means any services provided to the general public, including a particular
class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or
unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
"Wireless services provider" means a person who provides wireless services.
"Wireless support structure" means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either
guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or
12-16
capable of supporting wireless facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility
pole.
Sec. 12.35 ZONING
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and shall not be subject to zoning
review, if collocated in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or outside rights-of-way in the following
zoning districts:
B-1 Retail Business District
B-2 General Business District
O-1 Small Scale Office District
O-2 Office and Hotel District
RA Research and Assembly District
L1 Light Industrial District
G2 General Industrial District
In all other zoning districts, the Village’s normal zoning approvals, processes and restrictions shall
apply, if zoning approval, processes or restrictions are required by the Village’s zoning ordinance.
Sec. 12.36 PERMITS
Application Process: Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this Chapter, a permit to collocate
a small wireless facility within the Village is required in all cases. Permits are subject to the
following:
A. Permit Applications: Permit applications for the collocation of small wireless facilities
shall be made on a form provided by the Village for such purpose. In addition to any
generally applicable information required of other communications service providers or
for other installations in the public right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide
the following information:
1. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Village utility pole, make-ready
analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section
4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
2. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would
be installed and digital photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital photo
simulation of the proposed location providing “before and after” views
demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed small wireless facilities
on the surrounding environment;
3. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term
is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for
each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is
proposed to be installed;
12-17
4. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
5. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small
wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
6. Certification that, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge, the collocation
complies with the written design standards established by the Village, and
with the various other requirements set forth in this Chapter and code;
7. Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from the Village (i.e.
zoning approval, where required), other agencies and units of government with
jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of said small
wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such licenses, permits and
approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence of renewal or extension
thereof when granted; and
8. In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached to an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity other than the
Village, legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole or
wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
B. Means of Submission: Permit applications, along with all supporting information, for the
collocation of small wireless facilities shall be submitted by personal delivery or by
other means approved by the Village.
C. Multiple Applications for Same Location: Multiple applications for collocation on the
same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed based on a first fully
complete application, first-served basis.
D. Permit Application Fees: All applications for collocation of small wireless facilities shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the following amounts:
Request to collocate a small wireless facility
that includes the installation of a new utility
pole
$1,000.00
Request to collocate a single small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure
$650.00
Request to collocate multiple small wireless
facilities on existing utility poles or wireless
support structures addressed in a single
application
$350.00 per small wireless facility
E. Permit review timelines:
1. Completeness of Application: Requests for the collocation of small wireless
facilities shall be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of the Act,
12-18
this Chapter, and other applicable provisions of this code. Within thirty (30)
days after receiving an application, the Village must determine whether the
application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is
incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends a notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to provide
notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date when all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's
permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
2. Existing Pole or Wireless Support Structure: Requests for the collocation of
small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure
shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or
denied within ninety (90) days of submission of a completed application. A
permit application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within ninety (90) days, subject to the following: if an
applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its intention
to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy-five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be
deemed approved on the later of the ninetieth (90th) day after submission of
the completed application, or the tenth (10th) day after receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the Village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the
Village shall not preclude the Village from denying the permit within the
allowed time limit.
3. New Utility Pole: Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities that
include the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within one hundred
and twenty (120) days of submission of a completed application. A permit
application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny
the application within one hundred twenty (120) days, subject to the
following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one
hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application. The
permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the one hundred twentieth
(120th) day after submission of the completed application, or the tenth (10th)
day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. Receipt of a
deemed approved notice by the Village shall not preclude the Village from
denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
F. Tolling: The time limitations for approval or denial of applications shall be tolled by
notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as set forth above, upon mutual
agreement of the parties, or by a local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes a delay.
12-19
G. Pole Replacement: Permit approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of a utility
pole or wireless support structure at the applicant’s sole cost where such replacement
is deemed necessary for compliance with the requirements of this Chapter or code
relative to the siting of small wireless facilities, or other applicable codes and
regulations that concern public safety.
H. Denial: The Village shall deny an application that does not meet the requirements of
this Chapter. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall be provided in a written
notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall include the specific code provisions or
application conditions on which the denial is based.
I. Resubmittal After Denial: In the case of a permit denial, an applicant may cure the
deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and resubmit a revised application once
within thirty (30) days after the notice of denial is sent without payment of an additional
application fee. The Village shall have thirty (30) days to approve or deny the
resubmitted application or it is deemed approved, if the applicant has notified the
Village of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved
basis, which notification may be submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of
a resubmitted application is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original notice of
denial. This subsection does not apply if a revised application is not resubmitted within
thirty (30) days, or curing any deficiencies in the original application requires review of
a new location, new or different structure for collocation, new antennas, or other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. In such cases, a new
application and application fee are required.
J. Consolidated Applications: Consolidated applications for small wireless facilities for the
collocation of up to twenty-five (25) small wireless facilities shall be allowed if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure. Each consolidated application shall provide all
the information required by this Chapter for each small wireless facility at each location.
If such an application includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless
facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless facilities that do not qualify
for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the Village may remove such
collocation requests from the application and treat them as separate requests.
Separate permits may be issued for each collocation approved in a consolidated
application.
K. Alternate Locations: If an applicant is seeking to install a new utility pole as part of its
application, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be located on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred (100) feet of
the proposed collocation. The applicant shall accept the proposed alternate location so
long as it has the right to use the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the
alternate location imposes technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the
applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location based on the foregoing, the
applicant shall provide legally competent evidence in the form of a written certification,
under oath, describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons that
prevent the alternate location from being utilized.
12-20
L. Exemptions: No application, permit approval or fee shall be required from a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way when the work
in question is for:
1. Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless facilities if the
wireless provider notifies the Village in writing at least forty-eight hours prior
to the planned maintenance;
2. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are
substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies
the Village in writing at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications, including (i) equipment type and
model numbers, for the replacement of equipment consistent with the
equipment specifications information required on a permit application for
original installation; and (ii) information sufficient to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide all
information necessary and requested by the Village to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The Village has the sole right and
responsibility to determine if a proposed small wireless facility is substantially
similar to the existing small wireless facility; or
3. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers from Village permitting
requirements where traffic patterns are affected or lane closures are required.
Sec. 12.37 CONSTRUCTION
Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days
of issuance of the permit, unless the Village agrees to extend the period or a delay is caused by
make-ready work for a Village utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability
at the site, provided the applicant has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance
of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete
installation does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Permits that
are not completed within applicable timelines shall be void absent an extension granted in writing by
the Village.
Sec. 12.38 PERMIT DURATION
Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this Chapter shall be for a period of five (5)
years. Permits are subject to renewal at the end of the five (5) year permit period for a successive five
(5) year term so long as the installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the
time of renewal. A finding by the Village at the time of a request for renewal that an installation does
not comply with the applicable code provisions in force at the time of the renewal request shall be in
writing. If the Act is repealed or found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all permits
granted by the Village under this Chapter shall terminate at the end of their current term.
Sec. 12.39 HEIGHTS LIMITIONS
12-21
A. Antenna Installations: The maximum permitted height of a small wireless facility is ten (10)
feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is
collocated.
B. New Poles: The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure on which a small wireless facility is collocated is the higher of:
1. Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility
pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application
is submitted, and that is located within three hundred (300) feet of the new or
replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same
right-of-way within the Village. The Village may designate which intersecting
right-of-way within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed utility pole or
wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
2. Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.
C. Variance Process:
A Wireless provider may receive a variance pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section
14.21 of Chapter 14 of this Code, from the maximum permitted height of a new pole set
forth in this section, if, in addition to the conditions of Section 14.21, the wireless provider
can establish that:
1. Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or practical
difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created by the
wireless provider; and
2. Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new utility pole at the
maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this section cannot
accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to function effectively,
under reasonable terms and conditions; and
3. The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support structures, or a new
utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this
section, is not technically feasible.
Sec. 12.40 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Public Safety Technology: A wireless provider’s operation of a small wireless facility
may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications. A wireless provider must install small wireless facilities of the type
and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency’s communications equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and
measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licenses by
a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall take all reasonable steps
necessary to correct and eliminate the interference, including, but not limited to,
powering down the small wireless facility and later powering up the small wireless
facility for intermittent testing, if necessary. The Village may terminate a permit for a
12-22
small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making
a good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement
and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by
the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to establish the good faith effort shall be on the
wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the Village all information necessary to
demonstrate its efforts to resolve the interference consistent with the Code of Federal
Regulations sections cited above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein
shall constitute a public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through
the procedures for abatement of such nuisances set forth in this code.
B. A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any small wireless facility that:
1. Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on a right-ofway;
2. Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
3. Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
4. Violates Chapter 12, Public Ways and Properties or Chapter 14, Construction
of Utility Facilities in the Rights-of-Way, or other applicable regulations set
forth in this code or otherwise adopted by the Village, except to the extent
such chapters, sections or regulations may be modified by the provisions of
this Chapter; or
5. Violates the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C.
Section 12101 et seq.)
C. Contractual Requirements: Wireless providers shall comply with all requirements imposed
by a contract between the Village and any private property owner that concern design or
construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in
the right-of-way.
D. Ground-Mounted Equipment: Wireless providers shall comply with the ground mounted
equipment spacing requirements within rights-of-way as set forth in Chapter 14 of this
code.
E. Undergrounding:
1. The wireless provider shall comply with Village code provisions or regulations
concerning undergrounding requirements, if any, that prohibit the installation of
new or the modification of existing utility poles or equipment in the right-of-way.
2. A Wireless Provider may receive a variance pursuant to the procedures set forth
in Section 14.21 of Chapter 14, to allow a small wireless facility to be located
above ground in an area where Village ordinances or regulations prohibit or
restrict above ground facilities if, in addition to the conditions of Section 14.21,
the wireless provider can establish that:
a. Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is no
reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable
to adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of
the right-of-way; and
12-23
b. An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location is
necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified
area; and
c. An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location will
not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety
hazard; and
d. An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location will
not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies; and
e. Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the above
ground small wireless facility at the proposed location; and
f. An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location will
not create a safety hazard; and
g. The above ground small wireless facility is located and designed in
such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties;
and
h. In any historical area, that the above ground small wireless facility will
not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
3. Screening for Ground Mounted Facilities. Where a ground-mounted facility is
allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in accordance
with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer. Plant
materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous planting materials.
The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance of all
landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan.
4. Future Undergrounding: The Village may, from time to time, make a decision to
eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type generally, such as
electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of the Village. In the event that
such a utility pole has a collocated small wireless facility in place at the time of
such a decision, the Village shall either.
a. Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a
reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation
of the small wireless facility, or
b. Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a reasonable
cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so it
can maintain service from that location.
F. Collocation Limits: Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village
utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located
in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not
12-24
otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work
involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subsection, the terms “communications space”, “communication
worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the meanings given to those terms in
the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers.
G. Code Compliance: Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes and local code
provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
Sec 12.41: Stealth, Concealment and Design Standards Every small wireless facility installation shall
comply with the following standards:
A. General Stealth, Concealment and Design Standards: Installations shall comply with any
stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable to utility installations in the
public right-of-way, as set forth in Chapter 14 of this code, as well as any written design
standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment, design an aesthetic requirements that are otherwise identified by the Village
in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village Board of Trustees, in the Village’s
comprehensive plan, or in a written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
B. Historic Districts and Landmarks: For areas designated as historic districts, or on buildings
or structures designated as historic landmarks pursuant to this code, in addition to the
stealth, concealment and design requirements referenced above, the following additional
restrictions/conditions apply to the installation of small wireless facilities.
1. Small wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials that are consistent with
the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with any buildings or
structures designated as historic landmarks or located within a designated
historic district, and shall be designed to blend with the surrounding historical
landmarks and/or district in design and color
2. Small wireless facilities shall not be mounted upon _______
C. Historic District or Landmark Limitations:
1. Any stealth, concealment and design standards in a historic district or on a,
historic landmark, including restrictions on a specific category of utility poles,
may not have the effect of prohibiting any provider’s technology. Such stealth,
concealment and design measures shall not be considered a part of the small
wireless facility for purposes of the size restrictions of a small wireless facility
2. This section shall not be construed to limit the Village’s enforcement of historic
preservation in conformance with the requirements adopted pursuant to the
Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act or the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C. Section 300101 et seq., and the regulations
adopted to implement those laws.
12-25
Sec 12.42: Reservation of Village Utility Pole Space: The Village may reserve space on Village-owned utility
poles for future public safety uses or for Village electric utility uses. Such reservation may preclude
collocation of small wireless facilities if the Village reasonably determines that the Village’s utility pole
cannot accommodate both uses.
Sec. 12.43: Applicability of Existing Agreements:
A. Existing Installations: Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing
agreement is in place between the Village and a wireless provider relating to the
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village’s
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
B. Applications Received Between June 1, 2018 and June 1, 2020: Subject to any applicable
termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the Village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles
on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the Village’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the Village from the
wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates, fees and terms of this
Chapter and the Act received after June 1, 2020, whichever is later.
C. Applications Received After June 1, 2020: Subject to any applicable termination provisions,
where an existing agreement is in place between the Village and a wireless provider
relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018,
such agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the
Village’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until receipt by
the Village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is accepting the rates, fees, terms
and conditions of this Chapter.
Sec.12.44: Collocation on Village Owned Infrastructure:
A. Fee: The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village-owned utility pole
located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:
1. $200/year per small wireless facility; or
2. The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless providers use of
space on the pole.
B. Exception: Small wireless facilities collocated on Village-owned utility poles located outside
of public right-of-way are not subject to the rate limitations in this section.
C. Attachment Agreement: An attachment agreement in a form approved by the Village is
required for any collocation upon any Village owned utility pole or wireless support
structure.
Sec.12.45: Notice of Sale or Transfer: A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or
control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the Village, provide written notice to
the Village of such sale or transfer of control. Such notice shall include the name and contact
information of the new wireless provider.
12-26
Sec. 12.46: Abandonment:
A. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months
shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall remove the small
wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village
notifying it of the abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at its last known address. If the small
wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days after receipt of such notice, such
wireless facility shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the Village may remove or cause
the removal of such facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs, pursuant to the terms
of its pole attachment or other agreement for Village utility poles or through the procedures
for abatement of nuisances set forth in this code.
B In the event the Village suspects that the wireless provider is no longer using the small
wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may send the wireless provider written
notice that requires the wireless provider to remove the small wireless facility or provide
proof that the small wireless facility is operational and still being used within thirty (30)
days, and informs the wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the small
wireless facility will result in the Village removing the small wireless facility at the wireless
provider’s cost.
Sec. 12.47: Dispute Resolution: The Circuit Court of DuPage County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of
small wireless facilities on Village utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the
collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
Sec. 12.48: Indemnification: Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless
against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising
out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village infrastructure or improvements, or rightof-
way associated with such infrastructure or improvements by the wireless provider or its
employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this Chapter
and the Act. A wireless provider proceeding under this Chapter waives any claims it may have
against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused,
based on the theory of liability.
Sec. 12.49: Insurance: At all times during the period in which a wireless provider’s facilities are located on Village
infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and
expense, carry the following insurance coverages:
A. Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all risks;
B. Workers’ Compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by law; and
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village
infrastructure, improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage, with limits not less than:
1. Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
2. Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
12-27
3. Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and shall provide certificates of insurance and proof
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy to the Village prior to
the collocation of any small wireless facility, and shall keep updated certificates and
proof of inclusion on file with the Village at all times that the provider maintains small
wireless facilities within the Village.
D. A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limits
required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the
extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement that the Village be named
an additional insured. A wireless provider that self-insures shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits
required by the Village.
Sec. 12.50: Maintenance of Small Wireless Facilities:
A. A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities installed within the Village in a
condition that maintains the safety, integrity and aesthetics of such facilities. Small
wireless facilities shall not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly
maintain such facilities, the Village shall notify the wireless provider, in writing, who shall
have thirty (30) days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If not corrected within
such period, the Village reserves the right to take such action as it deems necessary,
including revocation of the permit. Maintenance and replacement of small wireless
facilities shall be performed by the wireless provider at the wireless provider’s sole cost and
expense.
B. In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or property, the Village
may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at the wireless provider’s expense.
Sec. 12.51: Revocation of Permit:
A. A permit to collocate a small wireless facility may be revoked for one or more of the
following reasons:
1. The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a
misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal.
2. The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless facility in
accordance with the approved plans.
3. The wireless provider failed to comply within any material condition of a
permit issued.
4. The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or the
structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the Village.
5. The wireless provider failed to notify the Village of the replacement of small
wireless facilities as required by this Chapter.
12-28
6. A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the wireless provider’s
authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small wireless facility
is located.
7. The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian use of the
public right of way.
8. The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely restoration of the
right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless facility is located.
9. The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the small wireless
facility as required by this Chapter.
10. The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public safety
communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the
FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675.
11. The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless provider has
failed to remove the small wireless facilities as provided in this Chapter.
B. Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by certified mail or shall be
personally delivered to the wireless provider setting forth the basis for the revocation.
The wireless provider shall, within fourteen days of the notice of revocation, file a
written response with the Village Engineer setting forth the reasons why the permit
should not be revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the revocation as the
wireless provider determines necessary. Failure to file a response with the Village
Engineer shall be deemed an admission of the facts set forth in the notification of
written notification and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit. The Village
Engineer shall render findings and a decision within twenty-one days of the date of
receipt of the wireless provider’s response, if any.
C. If the Village Engineer revokes the permit, the wireless provider may file a written
notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within twenty–one (21) days of notification of the
permit revocation. Such notice shall contain a response to the decision of the Village
Engineer. The Village Board shall hear the revocation appeal and render a decision on
such appeal.
Sec. 12.52: Exceptions to Applicability:
A. Nothing in this Chapter authorizes the collocation of small wireless facilities on:
1. Property owned by a private party without the written consent of the property
owner;
2. Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is not located
within rights-of-way without the written consent of the unit of local government
(local governments are, however, required to authorize the collocation of small
wireless facilities on utility poles owned or controlled by the local government or
located within rights-of-way to the same extent the local government permits
access to utility poles for other commercial projects or uses);
3. A privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure, without the consent of
the property owner;
12-29
4. Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or
conversation district for public park, recreation or conversation purposes, without
the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rightsof-
ways located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control
of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code
(605 ILCS-5/1-101 et seq.); or
5. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18c-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or any other public
commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the
Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-102), without the consent of the rail carrier,
public commuter rail service, or electric utility;
B. The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to:
1. Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility’s wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act; or
2. Small wireless facilities owned by the Village.
14-1
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 14
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES
IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Revised by Ordinance 1083, dated 10-08-07
Sec. 14.01 Purpose and Scope
Sec. 14.02 Definitions
Sec. 14.03 Annual Registration Required
Sec. 14.04 Permit Required; Applications and Fees
Sec. 14.05 Action on Permit Applications
Sec. 14.06 Effect of Permit
Sec. 14.07 Revised Permit Drawings
Sec. 14.08 Insurance
Sec. 14.09 Indemnification
Sec. 14.10 Security
Sec. 14.11 Permit Suspension and Revocation
Sec. 14.12 Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status
Sec. 14.13 General Construction Standards
Sec. 14.14 Traffic Control
Sec. 14.15 Location of Facilities
Sec. 14.16 Construction Methods and Materials
Sec. 14.17 Vegetation Control
Sec. 14.18 Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Utility Facilities
Sec. 14.19 Clean-up and Restoration
Sec. 14.20 Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance
Sec. 14.21 Variances
Sec. 14.22 Penalties
Sec. 14.23 Enforcement
Sec. 14.24 Severability
Last Revision: Ordinance 1083, 10-08-07
14-2
CHAPTER 14
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES
IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec. 14.01 Purpose and Scope.
a Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent
with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village rights-of-way
and the Village as a whole.
b Intent. In enacting this Chapter, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way
in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing
uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
1) prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public
ways and places;
2) prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are
hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3) prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village’s utilities and of other
utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
4) protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of
utility facilities;
5) protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that
increase impermeable surfaces;
6) preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7) preserve open space, particularly the parkways that characterize the Village’s residential
neighborhoods;
8) prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
9) assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility
facilities locations.
c Facilities Subject to This Chapter. This Chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be
otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
d Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law,
may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of
locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village rights-ofway.
Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the
Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this Chapter.
e Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
14-3
1) Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event that a utility other than a
telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the
Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2) Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency
between, the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or
similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the
provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during
the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
f Conflicts with Other Chapters. This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters adopted
prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
g Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or
regulations conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the utility shall comply with the
requirements of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws
or regulations.
h Sound Engineering Judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when
administering this Chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in
this Chapter when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
Sec. 14.02 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO - American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI - American National Standards Institute.
Applicant - A person applying for a permit under this Chapter.
ASTM - American Society for Testing and Materials.
Backfill - The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
Bore” or “Boring - To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical
conductor.
Cable operator - That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
Cable service - That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
Cable system - That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
Carrier Pipe - The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
Casing - A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors,
and fiber optic devices.
14-4
Clear Zone - The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by
errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside
geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
Coating - Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external
corrosion.
Code - The Municipal Code of the Village of Burr Ridge.
Conductor - Wire carrying electrical current.
Conduit - A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
Construction or Construct - The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement,
demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
Cover - The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
Crossing Facility - A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
Director of Public Works - The Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
Disrupt the Right-of-Way - For the purposes of this Chapter, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or
causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include,
without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of
materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil,
and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the
flow of traffic on a highway.
Emergency - Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the
vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public
served by the utility.
Encasement - Provision of a protective casing.
Engineer - The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
Equipment - Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of
facilities.
Excavation - The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
Extra Heavy Pipe - Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
Facility - All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires,
ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within rights-of-way under this Chapter. For purposes of this Chapter, the term “facility” shall not
include any facility owned or operated by the Village.
Freestanding Facility - A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna,
transformer, pump, or meter station.
14-5
Frontage Road - Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is
precluded by control of access to a highway.
Hazardous Materials - Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other
characteristics, is determined by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited
to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or
state law, statute or regulation.
Highway Code - The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
Highway - A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets.
“Highway” includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or
convenient for vehicle traffic.
Holder - A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the
ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
IDOT - Illinois Department of Transportation.
ICC - Illinois Commerce Commission.
Jacking - Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
Jetting - Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
Joint Use - The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities.
J.U.L.I.E. - The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification program.
Major Intersection - The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
Occupancy - The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
Parallel Facility - A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.
Parkway - Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
Pavement Cut - The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
Permittee - That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to Sections 14.04 and 14.05 of this
Chapter.
Practicable - That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
Pressure - The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per
square inch gauge (psig).
Petroleum Products Pipelines - Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but
not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
Prompt - That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified,
the period shall be 30 days.
14-6
Public Entity - A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal
level.
Restoration - The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of
a facility.
Right-of-Way or Rights-of-Way- Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the Village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the Village.
“Right-of-way” or "Rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically
described in the previous two sentences and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures and other structures
or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
Roadway - That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
Sale of Telecommunications at Retail - The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge
made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
Security Fund - That amount of security required pursuant to Section 14.10.
Shoulder - A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge
and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
Sound Engineering Judgment - A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles,
practices and experience.
Telecommunications - This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through
use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter
service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or
portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. “Private line” means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single
customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of
such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
“Telecommunications” shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
“Telecommunications” shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer
who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. “Telecommunications” shall not include the
provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47
U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services
subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the
Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter
amended.
Telecommunications Provider - Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the
right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
Telecommunications Retailer - Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
14-7
Trench - A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
Utility - The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this Chapter.
Vent - A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
Video Service - That term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law
of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).
Village - The Village of Burr Ridge.
Water Lines - Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
Wet Boring - Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a
sluice for the excavated material.
Sec. 14.03 Annual Registration Required.
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the
Director of Public Works, providing the utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in Section 14.08 of this Chapter, in the form of a certificate of
insurance.
Sec. 14.04 Permit Required; Applications and Fees.
a Permit Required. No person shall construct (as defined in this Chapter) any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village right-of-way which (1) changes the location
of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this Chapter), or (4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along,
under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Director of Public
Works and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to
customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
b Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be filed on a form
provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village may
designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or “confidential”
by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
c Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly
authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
1) The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2) The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy
numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3) The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
4) A general description and engineering drawing of the proposed work and the purposes
and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
14-8
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to
be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted
by the work proposed;
5) Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
i) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and
devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and
to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
ii) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The
intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
Section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
6) Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification
of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable
codes, rules, and regulations;
7) Evidence of insurance as required in Section 14.08 of this Chapter;
8) Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section 14.10 of this Chapter;
9) Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this Chapter (See Section
14.21); and
10) Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
d Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities. In addition to the
requirements of Subsection c) of this Section, the permit application shall include the following
items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1) In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications,
telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution
system, evidence that any “Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity” or other
regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the
applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional
authority;
2) In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction
class, and operating pressures;
3) In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;
4) In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution
Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District have been satisfied; or
14-9
5) In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum
products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed.
e Applicant’s Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and
the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a
permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
f Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all
applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
$200.00. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act.
Sec. 14. 05 Action on Permit Applications.
a Village Review of Permit Applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required
documentation, shall be examined by the Village Engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If
the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the Village Engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the Village Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of
this Chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer
shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
b Additional Village Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers.
1) Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to commence work
governed by this Chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services.
Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to
demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Engineer shall specify the
portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
2) In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the
Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining
a permit under this Chapter.
3) Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required for
work pursuant to Section 14.04 of this Chapter the telecommunications retailer shall
submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall
be subject to the requirements of Subsection (a) of this Section.
c Additional Village Review of Applications of Holders of State Authorization Under the Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted fortyfive
(45) days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village, provided
the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and regulations.
14-10
Sec. 14.06 Effect of Permit.
a Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A permit from the Village
authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this Chapter on
Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
b Duration. No permit issued under this Chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months
unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion.
c Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under
this Chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who
will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such Village
representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the
purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in
the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility
facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property
owners.
d Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the
permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and applicable statutes, laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations.
Sec. 14.07 Revised Permit Drawings.
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations
identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90) days after the completion of the
permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual
facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates
from the requirements of this Chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with Section
14.21 of this Chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove
the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised
drawings or plans therefor.
Sec. 14.08 Insurance.
a Required Coverages and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall
secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as
additional insureds on the policies listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 below:
1) Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion,
collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as “X,” “C,” and “U” coverages)
and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
i) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
ii) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
iii) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability;
14-11
2) Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit
of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury and property damage for each
accident;
3) Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
4) Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000)
per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors
performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this Section.
b Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this Section may be in any combination of
primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess
coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by
the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
c Copies Required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this Section to
the Village within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
d Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance policies required by this
Section shall contain the following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days
after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return
receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Mayor
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10)
days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of
replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
e Self-Insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required by Subsection a) of this Section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to
the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under Subsection a), or the requirements of Subsections b), c) and d) of this Section. A
utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
Subsection a) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self insurer” under the
Workers Compensation Act.
f Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility’s Liability. The legal liability of the utility to the
Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or selfinsurance
required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
g Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid
and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in
the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and
of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.
14-12
Sec. 14.09 Indemnification.
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of,
resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions,
failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
Chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility’s indemnity
obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or
expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Chapter by the Village,
its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
Sec. 14.10 Security.
a Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in
this Section. The Security Fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at
the permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
1) The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Chapter;
2) Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee’s
failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives
of the Village issued pursuant to this Chapter; and
3) The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that
the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in
violation of this Chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or
restoration work the permittee is required by this Chapter to perform that the Village must
perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to
perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant
to this Chapter or any other applicable law.
b Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in the form, at the permittee’s
election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of
credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to
this Subsection shall, at a minimum:
1) Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee;
2) Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any
amounts covered by it; and
3) Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of Illinois at which it
can be drawn.
c Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably
estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee
fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will
be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
14-13
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in
another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Village Engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee
to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction
under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this Subsection (c) for any
single phase.
d Withdrawals. The Village, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance written notice clearly stating the
reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw an
amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such
amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1) Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2) Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3) Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the
Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance
by the permittee; or
4) Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the Village determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
e Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any
amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund
to the amount specified in Subsection c) of this Section.
f Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security
Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the
Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum
balance required in Subsection c) of this Section.
g Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit,
the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains
on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this Chapter or other
applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all
accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover
any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation,
provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the
permittee.
h Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are in
addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this Chapter or otherwise authorized
by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be
entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or
otherwise violated.
Sec. 14.11 Permit Suspension and Revocation.
a Village Right to Revoke Permit. The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this Chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
14-14
1) Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit
application;
2) Non-compliance with this Chapter;
3) Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to
the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4) Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit
and approved plans.
b Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The Village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation
or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section 14.11.
c Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension. Upon receipt of a
written notice of revocation or suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the following
options:
1) Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or
suspension;
2) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the
written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the Village within five (5)
working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village
providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of
the written notice of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this
Subsection.
d Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the Village
may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set
forth within Subsection a) of this Section.
e Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of
Subsection c) of this Section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village: (1)
correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than twenty (20) days notice to the permittee, remove
the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days notice to the permittee
of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village. The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal.
Sec. 14.12 Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status.
a Notification of Change. A utility shall notify the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the
transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new
owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including
this Chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
14-15
b Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current
ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new
owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions
of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village’s right-of-way.
c Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect
the name of the new owner upon transfer.
Sec. 14.13 General Construction Standards.
a Standards and Principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable
ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic
control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to
time:
1) Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
2) Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
3) Highway Design Manual;
4) Highway Standards Manual;
5) Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
6) Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545);
7) Flagger’s Handbook; and
8) Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
b Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among
differing principles and standards required by this Chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine, in
the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the
construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
Sec. 14.14 Traffic Control.
a Minimum Requirements. The Village’s minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in
IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code.
b Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and
installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable
federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
c Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
d Notice When Access is Blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will
partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify
the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
14-16
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to Section 14.20 of this
Chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
e Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection
requirements that are brought to the utility’s attention by the Village.
Sec. 14.15 Location of Facilities
a General Requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility
facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements
of this subsection.
1) No Interference with Village Facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if
the Village Engineer determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the Village’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the
operation or maintenance of any of the Village’s utility facilities. In no case shall a
proposed utility be permitted to be constructed parallel and within 24” of a Village owned
utility.
2) Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum
possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum
possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
3) No Interference with Travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that
interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
4) No Limitations on Visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit
visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
5) Size of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility
owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
b Parallel Facilities Located Within Right-Of-Way.
1) Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the rightof-
way lines if:
i) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly
parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;
ii) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb
with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where
available;
iii) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as
practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
iv) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
v) Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
14-17
2) Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within
the right-of-way lines only if:
i) The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more`than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line;
ii) A new facility may be located under a paved surface only if other locations are
impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new
cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
iii) In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall
be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five
(5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or
as near as practicable.
3) Tree Preservation. In no case shall a tree be removed in order to accommodate
construction of proposed utility.
c Facilities Crossing Highways.
1) No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed
between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may require the incorporation of
materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement
or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2) Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in
cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3) 90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety
(90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
4) Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or communication
facility may cross a highway only if:
i) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s rules entitled,
“Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83 Ill. Adm. Code
305);
ii) Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway
and outside of the clear zone; and
iii) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5) Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
i) The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum
maintenance-free service life; and
ii) Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the
initial installation.
6) Markers. The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line
where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a
14-18
highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency
phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal
regulations. (49 C.F.R. §192.707 (1989)).
7) Tree Preservation. In no case shall a tree be removed in order to accommodate
proposed construction of utility
d Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The Village may require that facilities be
located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
e Freestanding Facilities.
1) The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way.
2) The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be
screened from view.
f Facilities Installed Above Ground. Above ground facilities may be installed only if:
1) No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2) New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3) The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and
materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being
traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited
to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of
conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged and will not
be permitted except in cases where no other means is reasonably practical.
g Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
1) Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where
the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not
practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater,
independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely
separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that
are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant
pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
2) A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or
roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing.
Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:
i) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and
an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of
damage to or failure of the facility;
ii) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the
transportation system;
14-19
iii) The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative
practicability;
iv) The proposed method of attachment;
v) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
vi) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
vii) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
viii) The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk
involved.
h Appearance Standards.
1) The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to
preserve visual quality.
2) A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal
or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent
residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands
being traversed.
Sec. 14.16 Construction Methods and Materials.
a Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods.
1) Boring or Jacking.
i) Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished
from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village Engineer from
the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no
more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled
within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are
open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall
be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the
boring or jacking operation.
ii) Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the
roadway.
iii) Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. Borings over six inches (0.15
m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the
diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following
pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
iv) Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. Borings of six inches or less in
diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger
and following pipe method.
v) Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or
around the root system.
14-20
2) Trenching. Open trenching through paved surfaces will not be permitted except when no
other means of construction is reasonably practical. Trenching for facility installation,
repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.”
i) Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum
consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any
intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is
obtained from the Village Engineer.
ii) Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed excavated
material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material
shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection.
Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the
roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated
material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be
hauled to an off-road location.
iii) Drip Line of Trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved.
3) Backfilling.
i) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be
backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in
accordance with IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.” When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for
backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
ii) For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is completed,
the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that
has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Village
Engineer, the utility, at its expense and within 14 calendar days, shall remove
any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and
properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Village
Engineer.
iii) In the event that backfilling is not performed to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer, or in the event that settlement has occurred and a repair has not
been completed within 14 calendar days, the Village retains the right to have
the work performed at the utilities sole expense.
4) Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts will not be permitted except in cases where no other
construction means is reasonably practical. Pavement cuts for facility installation or
repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to
traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph 4) is permitted under
Section 14.21, the following requirements shall apply:
i) Any excavation under or within 3 feet of pavement shall be backfilled and
compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the Village Engineer.
14-21
ii) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as
practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt within 30 calendar days upon notification by the
Village.
iii) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
iv) For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete
surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
5) Encasement.
i) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any
other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece
fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village.
ii) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m) of
the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area
established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
iii) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished
between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is
used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior
to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are
of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased
regardless of installation method.
iv) In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
v) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of
more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe
is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection
of the pipe is provided;
vi) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility
shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-ofway.
6) Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at
least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of
facility:
TYPE OF FACILITY MINIMUM COVER
Electric Lines 30 Inches (0.8m)
Communication, Cable or Video Service Lines 18 to 24 Inches (0.6, as determined by Village
Gas or Petroleum Products 30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection
b Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
14-22
1) Electric Power or Communication Lines.
i) Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within Village
rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with
the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the
Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled “Rules for Construction of Electric
Power and Communications Lines,” and the National Electrical Safety Code.
ii) Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use
single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be
used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so
guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no
feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum
visibility.
iii) Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing,
provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize
damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a crossing is
installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or
bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the crossing is installed
by the use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved method which
compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or (b) the
installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
iv) Burial of Drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of
the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops,
shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless
otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after
placement.
2) Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines. Underground
facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by:
i) the use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved methods which compress
the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
ii) jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or
toes of slopes of the highway;
iii) open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of
slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
iv) tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by
other means.
3) Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be
constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved manner and in conformance
with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of
Transportation, Part 192 – Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline:
Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR §192), IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction,” and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
14-23
4) Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall
conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid
Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5) Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines. Water
lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way
shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current “Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.”
6) Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or
underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a
vegetation-free area extending 6” in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation-free area shall be provided by an extension of the mounting pad or similar
material approved by the Village Engineer. With the approval of the Village Engineer,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area.
The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend
with the surroundings.
c Materials.
1) General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way
shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable
portions of IDOT’s “Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” the
requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by
other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2) Material Storage on Right-of-Way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way
without the prior written approval of the Village Engineer. When such storage is
permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed
along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to
the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the Village.
3) Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify any
hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or
removal of any existing facilities.
d Operational Restrictions.
1) Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be required
to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public
health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to
the right-of-way or other property.
2) These restrictions may be waived by the Village Engineer when emergency work is
required to restore vital utility services.
3) Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are:
Monday through Friday: 7:00 AM to 7:00 PM
Saturday and Sunday: 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM
14-24
e Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact
J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of
an excavation or when requested by the Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically
mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
Sec. 14.17 Vegetation Control.
a Electric Utilities – Compliance with State Laws and Regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all
tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable
Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the
Village as permitted by law.
b Other Utilities – Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility
with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and
regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation,
but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit
required under this Chapter.
1) Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include
assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision
who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall
designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously
accomplished.
2) Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will
not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for
assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees extensively
damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the
International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may
require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
c Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The Village may require that special measures
be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may
consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, underground construction covered wire or other
means.
d Chemical Use.
1) Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any
chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any purpose,
including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2) Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way
unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer that such
spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control.
Sec. 14.18 Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Utility Facilities.
a Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own
expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or
14-25
alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for
the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way. In the event that the utility does not relocate
its facilities within 90 days, the Village retains the right to remove or relocate the facility at the
expense of the utility.
b Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village,
any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the
following circumstances:
1) Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or franchise, unless otherwise
permitted by applicable law;
2) If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise,
if required;
3) If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required
permit in violation of this Chapter; or
4) If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee’s
license or franchise.
c Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or
move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine to
be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or
removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
d Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the Village,
the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the Village
may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event
that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
Sec. 14.19 Clean-up and Restoration.
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10)
days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of entrances and
side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the
Village Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that
which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this Section may be
extended by the Village Engineer for good cause shown. In the event that the utility fails to complete
restoration to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer or fails to complete the restoration within 10 days, the
Village retains the right to perform the restoration at the expense of the utility.
Sec. 14.20 Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance.
14-26
a General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be
maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility’s expense.
b Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal
procedures for securing a permit:
1) If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility
shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway
or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers.
If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such
as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is
available.
2) In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Director of Public Works
or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what
steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to
make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
3) In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as
practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
c Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the Village a description of the repairs
undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
Sec. 14.21 Variances.
a Request for Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this
Chapter must do so in writing to the Village Engineer as a part of the permit application. The
request shall identify each provision of this Chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
b Authority to Grant Variances. The Village Engineer shall decide whether a variance is authorized
for each provision of this Chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
c Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Village Engineer may authorize a variance only if the
utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
1) One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an
irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the
provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
2) All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the
provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the
requested approach.
d Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the
Village Engineer may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this Chapter.
e Right to Appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination,
including denial of a variance, made by the Village Engineer under the provisions of this Chapter
14-27
shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within 30
days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village Board shall
commence its consideration of the appeal at the Board’s next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely
decide the appeal.
Sec. 14.22 Penalties.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Chapter 1 Section 1.05
Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Chapter. Unless the utility
shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the Village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing
the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or
overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
Sec. 14.23 Enforcement.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may
have for enforcement of this Chapter.
Sec. 14.24 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 15
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION
Sec. 15.01 Purpose
Sec. 15.02 Amendments
Sec. 15.03 Enforcement
Sec. 15.04 Penalties
Sec. 15.05 Customer Credits
Chapter 15 added by Ordinance 1147, dated April 27, 2015
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION
Sec. 15.01 Purpose
The regulations of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, 220 ILCS 5/22-501, as amended,
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services
within the Village’s boundaries.
Sec. 15.02 Amendments
Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the
effective date of this Chapter shall be incorporated into this Chapter by reference and shall be
applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the Village boundaries. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated
into this Chapter by reference without formal action by the Corporate Authorities of the Village.
Sec. 15.03. Enforcement
The Village does hereby, pursuant to law, declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and
privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints
received from residents within the Village.
Sec. 15.04 Penalties
The Village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/22-501 (r) (1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for
any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to
the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis
and shall not exceed Seven Hundred Fifty and no/100 dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material
breach, and shall not exceed Twenty-Five Thousand and no/100 ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of
a material breach per customer.
In this regard:
a) Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with
service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law.
b) The Village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material
breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30) days from the receipt of the
notice to remedy the specified material breach.
c) A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be deemed to occur for
each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service
provider after receipt of the notice as provided for a Subsection 15.04 (b) above.
Sec. 15.05 Customer Credits
The Village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations as set forth in the Cable and
Video Customer Protection Law. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS
5/22-501 (s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
15-1
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 17
Food Dealers - Regulations and Inspections
Article I. Purpose and Scope
Sec. 17.01. Purpose
Sec. 17.02. Definitions
Article II. Regulations
Sec. 17.03. General Provisions - Incorporation of Technical Codes
Sec. 17.04. Compliance with Laws, Rules and Regulations
Article III. Enforcement
Sec. 17.05. Intergovernmental Agreement - County as Agent
Sec. 17.06. Fees and Expenses
Article IV. Permits, Licenses, or Certificates
Sec. 17.07. General
Sec. 17.08. Issuance of Permit, License, or Certificate
Sec. 17.09. Suspension of Permit, License, or Certificate
Sec. 17.10. Revocation of Permit, License, or Certificate
Sec. 17.11. Service of Notices
Sec. 17.12. Hearings
Sec. 17.13. Application After Revocation
Sec. 17.14. Inspection Frequency
Sec. 17.15. Access
Sec. 17.16. Report of Inspections
Sec. 17.17. Correction of Violations
Article V. Examination and Condemnation of Food
Sec. 17.18. General
Article VI. Review of Plans
Sec. 17.19. Submission of Plans
Sec. 17.20. Pre-Operational Inspection
Article VII. Infections
Sec. 17.21. General
Article VIII. Remedies
Sec. 17.22. Penalties
Sec. 17.23. Injunctions
Last Revision A-643-01-14, dated 10-13-14
Article I. Purpose and Scope
Sec. 17.01. Purpose.
This Chapter is for the purpose of insuring the public health of the residents of the Village by providing
for the sale of only safe, properly labeled food, and regulating the sources of food, by establishing
sanitation standards for food, food protection, food personnel, food operations, food equipment and
utensils, sanitary facilities and controls, and other facilities; and also by requiring permits for the
operation of food service establishments and retail food stores (the term retail food store or
establishment as used in this Chapter shall mean either a food service establishment or a retail food
store); and by regulating the inspection of such establishments and providing for the examination and
condemnation of food.
Sec. 17.02. Definitions.
The definitions for this Chapter shall be the definition set forth in Section 17.01 of this Chapter and
those set forth in the Rules and Regulations incorporated herein under Section 17.03.
17-1-1
Article II. Regulation.
Sec. 17.03. General Provisions - Incorporation of Technical Codes.
All laws, rules and regulations established by the State of Illinois, or any of its agencies including the
Department of Public Health, as such may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as rules
and regulations within the Village regarding the sanitary conditions of, and inspections of, all retail
establishments (including all equipment, facilities and buildings) that distribute or sell any foods or
food goods. Such rules and regulations shall specifically include the provisions dealing with sanitary
inspection set forth in Chapter 56 1/2, Sections 67 et. seq. of the Illinois Revised Statutes, and also the
regulation and inspection of food service establishments shall be in accordance with the "Food Service
Sanitation Rules and Regulations", as published by the Illinois Department of Public Health, Office of
Health Regulation, Division of Food, Drugs and Dairies, as amended from time to time. Both of said
sets of Rules and Regulations published by the Illinois Department of Public Health are on file with the
Secretary of State and at least 3 copies of which, including any subsequent amendments thereto, shall
be on file with the Village Clerk and made conveniently available for public inspection, use and
examination, and 3 copies of which have been on file with the Village Clerk and conveniently available
for public inspection, use and examination for a period of 30 days prior to the adoption hereof;
provided, however, that the words "regulatory authority" in said rules and regulations shall be
understood to include the Village of Burr Ridge and the Cook County Department of Public Health.
Sec. 17.04. Compliance with Laws, Rules and Regulations.
All food establishments within the Village of Burr Ridge shall comply with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, rules and regulations regarding the handling and distribution of such food goods and
the sanitary condition of all equipment, facilities and buildings in which such food goods are either
prepared, distributed or otherwise handled in any manner whatsoever, or as otherwise regulated
hereunder.
17-2-1
Article III. Enforcement.
Sec. 17.05. Intergovernmental Agreement - County as Agent.
The Village has entered into an intergovernmental agreement for the provision of food and
environmental health inspectional services with the Department of Public Health in the County of Cook
(hereinafter referred to in this Chapter as the Department), which agreement calls for inspections of all
food establishments within the Village at least twice a year. The Cook County Department of Public
Health and its officers, agents and employees are hereby designated as the lawfully constituted agents
of the Village for all purposes under this Chapter as fully as if they were employees of the Village.
Sec. 17.06. Fees and Expenses.
For each inspection under this Chapter, a fee of $105.00 per inspection shall be charged to the
establishment being inspected, which such amount shall be payable to the Village of Burr Ridge prior
to the inspection or within 10 days after such inspection has been completed. In addition, if there are
any additional fees or expenses charged by the County to the Village in connection with any food
establishment, including but not limited to any fees or expenses charged in connection with any
prosecution brought against such establishment, any such establishment shall be required to
reimburse the Village in any amount equal to 105% of any such additional fees or expenses
immediately upon receipt of an invoice from the Village. (Amended by A-643-01-14)
17-3-1
Article IV. Permits, Licenses, or Certificates.
Sec. 17.07. General.
No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid permit, license, or certificate
issued to them by the Village. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this Chapter shall
be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license, or certificate. Permits, licenses or certificates are
not transferable. A valid permit, license, or certificate shall be posted in every food establishment.
Sec. 17.08. Issuance of Permit, License, or Certificate.
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a
permit, license, or certificate on forms provided by the Village. Such application shall include
the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food
establishment, and the signature of each applicant, together with any additional information
required by either the County or the Village.
(b) Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license, or certificate, the Cook County
Department of Public Health shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
(c) The Village shall issue a permit, license, or certificate to the applicant if its inspection reveals
that the proposed food establishment complies with the requirements of this Chapter.
Sec. 17.09. Suspension of Permit, License, or Certificate.
(a) The Village may, without warning, notice, or hearing, except as otherwise provided herein,
suspend any permit, license, or certificate to operate a food establishment if the holder of
the permit, license, or certificate does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter
and/or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard
to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by Section
17.09 (b) of this Chapter. When a permit, license or certificate is suspended, food
operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is
suspended, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate shall be afforded an opportunity
for hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for hearing.
(b) Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate, or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit, license, or
certificate is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for
hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the Village Administrator
by the holder of the permit, license, or certificate within 10 days, the suspension is
sustained. The Village may end the suspension at any time if the reasons for suspension no
longer exist.
Sec. 17.10. Revocation of Permit, License, or Certificate.
(a) The Village Board may, after the Village Administrator provides an opportunity for hearing
and gives a recommendation based on such hearing, revoke a permit, license, or certificate
for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this Chapter or for
interference with the Cook County Department of Public Health in the performance of its
duties hereunder.
17-4-1
(b) Prior to revocation, the Village shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate, or the person in charge, of the specific reason(s) for which the permit, license, or
certificate is to be revoked and that the permit, license or certificate shall be revoked at the
end of 10 days following service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed
with the Village Administrator by the holder of the permit, license, or certificate within such
10 day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the 10 day period, the revocation of
the permit, license, or certificate becomes final.
Sec. 17.11. Service of Notices.
A notice provided for in this Chapter is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit,
license, or certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license or certificate. A copy
of the notice shall be filed in the records of the Village.
Sec. 17.12. Hearings.
The hearings provided for in this Chapter shall be conducted by the Village Administrator at a time and
place designated by the Administrator. Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported
verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision for sufficient copies of the transcript. The
Village Board shall make a final finding based upon the complete hearing records and shall sustain,
modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing
decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate by the Village.
Sec. 17.13. Application After Revocation.
Whenever a revocation of a permit, license, or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked
permit, license, or certificate may not make written application for a new permit, license, or certificate
for a period of one year from the effective date of the revocation.
Sec. 17.14. Inspection Frequency.
An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at least once every 6 months. Additional
inspections of the food establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of
this Chapter.
Sec. 17.15. Access.
Duly authorized representatives of the Cook County Department of Public Health, after proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter any food establishment at any reasonable time for the
purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this Chapter. The representatives shall
be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and
supplies purchased, received, or used.
Sec. 17.16. Report of Inspections.
Whenever an inspection of a food establishment or commissary is made, the findings shall be
recorded on the approved inspection report form. The inspection report form shall summarize the
requirements of this Chapter and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement.
Inspectional remarks should be written to reference, by item number, the item violated and should
state the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the
weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the completed inspection report
17-4-2
form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection.
The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public
disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
Sec. 17.17. Correction of Violations.
(a) The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the
correction of the violations found; and correction of violations shall be accomplished within
the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) If an imminent health hazard exists, such as, but not limited to, lack of adequate
refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food operations. Operations shall not be resumed until
authorized by the Cook County Department of Public Health.
(2) All violations of 4 to 5 point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible,
but in any event, within 10 days following inspection. Within 15 days after the
inspection, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate shall submit a written
report to the Cook County Department of Public Health stating that the 4 to 5 point
weighted violations have been corrected. A follow-up inspection shall be
conducted to confirm correction.
(3) All 1 or 2 point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any
event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
(4) When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the establishment
shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations within 48 hours. One or
more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure
correction.
(5) In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall be corrected
within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24 hours, the establishment
shall immediately cease food operations until authorized to resume by the Cook
County Department of Public Health.
(b) The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections
may result in cessation of food operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection
findings or the time limits or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the Village
Administrator within 10 days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is
received, a hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of the request.
(b) Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of this Section or Section
17.09 to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection
that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for
reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
17-4-3
Article V. Examination and Condemnation of Food
Sec. 17.18. General.
Food may be examined or sampled by the Cook County Department of Public Health as often as
necessary for enforcement of this Chapter.
The Cook County Department of Public Health may, upon written notice to the owner or person in
charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it
believes is in violation of Sections 750.100, 750.110, 760.100, 760.110 of the then current edition of
the Illinois Department of Public Health's publications currently titled, "Food Service Sanitation Rules
and Regulations" or "Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations", respectively, or any other
Section of this Chapter. The Cook County Department of Public Health shall tag, label, or otherwise
identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or
moved from the establishment. The Cook County Department of Public Health shall permit storage of
the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the
public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order
shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within 10 days and that if no hearing is requested the
food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held within 20 days
after receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be
vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or
destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
17-5-1
Article VI. Review of Plans.
Sec. 17.19. Submission of Plans.
Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing
structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for
such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner of the
Village of Burr Ridge and also to the Cook County Department of Public Health for review and
approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall
indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work
areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities (to the extent the Burr Ridge
Building Ordinance requires further information for building permit review such additional information
shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner, it being understood that the review required
hereunder is in addition to, not in lieu of, any reviews and permits required under any other Village
ordinances, rules and regulations). The Cook County Department of Public Health shall approve the
plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of this Chapter.
No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Cook County Department of Public Health.
Sec. 17.20. Pre-Operational Inspection.
Whenever plans and specifications are required by Section 17.19. of this Chapter to be submitted to
the Cook County Department of Public Health, the Cook County Department of Public Health shall
inspect the food establishment prior to the start of operations, to determine compliance with the
approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this Chapter.
17-6-1
Article VII. Infections.
Sec. 17.21. General.
When the Cook County Department of Public Health has reasonable cause to suspect possible
disease transmission by an employee of a food establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of the
suspected employee or make any other investigation as indicated and shall take appropriate action.
The Cook County Department of Public Health may require any or all of the following measures:
(a) The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food establishments;
(b) The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the Cook
County Department of Public Health, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
(c) Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would
be no danger of transmitting disease;
(d) Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of other employees and
of his and their body discharges.
17-7-1
Article VIII. Remedies.
Sec. 17.22. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than
$50.00 nor more than $500.00, or imprisoned not more than six months, or both. Each day's violation
shall constitute a separate offense. Provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a
court from issuing an injunction enjoining the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, it being
specifically the intent of this Chapter that the penalties are in addition to any other legal or equitable
remedy the Village may have to promote the public health and safety of its residents.
Sec. 17.23. Injunctions.
In addition to the penalties provided for herein, the Department and/or the Village shall be entitled to
bring an action in equity to restrain or enjoin the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
17-8-1
H:\Municipal Code\CHAPT 25 Liquor chart.doc 01-10-11
SUMMARY
This page is included for reference only – not part of the Ordinance.
CLASS
TYPE
NUMBER
FEE
WEEKDAY & SUNDAY
CLOSING HOUR
FRIDAY
CLOSING HOUR
SATURDAY CLOSING
HOUR
A Drink only on premises 0 $ 500.00 1:00 A.M. 2:00 A.M. Sat. 2:00 A.M. Sun.
B Drink only on premises 4 $2,000.00 1:00 A.M. 2:00 A.M. Sat. 2:00 A.M. Sun.
C Drink only on premise 1 $2,500.00 2:00 A.M. 4:00 A.M. Sat. 4:00 A.M. Sun.
D 24 hour Unlimited $ 50.00 1:00 A.M. 2:00 A.M. Sat. 2:00 A.M. Sun.
E 24 hour Unlimited $ 50.00 1:00 A.M. 2:00 A.M. Sat. 2:00 A.M. Sun.
F Packaged 1 $2,500.00 10:00 P.M. 11:00 P.M. 10:00 P.M.
G Packaged goods -
beer and wine only
1 $2,500.00 Weekday 11:00 P.M.
Sunday 10:00 P.M.
11:00 P.M. 11:00 P.M.
H Drink only on premises 4 $2,000.00 1:00 A.M. 2:00 A.M. Sat. 2:00 A.M. Sun.
I Drink only on premises Unlimited $ 50.00 1:00 A.M. 2:00 A.M. Sat. 2:00 A.M. Sun.
J Packaged goods – retailer by delivery 0 $2,500.00 10:00 P.M. 10:00 P.M. 10:00 P.M.
K Packaged goods – beer and wine -hotel
convenience pantry
1 $1,000.00 1:00 A.M. 1:00 A.M. 1:00 A.M.
L Drink only on premises – complimentary
beer & wine 1 day a week – and in
conjunction with meal or light meal
1 $1,500.00 1:00 A.M.
1:00 A.M. 1:00 A.M.
M Winery – package or drink on premises 1 $2,500.00 1:00 A.M. 2:00 A.M. Sat. 2:00 A.M. Sun.
N Special Use – Transfer of inventory for
drink only at specific location.
0 $ 50.00
O Health/Beauty/Spas – beer and wine by
drink only
0 $1,000.00 9:00 P.M.
6:00 P.M. Sun
9:00 P.M. 9:00 P.M.
P Packaged goods – wine only 1 $2,500.00 10:00 P.M. 11:00 P.M. 10:00 P.M.
P1 Drink only on premises-beer and wine
only-in conjunction with pre-packaged
food for consumption on premises
1 $ 500.00 10:00 P.M. 11:00 P.M. 10:00 P.M.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 25
LIQUOR CONTROL
Sec. 25.01. Definitions.
Sec. 25.02. License Required.
Sec. 25.03. Applications for License.
Sec. 25.04. Approval, Denial of Application.
Sec. 25.05. Issuance of License.
Sec. 25.06. Renewals of License.
Sec. 25.07. Posting License and Warning.
Sec. 25.08. Dram Shop Insurance.
Sec. 25.09. Class of Licenses - Number of Licenses - Hours.
Sec. 25.10. Restriction on licenses.
Sec. 25.11. Fees - Term.
Sec. 25.12. Payment of Fees.
Sec. 25.13. Initial License Expense.
Sec. 25.14. Location.
Sec. 25.15 Change of Location.
Sec. 25.16. Transfer of License.
Sec. 25.17. Licensing of Premises for Which License is Revoked.
Sec. 25.18. Cessation of Business.
Sec. 25.19. Liquor Control Commissioner.
Sec. 25.20. Powers of Liquor Control Commissioner.
Sec. 25.21. Inspection.
Sec. 25.22. Health and Sanitary Requirements.
Sec. 25.23. Health of Employees - Certificates.
Sec. 25.24. Selling to Unfit Persons.
Sec. 25.25. Purchase by Minor.
Sec. 25.26. Minor Misrepresenting Age.
Sec. 25.27. Limitation on Sale of Alcoholic Beverages.
Sec. 25.28. Conduct of Licensee.
Sec. 25.29. Parent or Guardian.
Sec. 25.30. Acts of Agent or Employer.
Sec. 25.31. Sale, Consumption or Delivery on Government-owned or Controlled Property.
Sec. 25.32. Misrepresentation of Alcoholic Beverages.
Sec. 25.33. Revocation and Suspension of License - Procedure.
Sec. 25.33(A) Disqualification and Suspension of Manager – Procedure
Sec. 25.34. Other Ordinances and Laws to Apply.
Sec. 25.35. Penalty.
Sec. 25.36. Liquor Sales on Election Day.
Sec. 25.37. Village Hearings - Testimony Required.
Sec. 25.38. Persons Ineligible for License.
Sec. 25.39 Inapplicability of Chapter to Certain Types of Alcohol
Sec .25.40 Sales in Certain Areas Prohibited
Sec. 25.41 Happy Hours Prohibited
Sec. 25.42 Safety Provisions
Sec. 25.43 Appeals
Last Chapter Revision: Ordinance A-222-01-18, 04-23-2018
25-1
Sec. 25.01. Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
require a different meaning.
ALCOHOL - The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever
may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol
or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOL LIQUOR – Includes alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human
being.
BEER – A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley or other
grain, malt and hops in water, and includes among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter,
and the like.
CLUB – A group of persons or a corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for pecuniary
profit, or organized solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale of or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, which is kept, used, and maintained by its members and owns, hires,
or leases a building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its members and their
guests and is provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment.
However, such a club shall file with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of its application
for an original license or renewal thereof, a list of the names, resident addresses, and phone numbers
of its officers and members. Its affairs and management shall be conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar board chosen by the members at their annual meeting. No member or
any officer, agent, or employee of the club shall be paid or directly or indirectly receive, in the form of
salary or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club, the
members of the club, or its guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of such salary as may
be fixed and voted on at an annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other
governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
CONSUMPTION SALES – The sale or offering for sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises where sold.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE – Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead, or other receptacle or
container whatever used, corked, capped, sealed, and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor,
to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
PACKAGE SALES – The sale or offering for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor in the original package
and not be consumed or in fact consumed in whole or in part on the premises where sold.
PERSON – A natural human being, or any applicant or licensee hereunder even if such applicant or
licensee is a group of persons, a partnership, co-partnership, limited liability company or a corporation
unless the context of its use clearly indicates it is limited to a natural human being.
RESTAURANT – Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a
place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, and whose primary
business remains the service of food, and without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having
employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food
25-2
for its guests.
RETAILER – A person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation who sells or offers for sale,
alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE – Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever, including the
transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or
certificates for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant, or employee, and further includes dispensing, pouring, mixing or
otherwise serving alcoholic liquors. (amended by A-222-01-10)
SELL OR SALE AT RETAIL, SELL AT RETAIL, AND SALE AT RETAIL – refer to and mean sales
for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SERVICE OF FOOD – The service of meals for consumption only on the premises in an adequate and
sanitary kitchen as defined in any appropriate health or food service ordinance of the village. The
meals must consist of more than the service or sale of packaged foods such as potato chips, pretzels,
peanuts, cheese and crackers, or frozen or premade foods, such as pizzas, hamburgers, or
sandwiches which can be prepared by being heated or warmed in an oven. The meals must be
actually and regularly served and eaten at tables and not only at a bar or counter.
SPIRITS – Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other
substances in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, vodka, or other spirituous liquors, and
such liquors when rectified, blended, or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TO SELL – Shall include keeping or exposing for sale and keeping with intent to sell.
WINE – Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables
containing sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits as above
defined.
OTHER DEFINITIONS – Any term not defined above but defined in 235 ILCS 5/1-3 et. seq. and used
in this chapter shall be deemed to have the same definition as contained in 235 ILCS 5/1-3 et. seq.
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Sec. 25.02. License Required
No person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation, limited liability company or any other
entity shall sell or offer for sale at retail, draw, pour, mix, dispense or otherwise serve (hereinafter
collectively referred to as “sale”, “sold”, “sell” or “offered for sale”) any alcoholic liquors within the
village without first having obtained a liquor license as herein provided. Each separate place of
business or location wherein alcoholic liquor shall be sold or offered for sale, drawn, poured, mixed,
dispensed or otherwise served shall have a separate license. (amended by A-222-01-10)
Sec. 25.03. Applications for License (section amended by A-222-02-17)
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Liquor Control Commissioner in writing, signed
by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent of the applicant if the applicant is a
club, a duly authorized officer or shareholder of a corporation if the applicant is a corporation, a
duly authorized member if the applicant is a limited liability company, or by a person entitled to
share in the profits of the applicant if the applicant is a copartnership (provided, however, such
person shall also be a partner thereof). The application must be verified by oath or affidavit, and
25-3
shall contain the following information and statements:
A. The applicant’s name, date of birth, position; and the name, date of birth, position and
percentage of ownership in the business of every, partner, corporate officer, director, or
member, manager and any person who owns 25% or more of the shares or ownership of
the applicant business entity or parent corporation(s) of the applicant business entity.
B. The citizenship of the applicant and place of birth.
C. In case of a limited liability company, corporation or a club, the object for which it was
organized, a list of the names, resident address, and phone numbers of its officers,
directors, and a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, certificate of organization,
and/or charter.
D. In case of a co-partnership, the date of the formation of the partnership; in the case of an
Illinois corporation, the date of its incorporation; in the case of a limited liability company
the date of its organization in Illinois under the Limited Liability Company Act; or in the
case of a foreign corporation, the State where it was incorporated and the date of its
becoming qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in
the State of Illinois.
E. The name, character and address of the business of the applicant
F. The location of the premises which is to be operated under the license.
G. If applicant, owner or manager(s) have ever been charged with liquor license violations or
been investigated for them, or had any license suspended, revoked or denied the applicant
shall include the reasons therefore.
H. The number, the date of issuance and the date of expiration of the applicant’s current local
retail liquor license issued in either the village or issued by any county or other municipality
and any held within past 5 years.
I. The name of the city, village, or county that issued the local retail liquor license (if other than
the Village of Burr Ridge)l
J. A copy of the applicant’s current State liquor license.
K. The applicant’s Retailer’s Occupation Tax (ROT) Registration Number.
L. Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the Retailer’s Occupational Tax (Sales
Tax), and if so, the reasons therefore.
M. Whether the applicant possesses a current Federal Wagering Stamp, and if so, the reasons
therefore.
N. If applicable, the date of the filing of the “assumed name” of the business with the County
Clerk.
O. A statement whether the applicant or any owner, partner, member or manager of the
applicant, has ever been convicted of either a misdemeanor or a felony and whether any
such individual or entity is disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
25-4
contained in this chapter, laws of this state, or other ordinances of the village, and if so the
particulars thereof.
P. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state, the United States,
or any ordinances of the village in the conduct of his place of business.
Q. The class of license desired by the applicant.
R. Whether the applicant owns the premises for which a license is sought, and if he does not,
the name of his landlord and the period of his lease. A complete and correct copy of the
lease is to be attached to the application.
S. Whether or not the applicant intends to manage and conduct the business in person, and if
not, the name of the manager or agent who is to conduct the business to be carried on the
premises for which the license is sought.
T. A statement that the applicant will be required to and shall require all officers, agents, and
employees of the applicant to testify (subject to constitutional limitations) at any hearing that
may be called by the village or any of its committees, commissions, boards, or agencies, or
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, relating, directly or indirectly, to any events or
occurrences of which they may have knowledge arising out of their position as officer, agent,
or employee of the licensee. In addition, a statement that the applicant has so informed all
officers, agents, and employees, and has made the same a condition of employment for all
employees.
U. In addition to the foregoing information, the application shall contain or Applicant shall
provide such other information as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may prescribe.
1. In case the application is made by a partnership, all general partners, or, if a limited
partnership, any limited partner owning more than 25% of the total limited partnership
interest must sign the application and the information required by this chapter shall be
furnished as to each partner.
2. In case the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by the president and
secretary of the corporation and the corporate seal shall be affixed.
3. In case the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall be signed by the
manager of the limited liability company.
4. For applications for a license, whether new or renewal, where the real estate title of the
premises is in a trustee, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner reserves the right to request
or require the sworn affidavit of the land trustee or a beneficiary of the trust, disclosing the
names, residence addresses, and beneficial interest of each beneficiary of the land trust.
5. The application should include the type and nature of the applicant’s business, and the types
of activities to be conducted on the licensed premises. Any basic change in the activities to
be conducted or the type and nature of the premises or business must be submitted to the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner for approval.
6. Every application for a license, whether new or renewal, shall be accompanied by a copy
of the applicant’s policy of dram shop insurance written by a responsible insurance
company authorized and licensed to do business in Illinois insuring such applicant
25-5
against liability as required under 235 ILCS § 5/1-1 et. seq., as amended from time to
time. The applicant shall keep such policy of insurance in full force and effect during the
term of the license (and any renewals), or shall provide a suitable substitute policy and
each such policy shall contain a provision that such cannot be cancelled without thirty
(30) days prior written notice to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the Village
7. Every application for a license, whether new or renewal, shall be accompanied by a
supplemental application signed by each manager employed by the licensee to manage
the license premises and all business operations on the licensed premises. Such
supplemental application shall be in writing, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain
the following information and statements:
a. The manager’s name, sex, age and date of birth.
b. The citizenship of the manager, his place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen,
the time and place of his naturalization.
c. A statement whether the manager has owned or operated a business within the
last 5 years that required a liquor license and the dates involved and a
description of any liquor license incident requiring police intervention.
d. The number, date of issuance and date of expiration of any current local retail
liquor licenses issued to the manager by any county or other municipality, and
the name of such county or other municipality.
e. If the manager has ever been involved with an application for a liquor license
which was denied.
f. Whether the manager possesses a current Federal Wagering Stamp, and if so,
the reasons therefore.
g. A statement whether the manger has ever been convicted of either a
misdemeanor or a felony and whether any such manager is disqualified to
receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this Chapter, the
laws of this state, or other ordinances of the Village, and if so the particulars
thereof.
h. A statement that the manager will not violate any laws of the state, the United
States or any ordinance of the Village in the conduct of the business at the
license premises.
i. A statement that the manager will be required to and shall require all agents
and employees to testify (subject to constitutional limitations) at any hearing
that may be called by the Village or any of its committees, commissions,
boards, or agencies, or the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, relating,
directly or indirectly, to any events or occurrences of which they may have
knowledge arising out of their position as officer, agent or employee. In
addition, a statement acknowledging such requirement and indicating that the
manager has informed all agents and employees, and has made the same a
condition of employment for all employees.
j. In addition to the foregoing, the supplementary application shall contain or
25-6
manager shall provide such further information as the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may prescribe.
8. If during any license year there is any change in the manager(s) of the licensee, a new
supplementary application signed by each new manager must be filed in writing, verified by
oath or affidavit, and containing the same information as required under paragraph 7 above.
(Section 8 added by A-222-03-08)
9. Every application for a license shall include a signed acknowledgement from the applicant to
the statement that the applicant has read and understands the provisions of Subsection M of
Section 25.28 prohibiting campaign contributions to elected officials of the Village, and the
responsibility of the licensee to ensure compliance with the following prohibition:
Prohibition on Campaign Contributions. Any person, applicant, liquor manager
or entity listed on a Village of Burr Ridge liquor license application which has
been approved or is currently pending is prohibited from directly or indirectly
making campaign contributions as defined in Section 9-1.4 of the Illinois
Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4) and applicable regulations (26 Ill.Adm.Code
Part 100), to elected officials of the Village of Burr. This prohibition does not
apply to Class I Special Event Retailer licenses under this Code. (Section 9
added by A-222-01-13)
.Sec. 25.04. Approval, Denial of Application
All applications and supplementary applications for licenses under this chapter shall be delivered
by the Village Clerk to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. It shall be the duty of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner to investigate and consider all applications and supplementary
applications. For this purpose, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may enlist the aid of the
Chief of Police and any other village officials or employees that he deems necessary to complete
the investigation. The investigation shall include a background search and credit check. At any
time during the pendency of any such application(s) the Local Liquor Commissioner shall have the
right to compel the applicant to submit to any examination and to produce any books and records
which, in the judgment of the Local Liquor Commissioner, are material to the determination of
whether the applicant is qualified to receive a license or manage the business on the licensed
premises (as the case may be) under the provisions of this Code, or whether the premises sought
to be licensed are suitable for such purposes. The Local Liquor Commissioner shall also have the
right to require the applicant to answer any charges made in any objection to the issuance of the
license made by the chief of police, a prosecuting official, or by the sheriff or prosecuting attorney
of the county relative to the same. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and place
fixed by the Local Liquor Commissioner for his examination or to produce books and records when
requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an admission that the applicant is
not qualified to receive a license and/or not qualified to be a manager, as the case may be, and,
therefore, a basis for denial of the license or disqualification of the proposed manager, as the case
may be. (amended by A-222-03-08)
Upon completion of the investigation, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall approve or
disapprove the issuance of a license and/or designation of the manager based on the
application(s), provided, in the case of approval, that there exists an available license as set forth
in § 25.09. (amended by A-222-03-08)
Sec. 25.05. Issuance of License
25-7
All applications for licenses shall be kept on file in the office of the Liquor Control Commissioner,
and fees for all licenses shall be paid to the Village Clerk who shall certify to the Liquor Control
Commissioner the names and addresses of all licenses paying fees to him together with the class
of license for which payment is made and thereupon said Liquor Control Commissioner shall issue
the license provided for in this Chapter to all applicants who have complied with all the
requirements of this Chapter and other applicable laws. Provided, however, no license shall be
issued to any person ineligible to receive the same under this Chapter or the laws of the State of
Illinois, as amended from time to time. (amended by A-222-02-17)
Further provided, however, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, as a condition to the
issuance of any liquor license, impose such conditions and restrictions upon each license as the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner may deem necessary to insure that operation of the liquor
establishment shall not be harmful to the safety, morals and welfare of the community. The
conditions imposed upon each liquor license shall be enumerated upon said license and shall be
displayed at all times in a prominent place in such establishment and shall reiterate in detail such
conditions.
Sec. 25.06. Renewals of License
Each license required by this Chapter shall terminate on April 30 next following its issuance. No part of
a license fee will be refunded if the license is revoked by the Liquor Commissioner.
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to receive a
license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and
provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as vested right
which shall in any case prevent the President and Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction.
Application for renewal of license shall be filed with the Village Clerk on or before April 15th preceding
the expiration thereof. Such application for renewal shall be made under oath and shall be upon an
application form prepared by the Village.
If the owner or principle type of business has changed in any respect, a new license will be required.
(amended by A-222-02-17)
Each application for renewal shall be treated and considered in the same manner as hereinabove
provided for original applications for license. (A-222-2-89)
Each application for renewal shall also include a renewal supplementary application signed by any
manager of the business conducted on the licensed premises and containing the same information as
the original supplementary application. (amended by A-222-03-08
Sec. 25.07. Posting License and Warning
Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises and adjacent to or attached to each separate bar on the
licensed premises, including movable and/or other type of service bars, regardless of where such bars
are located.
In every tavern or other place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all
times in a prominent place next to each bar therein a printed warning which shall read substantially as
25-8
follows:
"WARNING - You are subject to a fine up to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) under the
ordinances of the Village of Burr Ridge if you purchase alcoholic liquor when under the age
of 21 years, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor."
Sec. 25.08. Dram Shop Insurance
No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant shall furnish the Liquor Control
Commissioner with a copy of a policy of dram shop insurance written by a responsible insurance
company authorized and licensed to do business in the State of Illinois insuring such application
against liability as required under the provision of 235 ILCS § 5/1-1 et. seq. as amended from time
to time, and in the maximum amounts provided in 235 ILCS § 5/1-1 et. seq.
Sec. 25.09. Classes of Licenses - Number of Licenses - Hours
Retail liquor licenses shall be divided into classes as follows: (for each class of license the terms “retail
sale”, “selling”, “sale”, “sell” and/or “offer to sell” shall include dispensing, pouring, mixing or otherwise
serving any alcoholic liquor regardless of whether there is any type of compensation.)”
(amended by A-222-02-15)
A. Class A--License shall be issued for the period of one year and shall be issued only to such
civic, benevolent, fraternal, patriotic, social or other organizations that qualify as a
not-for-profit corporation under the General Corporations Not-For-Profit Act of the State of
Illinois. A Class "A" license shall permit the sale of any and all alcoholic liquor as defined
herein by the drink only and for consumption on the premises where sold subject to the
other terms and conditions of this Code. It shall be lawful for any Class "A" licensee to keep
open for business and admit the public to such premises each day of the week, Sundays
included; provided, however, that no person shall sell, dispense or pour, or give away any
alcoholic liquor between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays, and between
2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on Saturdays, and between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M.
on Sundays; provided further, however, that on January 1st of each year while this Chapter
is in effect alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail pursuant to the terms of this Chapter until
4:00 A.M.; provided further, however, that it shall be the duty of the license holders of such
establishments to require that all persons, other than employees of said establishments,
leave the premises within fifteen (15) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times.
B. Class B--License shall be issued for a period of one year to any person or persons,
organization, association, partnership or corporation that does not qualify for a Class "A"
license. A Class "B" license shall permit the sale of any and all alcoholic liquor as defined
herein by the drink only and for consumption on the premises where sold subject to the
other terms and conditions of this Code. It shall be lawful for any Class "B" licensee to keep
open for business and admit the public to such premises each day of the week, Sundays
included; provided, however, that no person shall sell, dispense or pour, or give away any
alcoholic liquor between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays, and between
2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on Saturdays, and between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M.
on Sundays; provided further, however, that on January 1st of each year while this Chapter
is in effect alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail pursuant to the terms of this Chapter until
4:00 A.M.; provided further, however, that it shall be the duty of the license holders of such
establishments to require that all persons, other than employees of said establishments,
leave the premises within fifteen (15) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times.
25-9
C. Class C--License shall be issued for a period of one year to any person or persons,
organization, association, partnership, or corporation that does not qualify for a Class "A"
license. A Class "C" (formerly "BB") license shall permit the sale of any and all alcoholic
liquors as defined herein by the drink only and for consumption on the premises where sold
subject to the other terms and conditions of this Code. With respect to establishments
holding Class "C" licenses, it shall be lawful to keep open for business and to admit the
public to such premises each day of the week, Sundays included; provided, however, that
no person shall sell, dispense or pour, or give away any alcoholic liquors between the hours
of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays, and between the hours of 4:00 A.M. and 6:00
A.M. on Saturdays, and between the hours of 4:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M. on Sundays;
provided, however, that it shall be the duty of the license holders of such establishments to
require that all persons, other than employees of said establishments, leave the premises
within fifteen (15) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times.
D. Class D--License shall be issued for twenty-four (24) hours only. A Class "D" (formerly "C")
license shall permit the sale of any and all alcoholic liquor as defined herein by the drink only
and for consumption on the premises where sold for a twenty-four (24) hour period only;
provided, however, that no person shall sell, dispense or pour, or give away any alcoholic
liquor between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays, and between 2:00 A.M.
and 6:00 A.M. on Saturdays, and between the hours of 2:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M. on
Sundays; provided further, however, that on January 1st of each year while this Chapter is in
effect alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail pursuant to the terms of this Chapter until 4:00
A.M.; provided further, however, that it shall be the duty of the license holders of such
establishments to require that all persons, other than employees of said establishments,
leave the premises within fifteen (15) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times.
E. Class E--License shall be issued for twenty-four (24) hours only. A Class "E" (formerly "D")
license shall permit the sale of beer only for consumption on the premises where sold during
any twenty-four (24) hour period; provided, however, that no person shall sell, dispense or
pour, or give away any alcoholic liquor between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on
weekdays, and between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on Saturdays, and between the hours of
2:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M. on Sundays; provided further, however, that on January 1st of
each year while this Chapter is in effect alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail pursuant to the
terms of this Chapter until 4:00 A.M.; provided further, however, that it shall be the duty of
the license holders of such establishments to require that all persons, other than employees
of said establishments, leave the premises within fifteen (15) minutes after the foregoing
stated closing times.
F. Class F--License shall be issued for a period of one year. A Class "F" (formerly "E") license
shall permit the sale of any and all alcoholic liquor as defined herein, provided the liquor is
sold only in its original package and not for consumption on the premises where sold. A
Class “F” license shall also permit the tasting of wine or other alcoholic liquor, as an ancillary
part of the primary business of selling liquor. The number of such tastings may be limited by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, in his/her discretion. It shall be lawful for any Class
F licensee to keep open for business and to admit the public to such premises each day of
the week only between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. Monday through Thursday
and on Saturday, between the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M. on Friday, and between
the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. on Sunday; provided, however, that it shall be the
duty of the license holders of such establishments to require that all persons, other than
employees of said establishments, leave the premises within fifteen (15) minutes after the
foregoing stated closing times, unless said establishment remains open for a longer period
25-10
of time for the sole purpose of selling foods other than alcoholic liquor(Amended A-222-02-
15)
G. Class G--License shall be issued for a period of one year. A Class "G" (formerly "EE")
license shall permit the sale of beer and wine (as defined herein) only, provided the beer
and wine are sold only in their original package and not for consumption on the premises
where sold. It shall be lawful for any Class "G" licensee to keep open for business and to
admit the public to such premises each day of the week, Sundays included, only between
the hours of 6:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M. on weekdays and on Saturdays, and between the
hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. on Sundays; provided, however, that it shall be the duty
of the license holders of such establishments to require that all persons, other than
employees of said establishments, leave the premises within fifteen (15) minutes after the
foregoing stated closing times, unless said establishment remains open for a longer period
of time for the sole purpose of selling foods other than beer and/or wine. (A-222-02-15)
H. Class H— License shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises designated
therein for consumption by the drink on such premises only, and provided further that
such sale of alcoholic liquor shall be restricted to sales made in conjunction with the
licensee's operation of a restaurant on said premises, and further provided that such sale of
alcoholic liquor shall not be permitted until all food services equipment is installed and fully
operating and such licensed premises meet the qualifications set forth in 235 ILCS 5/1-
3.23. No person shall sell, dispense or pour or give away any alcoholic liquor between the
hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays, and between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on
Saturdays, and between 2:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M. on Sundays; provided, however, that
on January 1st of each year while this Chapter is in effect alcoholic liquor may be sold at
retail pursuant to the terms of this Chapter until 4:00 A.M.; provided further, however, that
it shall be the duty of the license holders of such establishments to require that all
persons, other than employees of said establishments, leave the premises within fifteen
(15) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times. Provided, however,
notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a restaurant may permit a patron to
remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off-premise consumption
provided that the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of
wine with the meal on the restaurant premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that
is to be removed from the premises pursuant to this Section shall be securely sealed by
the licensee or an agent of the licensee prior to removal from the premises and placed in
a transparent one-time use tamper-proof bag. The licensee or agent of the licensee shall
provide a dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron. Wine that is resealed in
accordance with the provisions of this Section and not tampered with shall not be
deemed an unsealed container.
I. Class I--Special Event Retailer. A "special event retailer" means an educational, fraternal,
political, civic, religious, or non-profit organization which sells or offers for sale beer or wine,
or both, only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated by a special event
retail license.
"Special Event" means an event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political, civic,
religious or non-profit organization.
A special event retailer's license shall allow the licensee to sell and offer for sale, at retail,
beer and wine for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form and only at the location
and on the specific dates designated for the special event in the license. An applicant for a
special event retailer license must also submit with the application proof satisfactory to the
25-11
Liquor Control Commissioner that the applicant will provide dram shop liability insurance in
the maximum limits.
A special event retail license shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed 15
days per license in any 12 month period. No person shall sell, dispense, pour or give way
any alcoholic liquor between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays, and
between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on Saturdays, and between 2:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M. on
Sundays; provided however, that on January 1st of each year while this Chapter is in effect
alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail pursuant to the terms of this Chapter until 4:00 A.M.;
provided further, however, that it shall be the duty of the license holders of such
establishments to require that all persons, other than employees of said establishments,
leave the premises within fifteen (15) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times.
(Amended by A-222-2-90)
J. Class J—Retailer by Delivery. A ‘retailer by delivery’ means any retailer whose principal
business is the sale of any and all alcoholic liquor by order and not for consumption on the
premises where sold, provided that such alcoholic liquor shall at the time it leaves the
premises be sealed in its original container and is privately shipped to the ultimate
consumer. The Class ‘J” license shall be issued for a period of one (1) year. No in-store
sales shall be allowed. The only alcoholic liquor that shall be sold shall be specially
packaged as gifts or novelty items. Drive-in or drive-up sales are likewise prohibited. The
hours of operation shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. except on Sundays when the hours
of operation will be between 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. (added by A-222-1-97)
K. Class K – License shall be issued for a period of one year, and only to a hotel. It shall be
lawful for a Class K licensee to sell single servings of packaged beer and wine from a
convenience pantry which also offers food items located at the hotel's front desk. It shall
also be lawful for a Class K licensee to sell 750 milliliter (ml) bottles of wine a convenience
pantry. Any such sales shall be made only to guests registered at the hotel who are 21
years of age and older, and shall not be permitted between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on
Sundays. Any such beer and wine sold shall be sold for consumption on the premises only.
(amended by A-222-01-02)
L. Class L – License shall permit a hotel to serve complimentary beer and wine to guests
registered at the hotel who are 21 years of age and older. Such complimentary service shall
be on the premises for consumption on the premises, for two hours one day a week, in
conjunction with complimentary light food service. The day, hours and location in the hotel
where the beer and wine will be served are subject to the approval of the Local Liquor
Commissioner. Guests, prior to being served complimentary beer or wine, must provide
proof that they are at least 21 years of age and that they are registered at the hotel.
A Class L licensee may also serve beer and wine on the premises to non-registered guests
at the hotel for consumption on the premises, when served in conjunction with a meal or
light meal served at the same location as the beer and wine. No such service shall occur
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays or between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Sundays. It shall be the duty of the holder of such
license to require that all persons other than employees of said establishment to leave the
premises within 15 minutes after the foregoing closing times. (added by A-222-4-00)
M. Class M License; Winery
25-12
A Class M license shall permit the licensee to manufacture, bottle and sell, for either
consumption on or off the licensed premises, up to 50,000 gallons of wine by the bottle from
the licensed premises, together with the right to sell ancillary retail products approved by the
Local Liquor Commissioner. A Class M License shall also permit the limited sale of sealed
and unconsumed bottles of spirits produced as a dessert liquor and used as an after dinner
drink., in their original packaging. Such sales shall be subsidiary to the principal sale of
wine. Such bottles of spirits shall be sold only for consumption off premises from the
restaurant. A Class M license must also apply for and receive a Class H license and
conform to all provisions of this Chapter relating to said Class H licenses. A Class M
licensee may also conduct wine sampling and tasting as may be permitted under the terms
and conditions of its Class M license. Nothing in the issuance of a Class M license shall be
considered to relieve the licensee of any responsibility for complying with all applicable state
and federal regulations relating to the manufacture and/or sale of wine or other alcoholic
beverages and with all applicable business and other regulations of the Village.
(Amended by A-222-05-15)
N. Class N License; Special Use Permit
Shall allow a licensee to transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its retail
licensed premises to the premises specified in the license hereby created, and to sell or
offer for sale at retail, only in the premises specified in the license hereby created, the
transferred alcoholic liquor for use or consumption, but not for resale in any form. The Local
Liquor Control Commissioner can impose conditions as he deems appropriate on any such
license. A special use permit license may be granted for the following time periods: one
day or less; 2 or more days to a maximum of 15 days per location in any 12 month period.
An applicant for the special use permit license must also submit with the application proof
satisfactory to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner that the applicant will provide dram
shop liability insurance to the maximum limits. Nothing herein shall be construed to make
the issuance of this special use license permit subject to the special use procedures under
the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance.
O. Class O License: Health/Beauty/Spas, Sporting Goods Retailers or Health/Personal
Grooming Product and Service Providers
A Class “O” license shall permit the sale of wine and beer solely on premises that are
exclusively occupied and operated as a health/beauty spa treatment facility, business for the
retail sale of sporting goods equipment, apparel or health, personal grooming or beauty
products of services.. Such license shall permit the sale only to customers of the spa facility,
sporting goods, equipment, apparel, health, personal grooming, beauty products or service
establishments, shall be limited to a single serving of wine or beer not to exceed 12 ounces
and only for consumption of the drink incidental to the presence of the customer on such
premises while the customer is being served, shopping for such equipment, apparel or
products or waiting for or receiving customary spa, personal grooming or beauty services
from the establishment or facility. It shall be lawful for any Class “O” Licensee to sell,
dispense or pour or give away any such wine or beer only between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and between the hours of Noon and 6:00 p.m.
on Sundays. (A-222-02-17)
P. Class P License
Class P – License shall be issued for a period of one year. A Class “P” License shall permit
the sale of any and all wine as defined herein, provided the wine is sold only in its original
25-13
package and not for consumption on the premises where sold. A Class “P” License shall
also permit the ancillary sale of other alcoholic liquor, provided that the primary business
remains the sale of wine. A Class “P” License shall also permit wine tasting again solely as
an ancillary part of the primary business of selling wine. The number of such wine tastings
may be limited by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner in his discretion. It shall by lawful
for any Class “P” licensee to keep open for business and to admit the public to such
premises each day of the week only between the hours of 6 a.m. and 10 p.m. Monday
through Thursday and on Saturday, and between the hours of 6 a.m. and 11 p.m. on Friday,
and between the hours of 11 a.m. and 10 p.m. on Sunday. (added by A-222-03-08)
Q. Class P-1 License (added by A-222-01-11)
Class P-1-License shall be issued for a period of one year. A Class “P-1” License shall be
issued only to holders of a Class P License. A Class “P-1” license shall permit the sale or
offer for sale of individual servings of wine and/or beer for consumption on the premises,
provided that the sale of such individual servings of wine and/or beer is ancillary to the sale
of packaged wine as per the Class P license and provided that there is service of prepackaged
food for consumption on the premises. All other provisions and restrictions of the
Class P License, including hours of operation, shall apply to the Class P-1 License.
R. Class Q License: Restaurant/Beer and Wine Only (added by A-222-02-12)
A Class “Q” – License shall be issued for a period of one year. A Class “Q” License shall
permit the sale of beer and wine only on the premises designated therein for consumption
by the drink on such premises only, and further provided that such sale of beer and wine
shall be restricted to sales made in conjunction with the licensee’s operation of a restaurant
on said premises, and further provided that such sale of beer and wine shall not be
permitted until all food services equipment is installed and fully operating and such licensed
premises meet the qualifications set forth in 235 ILCS 5/1-3.23. No person shall sell,
dispense or pour or give away any such beer and wine between the hours of 12:00 Midnight
and 11:00 A.M. on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays, Thursday and between 1:00 A.M.
and 11:00 A.M. on Friday and between 2:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M. on Saturday and Sunday;
provided further, however, that on January 1st each year while this Chapter is in effect
alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail pursuant to the terms of this Chapter until 2:00 A.M.;
provided further, however, that it shall be the duty of the license holders of such
establishments to require that all persons, other than employees of said establishments,
leave the premises within fifteen (15) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times.
Provided, however, notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a restaurant may
permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for offpremises
consumption. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the
premises pursuant to this Section shall be securely sealed by the licensee or an agent of the
licensee prior to removal from the premises and placed in a transparent one-time use
tamper-proof bag. The licensee or agent of the licensee shall provide a dated receipt for the
bottle of wine to the patron. Wine that is resealed in accordance with the provisions of this
Section and not tampered with shall not be deemed to be in an unsealed container.
(amended by A-222-03-12)
S. Class R License: Restaurant/Wine Only for Off-Site Consumption (added by A-222-01-15)
A Class “R” — License shall be issued for a period of one year. A Class “R” License shall
permit the sale of sealed and unconsumed bottles of wine in their original packaging, on the
premises of a restaurant that holds an “H” liquor license under Section 25.09(H) of this
25-14
Code. Such bottles of wine shall be sold only for consumption off premises from the
restaurant. Sale of such wine shall not be permitted until all food services equipment is
installed and fully operating and such licensed premises meet the qualifications set forth
in 235 ILCS 5/1-3.23. No person shall sell or give away any such wine between the hours
of 1:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on weekdays, and between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on
Saturdays, and between 2:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M. on Sundays. Provided further,
however, that it shall be the duty of the license holders of such establishments to require
that all persons, other than employees of said establishments, leave the premises within
fifteen (15) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times. A Class “R” license holder
must also apply for and receive a Class “H” license and conform to all provisions of this
Chapter relating to said Class “H” licenses. Nothing in the issuance of a Class “R”
license shall be considered to relieve the licensee of any responsibility for complying with
all applicable state and federal regulations relating to the sale of wine and with all
applicable business and other regulations of the Village.
T. Class S License: Bring Your Own Beverage (BYOB) (added by A-222-01-18)
A Class “S” – License shall be issued for a period of one year. A Class “S” License shall
permit the consumption of sealed and unconsumed cans of beer and bottles of wine in their
original packaging, provided that said beer and wine is brought by patrons of the
establishment holding said Class “S” License. Patrons of Class “S” License holders may
bring no more than 72 ounces of unopened beer and/or no more than 750mL of unopened
wine per two patrons over the age of 21. No person shall open any alcohol on premises
between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. on weekdays or weekends. Provided
further, it shall be the duty of the license holders of such establishments to require that all
persons, other than the employees of said establishments, leave the premises within thirty
(30) minutes after the foregoing stated closing times. A Class “S license holder may not
originate any retail sale of alcohol to a customer, and all holders of Class “S” licenses must
provide snacks and pre-packaged foods for customers. Nothing in the issuance of a Class
“S” license shall be considered to relieve the licensee of any responsibility for complying with
all applicable state and federal regulations and with all applicable business and other
regulations of the Village.
The number of Class "A" licenses issued within the Village shall be limited to one (1); the number of
Class "B" licenses issued within the Village shall be limited to four (4); the number of Class "C"
licenses issued within the Village shall be limited to one (1); the number of Class "D" licenses shall not
be limited; the number of Class "E" licenses shall not be limited; the number of Class "F" licenses
issued within the Village shall be limited to one (1); the number of Class "G" licenses issued within the
Village shall be limited to one (1); the number of Class "H" licenses issued within the Village shall be
limited to nine (9); the number of Class "I" licenses shall not be limited; the number of Class “J”
licenses issued within the Village shall be limited to zero (0). The number of Class “K” licenses shall
be limited to one (1). The number of Class “L” licenses shall be limited to one (1). The number of
Class “M” licenses shall be limited to one (1). The number of class “N” licenses shall not be limited.
The number of class “O” licenses shall be limited to one (1). The number of class “P” licenses shall be
limited to one (1). The number of Class “P-1” licenses shall be limited to one (1). The number of Class
“Q” licenses shall be limited to zero (0). The number of Class “R” licenses shall be limited to one (1).
The number of Class “S” licenses shall be limited to one (1).
(amended by A-222-01-18)
Sec. 25.10. Restriction on Licenses
No license shall be issued to any person ineligible to receive the same by virtue of 235 ILCS §5/6-2,
25-15
as amended.
Sec. 25.11. Fees - Term
The fee of any Class "A" license granted hereunder shall be in the amount of Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars, plus Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each separate bar maintained on said
premises over one (1). The fee for any Class "B” license granted hereunder shall be in the
amount of Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00), plus Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each
separate bar maintained on the premises over one (1). The fee for any Class "C" license granted
hereunder shall be in the amount of Two Thousand Five Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars, plus Two
Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each separate bar maintained on the premises over one (1). The
fee for any Class "F" license granted hereunder shall be in the amount of Two Thousand Five
Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars. The fee for any Class "G" license granted hereunder shall be in the
amount of Two Thousand Five Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars. The fee of any Class "H" license
granted hereunder shall be in the amount of Two Thousand ($2,000.00) Dollars, plus Two Hundred
($200.00) Dollars for each separate bar maintained on said premises over one (1). The fee for any
Class ‘J’ license granted hereunder shall be in the amount of Two Thousand Five Hundred
($2,500.00) Dollars. Each such license shall terminate on the 30th day of April next following its
issue. The fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have
expired in the license year. The fee for the renewal of any Class "A" license originally issued
pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be in the amount of Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars,
plus Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each separate bar maintained on said premises over one
(1); the fee for renewal of any Class "B" license originally issued pursuant to the terms of this
Chapter shall be in the amount of Two Thousand ($2,000.00) Dollars, plus Two Hundred ($200.00)
Dollars for each separate bar maintained on said premises over one (1); the fee for the renewal of
any Class "C" license originally issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be in the amount
of Two Thousand Five Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars, plus Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each
separate bar maintained on said premises over one (1); the fee for the renewal of any Class "F"
license originally issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be in the amount of Two
Thousand Five Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars; the fee for the renewal of any Class "G" license
originally issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be in the amount of Two Thousand Five
Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars; the fee for the renewal of any Class "H" license originally issued
pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be in the amount of Two Thousand ($2,000.00) Dollars,
plus Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each separate bar maintained on said premises over one
(1); the fee for the renewal of any Class “J” license originally issued pursuant to the terms of this
Chapter shall be in the amount of Two Thousand Five Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars. The fee for
any Class "D" or Class “E” license granted hereunder shall be Fifty ($50.00) Dollars and shall be
paid at the time the license is granted. However, the aforesaid fee shall not be applicable to such
civic, benevolent, fraternal, patriotic, social or other organizations that qualify as a Not-For-Profit
corporation under the General Corporation Not-For-Profit Act of the State of Illinois or to units of
local government. (amended by A-222-1-97)
The fee for any Class "I" license granted hereunder shall be Fifty ($50.00) Dollars per day. Each
such license shall terminate as of the date indicated on the face of the license or on the 30th day of
April next following its issuance, whichever is earlier. The fee for any Class “K” License granted
shall be $1,000.00 and the fee for any Class “L” License granted shall be $1,500.00. The fee for
any Class “M” License granted shall be $2500.00. This fee is in addition to the fee for the
required class “H” license. The fee for a Class “N” license shall be $50.00 for each day specified
in the license (permit). The fee for any Class “O” license shall be $1,000. The fee for any Class
“P” license granted shall be in the amount of Two Thousand Five Hundred and 00/100 Dollars
($2,500.00). The fee for any Class “M” license originally issued hereunder or being renewed
hereunder is Two Thousand Five Hundred & 00/100 ($2,500.00). The fee for the renewal of any
25-16
Class “P” license originally issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall be in the amount of
Two Thousand Five Hundred & 00/100 Dollars ($2,500.00). The fee for a Class “P-1” shall be
$500 in addition to the fee for the per-requisite Class “P” license. The fee for any Class “Q”
license shall be ($2,000.00). The fee for any Class “R” license shall be One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00). The fee for any Class “S” license shall be Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
(amended by A-222-01-18)
Sec. 25.12. Payment of Fees
All license fees shall be paid in advance on or before the 15th day of April in each year.
Every license shall expire on April 30th following its issuance (except twenty-four (24) hour
licenses).
All license fees shall be paid at the office of the Village Clerk.
In the event a license is not issued, any license fees (except the initial license expense provided for
in the next section of this Chapter) which have been prepaid shall be refunded to an applicant.
All license fees collected by the Village Clerk shall be forthwith paid to the Village the Village Clerk
shall keep a record of all licenses issued.
Sec. 25.13. Initial License Expense
In connection with the first application or any person, group of persons, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, or other entity applying for a license under this Chapter, said applicant
shall pay at the time of such application a non-refundable initial license expense of Two Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($250.00), which shall be in addition to the license fee required in this Chapter. Such
amount shall be due and paid at the time when the application is filled out and filed with the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner. The initial license expense shall be for the purpose of defraying any
and all costs (including fingerprinting, which shall be limited to one set, any additional required sets
shall be paid by applicant) which the Village may incur as a result of the review and investigation of
said application (including live scan fingerprinting), and shall not be refunded regardless of whether
the applicant is issued a license or not. (amended by A-222-02-17)
Sec. 25.14. Location
Licenses shall be issued to existing liquor establishments that are annexed to the Village
subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter only if at the time of annexation, they are then
currently licensed by the State of Illinois and either the County of Cook or DuPage.
Sec. 25.15. Change of Location
Licenses shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the premises described in the application
and license therefor. Said license shall not be transferable to any other location in the Village
unless written permission is first obtained from the Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of
location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the sale of
alcoholic liquor under the laws of the State of Illinois and the Codes and Ordinances of the Village.
Sec. 25.16. Transfer of License
a. A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for a term not to exceed the period for
25-17
which the same is issued unless sooner revoked, as provided in this Chapter, and shall
not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution
nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descent by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that the
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, under
order of the appropriate court, may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or
bankrupt licensee after the death of such license but not linger more than six months
after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
b. When the licensee is a corporation or limited liability company, the license shall terminate
whenever fifty percent (50%) or more of the ownership interest therein changes from that
shown on the original license application. In such event, the corporation or limited liability
company, through its officers, must make application for the issuance of a new license as
provided herein; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply
where the transfer of an ownership interest is made to an owner shown on the original
license application who owned fifty percent (50%) or more of the ownership interest of
such corporation or limited liability company at the time the original license application
was filed with the Village.
c. When the licensee is a partnership or corporation or limited liability company, no change
in ownership from that shown on the original application involving the addition of a new
partner of such partnership or a new shareholder of the corporation, or a new member of
the limited liability company, who will have an ownership interest in the aggregate more
than five percent (5%), shall be effective until such proposed change in ownership has
first been reported in writing to the local Liquor Commissioner and said Commissioner
finds that the proposed new partner, shareholder or member is not ineligible under the
provisions of this Chapter and so advises the licensee in writing. Any change in
ownership without complying with the terms hereof shall constitute grounds for revocation
of the liquor license issued pursuant hereto.
d. Any licensee may seek to renew his license at the expiration thereof pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and
provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as
a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Board of Trustees from decreasing or
increasing the number of licenses to be issued within the Village, nor shall it limit or
restrict the right of the Village to at any time amend or repeal any or all provisions of this
Chapter.
e. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, where ownership in a sole proprietorship,
partnership, limited liability company or corporation is transferred solely to any person or
persons found qualified pursuant to application under this Code to hold a liquor license in
the Village of Burr Ridge and proven to be a parent or a son or daughter of the prior
owner and where such transfer of ownership under this Code requires the issuance of a
new liquor license, no additional fee for a new liquor license shall be assessed for the
year in which the transfer of ownership is made; instead, the fee for that year’s liquor
license shall be pro-rated between or among the owners as follows:
1. the first owner shall pay the entire amount; and
25-18
2. the subsequent owner shall pay a pro-rated amount based on the date on
which ownership is acquired; and
3. upon receipt of payment of the pro-rated amount the Village shall return to the
first owner that same pro-rated amount.
Upon payment of the pro-rated amount a new license in the name of the new owner or
owners shall be issued which shall be effective only for that portion of the year for which
the pro-rated amount was paid.
Sec. 25.17. Licensing of Premises for Which License is Revoked
When any license hereunder shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to
any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, limited liability company, corporation or other entity
for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises
described in such revoked license.
Sec. 25.18. Cessation of Business
Any licensee who ceases to do business or closes his place of business for a period of more than
thirty successive days shall be subject to having his license declared forfeited and lapsed by order
of the Liquor Control Commissioner.
Provided, however, if any licensee wishes to close for repairs or remodeling, the licensee shall so
notify the Liquor Control Commissioner, and indicate the work to be done and the construction
schedule for the work. The licensee shall also request from the Liquor Control Commissioner
approval to cease doing business for such purposed, and, if approved, the Liquor Control
Commissioner will indicate the period of time for which the temporary cessation has been approved
in the order permitting such temporary cessation of business. If, due to not fault of the licensee, the
remodeling or repairs continue for a linger period of time than originally approved, the licensee
shall so notify the Liquor Control Commissioner and the order of the Liquor Control Commissioner
shall then be revised accordingly if the Local Liquor Commissioner agrees to such extension of
time. Such revised order shall indicate a new date for completion of all work. Provided, however,
no such business shall be allowed to cease doing business for such remodeling or repairs for a
period in excess of one year unless and until an extension has been granted in writing by the Local
Liquor Commissioner.
There shall be no reduction or proration of the license fee for any period of time during remodeling.
(A-222-2-88)
Sec. 25.19. Liquor Control Commissioner
The Mayor/President of the Village shall be the Liquor Commissioner of the Village and shall be
charged with the administration of the appropriate provisions of this Code and other Ordinances of
the Village relating to alcoholic liquors.
Sec. 25.20. Powers of Liquor Control Commissioner
The Liquor Control Commissioner may appoint not more than two persons residing in the Village to
assist him in the exercise of his powers and duties as Liquor Commissioner, and he shall have the
following powers:
A. To grant and suspend for not more than thirty (30) days, or revoke for cause, all licenses
25-19
issued under this Chapter, and to disqualify or place conditions upon any person acting
as manager or purporting to act as manager of any licensed premises.
(amended by A-222-03-08)
B. To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises
licensed under this Chapter in order to determine whether any of the provisions of state
or federal laws or this Code or other Ordinances of the Village or any rules or regulations
adopted by him or the State Commission have been or are being violated, and at such
time to examine said premises in connection therewith.
C. To receive complaints from any citizens within the Village that any of the provisions of
state or federal laws or this Code or other Ordinances of the Village or any rules or
regulations adopted in connection with the control of the sale of alcoholic liquors have
been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner provided by
law.
D. If the Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of
a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he
may, upon issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without
notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days,
giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such
licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the
licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to such other business or
businesses.
E. To appeal to the Circuit Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction any decision of
the State Liquor Control Commission which reverses or modifies any order issued or
penalty imposed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
Sec. 25.21. Inspection
It shall be the duty of the Liquor Control Commissioner or his authorized agent, and he is hereby
authorized and empowered from time to time to inspect and examine the premises wherein retail
liquor business is carried on, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not all health ordinances of
the Village and provisions of this Code relative to the carrying on of such business are being
complied with at such premises. Such inspection shall be made at least once each and every
month during the time said licensee is engaged in such business. It shall be the duty of every such
person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this Chapter to permit such inspection
to be made and to exhibit the premises to such persons making such inspection and a record of
such inspection shall be kept on file in the office of the Liquor Control Commissioner or the Village
Police Department. A failure to permit such inspection shall be sufficient cause to revoke or
suspend a license for the premises.
Sec. 25.22. Health and Sanitary Requirements
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation licensed to carry on a business under the
provisions of this Chapter to at all times keep the premises where such business is conducted
clean and in proper sanitary condition. All persons employed or working in any such premises shall
be kept clean and cleanly clothed. All utensils, appliances, vessels, receptacles, refrigerators,
closets, rooms or other places or things whatsoever which are used for the purpose of selling or
offering for sale, such liquors or of the storing or dispensing of the same, must at all times be kept
in a clean, wholesome and sanitary condition.
25-20
Sec. 25.23. Health of Employees - Certificates
Every person in charge of such premises shall keep himself and his employees in a clean condition
and cleanly clothed and no person who has tuberculosis or venereal or communicable skin disease
or who has any infectious or contagious disease shall engage in or be employed in and about such
business or such premises, or engaged in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of
alcoholic liquor. Every person in charge of such premises and his employees shall obtain and keep
in effect all necessary health certificates as may be required by the Illinois Department of Public
Health and/or any other government agencies, including any certificates required because the
liquor establishment serves food as well as alcoholic liquor.
Sec. 25.24. Selling to Unfit Persons
No licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty-one
(21) years, or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard,
spendthrift or insane, feeble-minded, or under legal disability or in need of mental treatment.
Sec. 25.25. Purchase by Minor
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one years to purchase or obtain
alcoholic liquors in any tavern or place in the Village where alcoholic liquors are sold.
For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee or his agent or employee,
may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic liquor to any person who is unable to produce adequate
written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty-one (21) years.
Sec. 25.26. Minor Misrepresenting Age
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twentyone (21) years to misrepresent his or her
age for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise obtaining or
attempting to obtain alcoholic liquor within the Village.
Sec. 25.27. Limitation on Sale of Alcoholic Beverages
A. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service.
B. Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because
of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such alcoholic liquor nor have such alcoholic
liquor in his possession.
C. If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that a sale or
delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the prospective
recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some
form of positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the
performance of his official duties.
D. No person shall transfer, alter or deface any identification card; use the identification card
of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification
card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have
25-21
possession of alcoholic liquor using an identification card in violation of this Section. The
consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of age is forbidden.
E. The possession and dispensing to, or consumption by, a minor of alcoholic liquor in the
performance of a religious service or ceremony, is not prohibited by this Section.
F. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license, or his agent,
representative or employee, or officer of the license holder, to suffer or permit any minor
to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the
room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided that this paragraph
shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to
any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of service or
commodities other than alcoholic liquor.
G. In addition to all other fines and penalties which may be authorized by law, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke the retail dealer's license for any
violation of this Section.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to minors, except
as authorized by this Chapter.
I. It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of 21 years from attending any bar,
preparing, pouring, mixing or drawing any alcoholic liquor as employee of a retail license
holder; provided, however, for restaurants holding a Class H liquor license, persons who
are at least 19 years of age may be employed as waiters or waitresses for the purpose of
selling, serving, giving or delivering of food and alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises.
(Amended by A-222-2-00)
J. Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training Certification. Every
person who sells or serves open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail, as well as
anyone whose job includes checking identification cards of patrons to purchase alcohol
or enter the premises, must obtain a Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education
and Training (“BASSET”) Certification within 120 days of being hired. The BASSET
Certificate then belongs to the employee and is transferred with the employee to any new
place of employment. A BASSET Certificate is valid for three years. These provisions do
not apply to special event retailers, or distributors, volunteers serving alcohol as
charitable functions, or instructors who are teaching the proper technique for using a
system that dispenses alcohol. (Added by A-222-04-15)
Sec. 25.28. Conduct of Licensee
Every licensee and every officer, shareholder, associate, member, agent, representative and
employee of every licensee under this Chapter shall be subject to the following regulations, and all
persons shall likewise be subject to the applicable regulations set forth below (when the term
licensee is used in this Sec. 25.28, it shall be deemed to include every officer, shareholder,
associate, member, manager, agent, representative and employee of the licensee):
A. Every licensee shall conduct his place of business in a quiet, decent and respectable
manner and shall eject therefrom or refuse admittance thereto all persons rendering
themselves objectionable or undesirable by reason of undue noise or other acts
disturbing the peace.
25-22
B. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to give or deliver any alcoholic liquor or intoxicating
beverages to a person under the influence of intoxicating liquor. Soliciting of drinks or
prostitution is prohibited.
C. Every licensee shall immediately report to the Village police any act by a person or
patron rendering himself objectionable, causing undue noise or disturbance, breach of
peace or unlawful conduct.
D. No person licensed under the provisions hereof shall make or allow any loud or
boisterous talking, or obscene or profane language, quarreling, singing, fighting or other
disturbance of persons passing along any street or public way in the vicinity thereof or to
the disturbance of the peace and quiet of persons doing business or residing in the
neighborhood thereof.
E. All licensees dispensing or serving food or alcoholic liquor shall be decently clothed.
Topless or similar attire is prohibited.
F. It shall be unlawful for any persons, while acting as a waiter, waitress, bartender,
entertainer, or any other position to:
1. Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
2. Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or
pubic hair regions; or
3. Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.
It shall also be unlawful to allow any customer or any other person to perform any of the
foregoing acts.
G. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any waiter, waitress, bartender,
entertainer or any other employee or any person to commit any of the unlawful acts in
this Section. A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress, bartender or entertainer
if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person is paid
any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity is
performed.
H. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any act or form of entertainment
which, when considered as a whole, would be considered obscene (i.e., has its
predominant appeal to prurient interests) as such term is defined by state law.
I. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any of the following: male or
female striptease (regardless of whether they strip off all of their clothes), lingerie (either
male or female) fashion shows, wet T-shirt contests, mud or jell-o wrestling or wrestling in
any substance other than air, and any similar contest or performance.
J. It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor
any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or
venereal disease.
25-23
K. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit any species of card games or
gambling in his premises or any part thereof or any places adjacent thereto under his
control.
L. Prohibited Entertainment. It shall be unlawful to permit the following conduct on licensed
premises:
1. Performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or other sexual act.
2. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks,
pubic hair, anus or genitals.
3. The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus,
vulva, or genitals.
4. Permitting any person to remain upon licensed premises who exposes to public
view any portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, genitals, vulva, or anus.
M. Prohibition on Campaign Contributions. Any person, applicant, liquor manager or entity
listed on a Village of Burr Ridge liquor license application which has been approved or is
currently pending is prohibited from directly or indirectly making campaign contributions
as defined in Section 9-1.4 of the Illinois Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4) and applicable
regulations (26 Ill.Adm.Code Part 100), to elected officials, or candidates for office, in the
Village of Burr Ridge (A candidate for office is a person who has filed their nominating
petition documents to run for elected office in the Village of Burr Ridge.). This prohibition
does not apply to Class I Special Event Retailer licenses under this Code.
(Section M added by A-222-01-13)
1. Any person, applicant, liquor manager or entity found guilty of a violation of this
Section may cause the licensee to be subject to fines, suspension or
revocation pursuant to Sections 25.53 and 25.33(A) of this Code or may result
in the non-issuance of a license to a pending applicant. In the case of a
campaign contribution made to the Liquor Control Commissioner in violation of
the prohibition set forth hereinabove, any actions or penalties to be taken shall
be as determined by the Deputy Liquor Control Commissioner.
2. Any violation of this Section shall be reported to the Liquor Control
Commissioner and to the Village Board of Trustees. No license will be
suspended or revoked, and no penalties imposed under this Code, except after
the applicable hearing process set forth in Section 25.33 and 25.33(A) of this
Code.
3. Any licensee found guilty of a violation of this Section shall bear all hearing
costs and fees incurred by the Village or Liquor Control Commissioner
associated with any hearing conducted under the Code, regarding a violation of
this Section.
N. Prohibition on Purchases from Commissioner. No licensee shall purchase, or offer to
purchase, any product, thing or service used by or as any part of the business of the
licensee from the Liquor Control Commissioner or members of the immediate family of
the Liquor Control Commission. Immediate family (for purposes of this subsection) shall
25-24
mean the spouse, children, son-in-law or daughter-in-law, parent, parent-in-law or sibling
of the Liquor Control Commissioner. (Section N added by A-222-01-13)
Sec. 25.29. Parent or Guardian
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any minor child of which
he or she may be the parent or guardian to violate the provisions of this Chapter.
Sec. 25.30. Acts of Agent or Employer
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter by any officer, director, shareholder, manager, associate, member, representative, or
other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be an act of such employer
or licensee and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or
omission had been done or omitted by him personally.
Sec. 25.31. Sale, Consumption or Delivery on Government-owned or Controlled Property
Unless specifically authorized by the laws of the State of Illinois or the U.S. Government, no
alcoholic liquor shall be sold on, consumed on, delivered to or on, or in the possession of any
person (except in the original package and with the seal unbroken) in or on any building or property
belonging to or under the control of the State or any of its political subdivisions, including but not
limited to buildings, lots or parcels of real estate, public streets, rights of way, and easements. Any
such sales, consumption or deliveries shall be permissible if in compliance with the requirements of
Section 5/6-15 of Chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Amended by A-222-2-93)
Sec. 25.32. Misrepresentation of Alcoholic Beverages
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, pour, or mix any alcoholic beverage which is
represented to be of a certain quantity or kind, a given brand name, or to be of certain ingredients
when it is in fact different from such representation. It shall be unlawful to add to or water down
any alcoholic liquor while it is in its original package, or otherwise, except when a customer orders
a drink with water as a mix.
Sec. 25.33. Revocation and Suspension of License - Procedure
The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to proceed by complaint and notice of
hearing to require any licensee under this Chapter to appear at a time and place specified in said
notice to show cause why the license issued under this Chapter to said licensee by the Liquor
Control Commissioner should not be suspended or revoked for violations of the provisions of this
Chapter, rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto or other applicable law.
All such original proceedings shall be instituted by complaint in writing, shall state the particular
provision, rule or regulation alleged to be violated and a general statement of the facts upon which
such allegation is based and shall be signed by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
The licensee against whom complaint has been filed shall be entitled to be served with a copy of
the complaint and shall be given notice of the time and place set for the hearing of said complaint.
Said complaint and notice of hearing shall be served on the licensee named therein, not less than
three (3) days prior to the date specified in said notice of hearing unless a different time limit is
required under existing law, and if such is so required, notice shall be served in compliance with
25-25
said time period. The licensee shall be given the opportunity to appear and defend.
Said licensee named in said complaint and notice of hearing shall appear at the time and place
designated in said notice of hearing and at such hearing shall have all protections and rights
allowed under law from time to time; provided, however, the failure of the licensee to appear and/or
defend shall not impair the power of the Local Liquor Commissioner to either suspend, revoke, or
not renew the license for cause.
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall within five (5) days after such hearing, if he
determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked, suspended or non-renewed,
state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation, suspension, or
non-renewal, and shall serve a copy of the order within said five (5) days upon the licensee.
The licensee, after the receipt of the order of suspension or revocation shall have the privilege,
within a period of twenty (20) days after the receipt of such order of suspension or revocation, of
appealing the order to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission. If and only if such right exists under
Illinois law, the licensee shall have the similar right to appeal any decision of non-renewal within
said twenty (20) day period to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
The notice of hearing required hereunder shall be served on the licensee either personally or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If served by certified or registered mail, the
licensee shall be conclusively deemed to be served three (3) calendar days after such notice was
deposited in the United States mail.
Different or additional procedures from those provided by this Chapter may be established from
time to time governing complaints and hearings provided for herein upon being instituted by the
Liquor Control Commissioner and approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
Sec 25.33 (A) Disqualification and Suspension of Manager – Procedures
The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to proceed by complaint and notice of
hearing to require any manager managing a business in a licensed premises under this Chapter to
appear at a time and place specified in said notice to show cause why the manager should not be
suspended or disqualified to act as manager for violations of the provisions of this Chapter, rules or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto or other applicable law.
All such original proceedings shall be instituted by complaint in writing, shall state the
particular provision, rule or regulation alleged to be violated and a general statement of the
facts upon which such allegation is based and shall be signed by the Liquor Control
Commissioner.
The manager against whom complaint has been filed shall be entitled to be served with a copy of
the complaint and shall be given notice of the time and place set for the hearing of said complaint.
Said complaint and notice of hearing shall be served on the manager named therein, not less
than three (3) days prior to the date specified in said notice of hearing unless a different time limit
is required under existing law, and if such is so required, notice shall be served in compliance
with said time period. The manager shall be given the opportunity to appear and defend.
Said manager named in said complaint and notice of hearing shall appear at the time and
place designated in said notice of hearing and at such hearing shall have all protections and rights
allowed under law from time to time; provided, however, the failure of the manager to appear
and/or defend shall not impair the power of the Local Liquor Commissioner to either suspend or
25-26
disqualify said manager, or place conditions on the continued functioning of said manager if not
disqualified.
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall within five (5) days after such hearing, if he
determines after such hearing that the manager should be disqualified, suspended or conditions
placed on his continued operation as manager, state the reason or reasons for such determination
in a written order of disqualification, suspension and/or conditions, and shall serve a copy of the
order within said five (5) days upon the manager. The decision of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be final.
The notice of hearing required hereunder shall be served on the manager either
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If served by certified or
registered mail, the manager shall be conclusively deemed to be served three (3) calendar
days after such notice was deposited in the United States mail.
Different or additional procedures from those provided by this Chapter may be established from time
to time governing complaints and hearings provided for herein upon being instituted by the Liquor
Control Commissioner and approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
Sec. 25.34. Other Ordinances and Laws to Apply
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner, proprietor, and/or other person
in charge of any place within the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold from the restrictions and
requirements of any other Chapters of this Code, other Ordinances of the Village, and/or of the
statutes of the State of Illinois or of the United States of America. The failure of any licensee,
owner, proprietor, and/or other person in charge of any such establishment to obey and/or comply
with said Code, Ordinances, and/or statutes shall be a violation hereof and shall also constitute
cause for the suspension, revocation, and/or termination of any liquor license issued by the Village.
(Amended by A-222-2-98)
Sec. 25.35. Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than
Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for the first
violation within a 12 month period, nor more than One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00)
for the second violation within the same 12 month period, nor more than Two Thousand Five
Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation within said 12 month period. The
maximum fines for any person, firm, or corporation within a single 12 month period shall be Fifteen
Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00). In addition thereto, the Liquor Control Commissioner shall have
the power to revoke, suspend or not renew licenses granted under this Chapter pursuant to its
provisions. (Amended by A-222-3-00)
Sec. 25.36. Liquor Sales on Election Day
Alcoholic beverages may be sold at retail on the day of any national, state, county, or municipal
elections, including primary elections, during the hours the polls are open within the corporate
boundaries of this Village.
Sec. 25.37. Village Hearings - Testimony Required
As a condition attached to the issuance of, or renewal of, a liquor license hereunder, it shall be the
25-27
duty of each licensee to require all owners, officers, agents, and employees of licensee to testify
(subject to any constitutional restrictions) at any hearing that may be conducted by the Village, or
any of its committees, commissions, boards or agencies, or the Local Liquor Commissioner,
regardless of whether they would otherwise be subject to subpoena power, when such hearings
may relate directly or indirectly to any events or occurrences of which they may have knowledge
arising out of their position as owner, officer, agent or employee of the licensee. It shall further be
the duty of licensee to inform all such owners, officers, agents, and employees of their duty to
testify hereunder, and licensee shall make the same a condition of employment for all licensee's
employees.
If any such officer, agent, or employee fails or refuses to testify to the full extent of their knowledge
at any such hearing when requested so to do by the Village, such failure shall be deemed to
constitute a violation of this Section by licensee, unless such failure to refusal is based upon a
constitutional right to not so testify.
The violation of the provisions of this Section shall constitute due cause for the non-renewal,
suspension and/or revocation of the license of the Licensee. Any such non-renewal, suspension or
revocation shall be effective only after compliance with the procedures and provisions set forth in
Sec. 25.33 hereof, or otherwise in conformity with law. The suspension, revocation or non-renewal
of such licensee shall be an additional remedy and shall not prevent or exclude a prosecutorial
action(s) for a fine under Sec. 25.35 hereof.
Sec. 25.38. Persons Ineligible for License
No license shall be issued to and no individual shall be eligible to act as a manager for a licensee if
the proposed licensee or manager is:
A. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he
resides.
B. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
C. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, unless the
Liquor Control Commissioner determines that such person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth in such
person's application and the Liquor Control Commissioner's investigation. The burden of
proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
D. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame or
prostitution, unless the Liquor Control Commissioner determines that such person has
been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set
forth in such person’s application and the Liquor Control Commissioner’s investigation.
The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant. (amended by A-
222-03-08)
E. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed
to decency and morality or involving moral turpitude, unless the Liquor Control
Commissioner determines that such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant
the public trust after considering matters set forth in such person’s application and the
Liquor Control Commissioner’s investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient
rehabilitation shall be on the applicant. (amended by A-222-03-08)
25-28
F. A person who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor under any Federal or
State law dealing with or regulating alcoholic liquor, drugs, cannabis sativa, or controlled
substances as defined under any such law, unless the Liquor Control Commissioner
determines that such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust
after considering matters set forth in such person’s application and the Liquor Control
Commissioner’s investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on
the applicant. (amended by A-222-03-08)
G. A person whose license issued under this Ordinance has been revoked for cause, or any
person who applies as an individual but who was a partner in a partnership or an officer,
manager or director of a corporation, or member of a limited liability company, or
individual with at least a five percent (5%) ownership interest in an entity which previously
has had a license revoked, is ineligible.
H. A person who has had a license issued by any other unit of government which has been
revoked for cause, unless the Liquor Control Commissioner determines that such person
has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set
forth in such person’s application and the Liquor Control Commissioner’s investigation.
The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant. (amended by A-
222-03-08)
I. A person who has had a license issued under this Ordinance or by any other unit of
government which has been suspended, if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
determines, after investigation, that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to
warrant the public trust and to have issued him a license. The burden of proof of
sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
J. A partnership, unless all of the members of such partnership shall be qualified to obtain a
license.
K. A corporation, or limited liability company, if any officer, member, manager or director
thereof, or any individual owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the
entity, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within the Village.
L. A corporation, unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation
which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in
Illinois and a limited liability company unless it is duly organized under the Illinois Limited
Liability Company Act.
M. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the
manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee.
N. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State law concerning
the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or has forfeited his bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
O. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or
does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued.
P. Any law enforcing public official of the Village, including the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, Village Trustees, and no such official shall be interested in any way,
25-29
either directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor,
except that a license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not
located within the Village, if the issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor
Control Commission.
Q. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
R. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense under the laws of the State of
Illinois as heretofore or hereafter amended, unless the Liquor Control Commissioner
determines that such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust
after considering matters set forth in such person’s application and the Liquor Control
Commissioner’s investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on
the applicant. (amended by A-222-03-08)
S. A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has been
issued by the Federal Government for a prior or current tax period.
T. A partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp has
been issued by the Federal Government for a prior or current tax period; or if any of the
partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by
the Federal Government for a prior or current tax period.
U. A corporation, or limited liability company if any officer, manager, member or director
thereof, or any individual owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the
entity, shall have been issued a federal gaming device stamp, or a federal wagering
stamp, for a prior or current tax period.
V. Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp, or a federal wagering stamp has
been issued by the Federal Government for the period within which the license is to be
effective.
Sec. 25.39. Inapplicability of Chapter to Certain Types of Alcohol
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of
denatured alcohol; to any liquid or solid containing 0.5% or less of alcohol by volume; to
flavoring extracts, concentrates, syrups, or medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary, or
toilet preparations; or to food products unfit for beverage purposes. However, provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed to exclude or not apply to alcoholic liquor used in
the manufacture, preparation, or compounding of such products.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to wine intended for use or used by any
church or religious organization for sacramental purposes.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent any duly licensed, practicing physician or
dentist from possessing or using any alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his
profession; any hospital or other institution caring for sick and diseased persons from
possessing alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients of that hospital or other
institution; or prevent any licensed pharmacist from possessing and using alcoholic
liquors in the preparation of prescriptions written by duly licensed physicians.
Sec. 25.40 Sales in Certain Areas Prohibited
25-30
A. No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of an alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of
any church, school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their
spouses or children, or any military or naval station. However, this prohibition shall not
apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants,
food shops, or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal
business carried on, if that place of business so exempted has been established for such
purposes prior to the taking effect of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5 § 6-11, nor to the renewal of a
license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any church
or school where that church or school has been established within such 100 feet since
the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall
be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational
programs (as determined in accordance with any applicable statutory provisions or
judicial decisions) and not to property boundaries.
B. No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at
any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of
school age or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school
supplies, food, lunches, or drinks for such minors.
C. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private
school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to periods when groups
are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other
than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors.
Sec. 25.41 Happy Hours Prohibited
A. All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of
alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or
part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use establishment which holds a valid retailer’s
license operates on its premises more than one establishment at which drinks of
alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall maintain at
each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at
that establishment.
B. No retail license or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
1. Serve 2 or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person for
consumption by that one person, except conducting product sampling or selling
or delivering wine by the bottle or carafe;
2. Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of
alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private
functions not open to the general public;
3. Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any person on any one
date at a reduced price other than that charged other purchasers of drinks on
that day where such reduced price is a promotion to encourage consumption of
alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in paragraph (7) of subsection (C) of this
Section;
25-31
4. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a
drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price regularly
charged for the drink on that day;
5. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which
involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic liquor as
prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
6. Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any
of the practices prohibited under paragraphs (1) through (5) above
C. Nothing in subsection (B) shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from:
1. Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
2. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
3. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
4. Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or
multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of any function,
meeting, convention or trade show;
5. Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
6. Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including but not limited to buckets), carafes,
or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such manner, or
selling bottles of spirits, and delivered to two or more persons at one time; or
7. Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole or in part, a
cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not regularly
scheduled.
D. A violation of this Section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the licensee’s
liquor license.
Sec. 25.42 Safety Provisions
A licensee may not permit the use of any pyrotechnic device within its licensed premises
unless the lead pyrotechnic operator and distributor possesses a valid state pyrotechnic
license and also has received a permit from the village. A licensee, or any agent or
employee of that licensee, may not use mace, pepper spray, or any other toxic airreleased
compound within its licensed premises. Violation of this subsection (A) by any
licensee or any employee or agent of a licensee is due cause for revocation of the
license.
B. No person may impede any person who is attempting to exit the premises of a licensee
due to an emergency that constitutes a threat to the health or safety of persons within the
licensed premises. For the purpose of this provision, the term “impede a person who is
attempting to exit” includes physically restraining the person or blocking or locking an exit
while the licensed premises is open to the public. Violation of this subsection (B) is due
cause for revocation of the license.
25-32
C. A licensee where premises has an authorized capacity (i) of at least 250 persons, (ii) or
otherwise set by the State Fire Marshal, or (iii) otherwise set by local ordinance,
whichever is lowest, must place a panic bar on each exit of its licensed premises. A
licensee whose premises has an authorized capacity of at least 500 persons that
conducts live entertainment within its premises must, before the commencement of the
live entertainment, make an announcement to the patrons of the licensed premises that
generally informs those patrons of the locations of exits and fire escapes at the licensed
premises.
D. A licensee shall not permit occupancy of the licensed premises in excess of the
maximum occupancy load requirements established from time to time by the village or
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Each licensee must post and continuously
maintain a sign located in a conspicuous place (approved by the village) on the licensed
premises indicating such maximum occupancy load for the licensed premises. If such
overcrowding were to occur the licensee, its agents and/employees shall immediately
remedy the same by requiring a sufficient number of individuals to leave the premises. If
such reduction to at most the maximum occupancy load requirement is not immediately
accomplished, the licensed premises shall be immediately closed and shall not re-open
until the situation has been reviewed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Such
overcrowding is considered a serious offense and may result in revocation of the license.
Such overcrowding event shall be documented in accordance with such policy or policies
established from time to time by the village or the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
Sec. 25.43 Appeals
A. Pursuant to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5 § 7-9, any appeal authorized
thereunder from an order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be limited to a
review of the official record of the proceedings of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner,
and it is hereby resolved that such review shall be solely on the record.
B. A certified official record of any proceeding that is subject to appeal under the provisions
of ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5 § 7-9, before the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be
taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter and shall
be filed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with the State Liquor Commission
within five days after notice is received by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the
filing of an appeal from an order of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
C. The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power and right to appeal to the Circuit
Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction any decision of the State Liquor Control
Commission which reverses or modifies any order issued or penalty imposed by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(amended by A-222-03-08)
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 32
MOTELS
ARTICLE I. License Required; Definition
Sec. 32.01. Definition
Sec. 32.02. License required
Sec. 32.03. Application for license
Sec. 32.04. License fee
Sec. 32.05. Transfer of license
ARTICLE II. Construction
Sec. 32.06. Construction requirements
ARTICLE III. Supervision and Maintenance
Sec. 32.07. Caretaker
Sec. 32.08. Cleanliness of establishment and surrounding areas
Sec. 32.09. Register of guests
Sec. 32.10. Maintenance of bathroom
Sec. 32.11. Dangerous articles. Storage of inflammable liquids and chemicals
Sec. 32.12. Sheets, towels, etc.
Sec. 32.13. Drinking containers
Sec. 32.14. General maintenance
Sec. 32.15. Refuse. Containers
Sec. 32.16. Lighting
Sec. 32.17. Fire Extinguishers
Sec. 32.18. Adequate Heat
ARTICLE IV. Lobby; Rate Notices
Sec. 32.19. Lobby
Sec. 32.20. Rate Notices
ARTICLE V. Penalties
Sec. 32.21. Fines
Sec. 32.22. Termination, Revocation, or Suspension of License
ARTICLE VI. Taxation
Sec. 32.23. Hotel and Motel Tax
32-1-1
ARTICLE I. License Required; Definition
Sec. 32.01. Definition.
The term "motel" as used in this article shall be construed to mean any establishment consisting of a
group of attached or detached rooms, located on a single zoning lot or contiguous or adjoining
zoning lots comprising one single plot of land, which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out
to the public to be a place where lodging or lodging and food, or apartments or suites or other
sleeping or housekeeping units, with or without self-contained kitchen facilities, are offered for hire or
rent to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential. These facilities may be
described as motor or other similar names denoting that accommodations are available primarily for
transient guests.
Sec. 32.02. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, manage or operate a motel, as defined herein,
without complying with all of the provisions of this Chapter and without first having obtained a license
therefor. Such license shall be issued only to persons of good moral character and any person who
shall have been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense denoting moral
turpitude is to be presumed, prima facie, to be of bad moral character. The license year shall be from
May 1st to April 30th. (Amended by A-232-1-91)
Sec. 32.03. Application for License.
Each applicant for a license to operate or maintain a motel shall file an application with the Village
Clerk stating therein the name and address of the owner, name and address of the manager,
assistant manage, if any, or desk clerk or clerks or any other person or persons having charge of the
operation of the premises; location of the motel, the number of rooms to be available; the maximum
number of persons and vehicles to be accommodated; and whether or not kitchen facilities are
afforded and if so, the number and location of each such unit. Unless the same shall have been
previously presented and approved, this application shall be accompanied by plans of the motel
drawn by a licensed architect, showing the proposed or existing locations of all buildings, rooms,
toilets, type of heating, sewer connections, driveways and other improvements.
Sec. 32.04. License fee.
The annual license fee for such license shall be $50.00 for each motel containing 10 rooms or less,
and $5.00 additional per year for each additional room in excess of 10.
Sec. 32.05. Transfer of License.
Any license that shall be issued shall not be transferred without the written authority of the President
and Village Clerk or such other person designated to issue licenses and transfer fee in an amount of
$150.00 shall be charged therefor.
32-2-1
ARTICLE II. Construction
Sec. 32.06. Construction requirements.
All buildings hereafter constructed, altered or remodeled for use as a motel as herein defined shall
comply fully with the applicable provisions of the Village Building and Zoning Ordinance and in
addition the following:
(a) All buildings constructed or remodeled or in which new or additional accommodations are
created, shall be built of fire resistant materials. On buildings of more than one-story
construction all enclosing walls and partitions shall be of construction providing fire
resistance of not less than one hour. All exterior walls and partitions shall be of
construction providing fire resistance for not less than two hours.
(b) All units of more than one story construction shall provide exits, two or more in number on
each floor.
(c) No parking space shall be provided for motor vehicles within six feet of any building or
structure used for housing accommodations in a motel, unless all wall facing such parking
space is constructed of fireproof materials, and unless the windows in such wall of any
space are equipped with reinforced fire resistant glass.
(d) All accommodation units shall have at least 50 square feet of floor area for each person
occupying said room and in no event shall any room have less than 100 square feet
exclusive of the space required for toilet and closet space.
(e) In no event shall more than four persons be accommodated in any one individual room.
(f) Each room shall be equipped with a private bathroom consisting of toilet, lavatory, showerstall
or bath, all within a single enclosed area, and a separate closet space of not less than
two feet in width.
(g) The window area of accommodation units shall be sufficient to furnish adequate natural
light. Twenty-five percent of the required window area shall be capable of being opened
unless some other adequate means of ventilation is provided.
(h) The toilet room shall contain at least one window opening to the outside unless some other
adequate means of ventilation is provided.
(i) All combustion type room heaters shall be vented.
(j) If gas heaters are used, the same shall be approved by the American Gas Association or
some other recognized testing laboratory that provides a follow-up inspection service; all
heaters must be equipped with an automatic shut-off which will operate at flame failure.
(k) An adequate supply of safe water shall be provided from a source which complies with the
municipal regulations governing the supply of water.
(l) All sewerage and all other or water carried wastes shall be discharged into a municipal
sewer system whenever available. Whenever not available, liquid wastes shall be
discharged into a private sewage disposal system the operation of which shall not create a
nuisance or pollute a stream, lake or other body of water, or adversely affect any supply of
32-2-2
drinking water. All sewage disposal systems shall comply with all local and state statutes,
ordinances, regulations and codes.
(m) Artificial swimming pools used in connection with recreational areas, shall be constructed
and maintained in a manner which will not create any health or safety hazard, and shall
comply with all applicable state statutes and Village Ordinances.
(n) All mechanical equipment installed or used in connection with the motel, including but not
limited to electrical, water and sewer supplies and heating facilities, shall be of such
standard as to provide a reasonable degree of health and safety safeguards for the
occupants of said motel.
32-3-1
ARTICLE III. Supervision and Maintenance
Sec. 32.07. Caretaker.
Each establishment shall have at least one competent attendant or caretaker available at all times. It
shall be his duty to receive and deliver telephone messages and mail, to maintain the premises,
facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and free from rodents and vermin.
Sec. 32.08. Cleanliness of establishment and surrounding areas.
Each establishment shall be kept clean and free from rubbish, litter, dirt, filth, garbage or other matter
in or on the same, or in the yard, court, passage, area or alley connected with or belonging to the
same.
Sec. 32.09. Register of guests.
Each establishment shall keep a register of all transient guests. This register shall contain the name,
legal residence, make of car, car license, number and names of persons occupying the rooms, the
number or numbers of the room or rooms assigned to the guest or guests and the date of arrival and
departure. The register shall be available for inspection by law enforcement officers for a period of
not less than three years.
Sec. 32.10. Maintenance of bathroom.
All floors and toilet facilities in each bathroom shall be thoroughly washed and disinfected daily.
Sec. 32.11. Dangerous articles, storage of inflammable liquids and chemicals.
All areas shall be kept free at all times from inflammable materials and any articles dangerous or
detrimental to health. No inflammable liquids or chemicals shall be kept on the premises unless the
same are stored and kept in a special room so designed and constructed as to be fireproof and
otherwise safe for such storage.
Sec. 32.12. Sheets, towels, etc.
All sheets, towels and other linens furnished for each accommodation unit shall be clean and freshly
laundered daily.
Sec. 32.13. Drinking Containers.
Paper cups in proper dispensers shall be provided in each accommodation unit. If drinking glasses
are furnished in lieu thereof, they shall be washed and sterilized daily.
Sec. 32.14. General Maintenance.
The entire establishment shall be so operated in such a manner as to provide clean, wholesome
accommodations to the guests at all times. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing it shall be
the duty of the operator of the establishment to keep the furniture, furnishings and equipment and the
premises as a whole in a good state of repair and maintenance.
32-3-2
Sec. 32.15. Refuse. Containers.
In any accommodations where cooking facilities are provided, fly proof and metal containers shall be
supplied for garbage and refuse and it shall be the duty of the motel operator to promptly remove and
dispose of such garbage and refuse.
Sec. 32.16. Lighting.
Any area or premises of the motel open to use by the public or by all persons staying in or being
accommodated in the said motel shall be kept adequately lighted at night time provided that such
lights shall be so shaded or regulated so as to prevent them from shining upon any adjacent
premises.
Sec. 32.17. Fire Extinguishers.
For each 2,500 square feet of floor area on each floor, one 2 1/2 gallon soda and acid approved type
fire extinguisher or an approved wet water type extinguisher shall be available, but in no event shall
there be less than one fire extinguisher on each floor.
Sec. 32.18. Adequate heat.
Each room including the bathroom shall have facilities to keep such room at a minimum temperature
of not less than 68 degrees between October 1st and May 15th of each year.
32-4-1
ARTICLE IV. Lobby; Rate Notices
Sec. 32.19. Lobby.
Each establishment shall maintain an office, lobby or other room which shall be made available for
the registration of guests.
Sec. 32.20. Rate Notices.
Printed notices shall be posted in each room giving the established rate for said room for one or more
persons and it shall be unlawful to charge a rate in excess of such rate, provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall prohibit the motel from establishing other or different rates during
seasonal periods and nothing herein contained shall prevent the proprietor from changing such
published rates from time to time. Such notices shall also prescribe any reasonable rules and
regulations of the establishment, not in conflict with any statute or regulations of the State of Illinois or
Village Ordinance in such case made and provided.
32-5-1
ARTICLE V. Penalties
Sec. 32.21. Fines.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than
$5.00 nor more than $750.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues. (Amended by A-232-1-96)
Sec. 32.22. Termination, Revocation, or Suspension of License.
In addition to any other penalty herein imposed for violation of any provision of this Chapter, the
Village Board shall have the right to terminate, revoke, or suspend any license granted under the
provisions of this Chapter; provided, however that no suspension, termination, or revocation of a
license shall take place until after notice of such violation has been given to the motel owner or
manager, and a public hearing afforded at a time and place to be fixed by the Village Board.
(a) The notice required by this section shall:
i. state the particular provision of this Chapter alleged to have been violated and
the facts upon which such allegation is based; and
ii. state the time, date, and place of the public hearing on the alleged violation; and
iii. be signed by the Village Clerk; and
iv. be served on the motel owner or manager in person or by registered or certified
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the address given in the application for a
motel license not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing.
(b) At the public hearing of the alleged violation:
i. the charges against the licensee shall be read; and
ii. the licensee shall be given an opportunity to answer and/or explain all charges,
to present witnesses, and to cross-examine witnesses testifying against the
licensee; and
iii. the licensee may be represented by counsel; and
iv. formal rules of evidence shall not apply.
(c) The Village Board shall determine after the public hearing whether or not to suspend,
terminate, or revoke the license and shall give written notice to the licensee of its decision.
The Board's decision shall be final.
(Article V added by A-232-1-83)
32-6-1
ARTICLE VI. Taxation
Sec. 32.23 Hotel and Motel Tax
A motel room tax is imposed by the Village of Burr Ridge under the provisions of Section 60-7 of
Chapter 60 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code (the General Municipal Code of the Village of Burr
Ridge of 1974). For details of such tax, see Section 60-7 of Chapter 60. (Article VI added by A-232-
1-91)
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 38
Nuisances
Article I. Nuisances Generally.
Sec. 38.01. Nuisances - general.
Sec. 38.02. Definitions.
Sec. 38.03. Deposit of grass, rubbish, etc. - prohibited.
Sec. 38.04. Dumping and Storing.
Sec. 38.05. Excavations.
Sec. 38.06. Surface and Sub-Surface Water Drainage.
Article II. Nuisances - Weeds.
(Removed by A-250-01-11)
Article III. Abatement - Penalty.
Sec. 38.14. Nuisance - unlawful - penalty.
Sec. 38.15. Abatement of nuisance by Village.
Article IV. Composting
Sec. 38.16. Purpose and Intent.
Sec. 38.17. Definitions.
Sec. 38.18. Standards and Conditions.
Sec. 38.19. Responsibility for Compliance.
Sec. 38.20. Nuisance Declared.
Sec. 38.21. Enforcement.
Sec. 38.22. Penalty.
Article V. Feeding of Wild Animals and Fowl
Sec. 38.23 Purpose and Intent.
Sec. 38.24 Definitions.
Sec. 38.25 Nuisance Declared.
Sec. 38.26 Enforcement
Sec. 38.27 Penalty.
Article VI. Permitted Times for Outside Construction and Maintenance
Sec. 38.28 Purpose and Intent
Sec. 38.29 Definitions
Sec. 38.30 Nuisance Declared
Sec. 38.31 Enforcement
Sec. 38.32 Permitted Hours
Sec. 38.33 Penalty
Last Revision A-250-01-17, 11-13-17
38-1-1
Article I. Nuisances Generally.
Sec. 38.01. Nuisances - general.
It shall constitute a nuisance to commit any offense which is in fact a nuisance, or which is a nuisance
according to the common law, or which is made such by this Code, other ordinances of this Village or
by the statutes of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 38.02. Definitions.
The following acts, omissions or conditions shall be deemed nuisances:
1. An act which shall annoy, injure or endanger the safety or health of the public.
2. An act which shall offend public decency.
3. An act which shall unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous
for passage, a public park, public way or other public place.
4. Obstruction of any gutter so as to cause water to stagnate therein or permitting foul or
stagnant water to stand upon any premises.
5. Causing or permitting any garbage or offensive substance of any kind, including, but not
limited to unused paper, junk, unused wood, ashes, tin cans, unused masonry or crockery,
cinders, rubbish, refuse, tree branches, trimmings or stumps, yard trimmings, cartons, and
boxes, to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place in the Village other than as
prescribed by this Code or other applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village.
6. All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or
otherwise and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public.
7. All dangerous or unsanitary, unguarded, unprotected machinery or equipment in any public
place or situated or operated on private property.
8. Causing or permitting any open burning of garbage or other discarded solid materials or
cause or allow the burning of garbage or other discarded solid materials in any chamber not
approved by the State of Illinois Pollution Control Board or Environmental Protection
Agency.
9. The hours permitting outside construction and outside maintenance are listed in Article VI of
Chapter 38 of the Municipal Code. (Amended by A-250-01-17)
Sec. 38.03. Deposit of grass, rubbish, etc. - prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or deposited, any grass,
leaves, branches or parts of trees or any other things in any public way within the Village other than as
prescribed by this Code or other applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the Village, and such
is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
Sec. 38.04. Dumping and Storing.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or store material of any kind on any real
38-1-2
property in the Village, except:
(a) When dumping, depositing or storing is for a purpose which is customarily
incidental to residential use; or
(b) When building materials are deposited on a site for which a building permit has
been issued and the building materials are to be used for construction purposes
thereon in conformance with the applicable codes of the Village; or
(c) Where the building materials are deposited on a site used in accordance with the
applicable codes of the Village for the purpose of storing building materials.
2. In the event that building materials are deposited on a site in the Village, for which a building
permit has been issued, and such permit expires, the continued existence of the building
material on such site is declared to be a nuisance.
Sec. 38.05. Excavations.
1. When any person makes or maintains an excavation within the Village to be used for the
construction of a building and/or for a use accessory to the construction of a building, the
development of a subdivision, or the construction and/or installation of public improvements,
or makes and/or maintains any other excavation which constitutes a danger to the public by
reason of its depth or proximity to public ways or walks or for any other reason, it shall be
unlawful for such person:
a. to allow such excavation to remain open for a period of time in excess of that time
necessary or reasonably required to accomplish the purpose for which said
excavation is made; and/or
b. to make or maintain such excavation without providing adequate safeguards and
precautions to protect the health, safety and lives of all members of the
community, and in particular, of minor children who might be attracted to or have
occasion to go upon the property where such excavation exists.
c. to make an excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any street without
first securing a permit from the Village except that any person maintaining pipes,
lines, or other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may
proceed without seeking a permit when emergency circumstances require that the
work be done immediately and at the first opportunity thereafter a permit is
sought; however, no permit shall be issued if the excavation contemplated is for
connection to a utility for which construction recapture and/or connection fees
required by Village ordinances are not paid in full. (Added by A-250-1-94)
2. A violation of paragraph 38.05.1 above is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Amended by
A-250-1-82)
Sec. 38.06. Surface and Sub-Surface Water Drainage.
1. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or other person in control or possession of any
premises jointly or severally to permit any eave trough, footing drain, drain, downspout,
piping, sump pump or other device or appliance, permanent or temporary, above or below
38-1-3
grade, for collecting and discharging surface water, rain water or any other source of surface
runoff water, ground water or sub-surface water to be so designed, located or constructed
on, over or across any street, alley, public way, or any rights of way thereof, or public
property other than by means of a Village approved storm sewer, drainage swale, or other
drainage system or structure, without approval of the Village and a written permit to do so
issued by the Building Commissioner and the Zoning Enforcement Officer. A violation of this
paragraph is declared to be a nuisance. (Amended by A-250-1-82)
2. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or other person in control or possession of any
premises jointly or severally to cause the discharge from any swimming pool, hot tub, pond,
water feature, ice rinks, or other depressional area to be conveyed across the surface of
another private property or to be discharged into a drywell. All discharge related to the
maintenance, filling, or emptying of such facilities caused by the property owner shall be
made directly to a gravity storm sewer, or to a roadside ditch or roadway curb if a storm
sewer is not available. All such discharges must be dechlorinated and pH neutral. (Added
by A-250-01-14)
38-2-1
ARTICLE II. Nuisances - Weeds.
(removed by A-250-01-11)
38-3-1
ARTICLE III. Abatement - Penalty.
Sec. 38.14. Nuisance - unlawful - penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on any property
under his control or do any act which constitutes a nuisance. The violation of any provisions of this
Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (Amended by A-250-1-96)
Sec. 38.15. Abatement of nuisance by Village.
Imposition of any penalty for a violation of this Chapter shall not be construed as a waiver of the right
of the Village to collect the costs of removal of any nuisance or nuisances as provided by the
provisions of this Chapter.
38-4-1
ARTICLE IV - COMPOSTING.
Sec. 38.16. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this Article is to promote the recycling of landscape waste through
composting and to establish minimum standards for composting.
Sec. 38.17. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
A. "Compost” shall be defined as the humus-like product of the process of composting
landscape waste, which may be used as a soil conditioner.
B. "Composting” shall be defined as the biological treatment process by which
microorganisms decompose the organic fraction of landscape waste, producing compost.
C. "Compost Bin” shall be defined as an enclosure constructed of concrete blocks, brick,
wood, woven wire or durable plastic which surrounds a compost pile.
D. "Compost Pile” shall be defined as an area in which composting takes place.
E. "Landscape Waste” shall be defined as all accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings,
leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
Sec. 38.18. Standards and Conditions.
All composting shall be done in compliance with the following standards and conditions:
A. All compost piles shall be enclosed in a free-standing compost bin.
B. Each compost bin shall be no larger in volume than one hundred twenty-five (125) cubic
feet, and shall be no taller than five (5') feet.
C. No more than three (3) compost bins may be located on any lot used for residential
purposes.
D. All compost bins/piles shall be maintained so as to prevent the attraction or harborage of
rodents.
E. All compost bins/piles shall be maintained so as to prevent unpleasant odors.
F. All composting shall be done in accordance with any process which has been found to be an
acceptable composting process by the Illinois Department of Energy and Natural
Resources.
G. Compost piles shall only be made up of landscape waste.
H. No compost pile/bin shall be located in any front yard or corner side yard.
38-4-2
I. A compost pile/bin may be located in a side yard provided, however, that it shall not be
located in any side yard setback required by the Zoning Ordinance.
J. A compost pile/bin may be located in a rear yard provided, however, that it shall not be
located within ten (10) feet of any lot line. In cases where a rear yard adjoins a street, a
compost pile/bin shall be located no closer than 50 feet to the street.
Sec. 38.19. Responsibility for Compliance.
It shall be the duty of both the owner(s) and occupant(s) of any property on which composting is taking
place, or on which a compost pile/bin is located, to make sure that said composting is being done, and
said compost pile/bin is being maintained, in full compliance with all provisions of this Article.
Sec. 38.20. Nuisance Declared.
It is hereby declared a nuisance to engage in composting or to maintain a compost pile/bin other than
in full compliance with the provisions of this Article. In regard to any composting to compost pile/bin
which constitutes a nuisance, the provisions of Section 38.26 of this Article regarding penalties shall be
applicable.
Sec. 38.21. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or his/her designee to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter.
Sec. 38.22. Penalty.
In addition to any action for injunctive relief in relation to the abatement of a nuisance, any person, firm
or corporation violating any provision of Article V shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate said distinct offense. (Amended by A-250-1-96)
(Article V added by A-250-1-90 and renumbered to Article IV by A-250-2-94)
38-5-1
ARTICLE V – FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS AND FOWL
(Article V added by A-250-01-08)
Sec. 38.23 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this Article is to prohibit the ground feeding of non-domesticated animals
and fowl to minimize the dangers posed to health and property by activities which promote the
presence and the concentration of such animals and fowl onto public or private areas of the Village.
Sec. 38.24 Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
A. Domesticated animal: Animal cared for and privately or publicly owned, and maintained in
captivity.
B. Non-domesticated animal: Shall include, but are not limited to, cats, squirrels, rats, mice,
rabbits, raccoons, fox, opossum, skunk, coyotes, chipmunks and deer.
C. Non-domesticated fowl: Shall include, but are not limited to, ducks, pigeons and geese.
D. Ground-feeding: To spread, cast, deposit or dump food, including corn, bread, birdseed,
food scraps, pet food or commercial animal chow, or any like or similar substance on any
public or private property in the Village.
Sec. 38.25 Nuisance Declared.
The ground-feeding of non-domesticated animals and fowl within the Village is hereby declared a
nuisance and is prohibited.
Sec. 38.26 Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or his/her designee to enforce, or provide for the
enforcement, of this Article.
Sec. 38.27 Penalty.
In addition to any action for injunctive relief relative to the abatement of a nuisance, any person who
engages in such prohibited ground-feeding, or permits the ground-feeding of non-domesticated
animals or fowl on their property, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Article and shall be
subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day a violation of the provisions of this Article shall continue, will constitute a separate
offense.
38-6-1
ARTICLE VI – PERMITTED TIMES FOR OUTSIDE CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
(Article VI added by Ordinance A-250-01-17)
Sec. 38.28 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this Article is to establish permitted times in which outside construction and
outside maintenance may be performed so as to mitigate the impact of noise within this Village.
Sec. 38.29 Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
A. Outside construction. any repair, building, or remodeling work on the outside of any
enclosed structure or anywhere on any structure not completely enclosed by walls,
windows, doors, and roof.
B. Outside maintenance: any operation of gas- or electric-powered equipment, including but
not limited to lawnmowers, leaf blowers, saws, or any other device intended for property
maintenance, including landscaping and home repair, used outside of any completely
enclosed space.
C. Holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving,
and Christmas Day.
D. Commercial entity: any company, firm, agent, or other organization that is hired by a
property owner to preform outside construction or outside maintenance for compensation.
E. Property owner: any person that owns or lives at a property, or is responsible for the
maintenance of a property on behalf of an owner, such as a property manager or tenant.
Sec. 38.30 Nuisance Declared.
The performance of any outside construction or maintenance outside of a completely enclosed space
within the Village by a commercial entity outside of permitted hours is hereby declared a nuisance and
is prohibited. Property owners performing outside construction or outside maintenance are hereby
exempt from all regulations set forth in Article VI, Chapter 38 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
Sec. 38.31 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the Village Administrator or his/her designee to enforce or provide for the
enforcement, of this Article.
Sec. 38.32 Permitted Hours.
Outside construction is permitted during the following hours:
Monday through Friday: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Saturday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Sunday and Holidays: Prohibited
Outside maintenance is permitted during the following hours:
38-6-2
Monday through Friday: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Saturday: 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Sunday and Holidays: 12:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Sec. 38.33 Penalty.
Any violation of the outside construction work hours listed herein shall be subject to a work order and
fee as described in Sections 404 and 250.7.3 of the Burr Ridge Building Ordinance. Any violation of
the outside maintenance hours listed herein shall be subject to a $50 fine per daily occurrence.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 39
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Sec. 39.01 Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 39.02 Amend Section 101.1 of 2012 IPMC – Title
Sec. 39.03 Amend Section 103.5 Fees of 2012 IPMC
Sec. 39.04 Amend Section 111 Means of Appeal of 2012 IPMC
Sec. 39.05 Amend Section 303.14 Insect Screens of 2012 IPMC
Sec. 39.06 Amend Section 602.3 Heat Supply of 2012 IPMC
Sec. 39.07 Amend Section 602.04 Occupiable Work Spaces of 2012 IPMC
Sec. 39.08 Amend Section 302.4 Weeds of 2012 IPMC
Chapter 39 added by Ordinance A-1115-01-14, dated April 28, 2014
Article 1. Property Maintenance Regulations
Sec. 39.01 Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
A. For purposes of regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings, and structures; providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit
for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the Village of Burr
Ridge; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; the Village of
Burr Ridge hereby adopts the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code (hereinafter
referred to as the 2012 IPMC) subject to the modifications and exceptions otherwise set
forth herein.
B. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of the 2012
IPMC are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed herein.
C. The Building Commissioner of the Village of Burr Ridge shall maintain a copy on file in the
Village offices of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code and shall make said
code available for public inspection.
D. Whenever the provisions of this Section conflict with specific or implied provisions of the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, the provisions of this section shall
prevail and govern.
Sec. 39.02 Amend Section 101.1 of 2012 IPMC - Title
In said IPMC 2012 Edition, insert “Village of Burr Ridge” in the space provided for [name of
jurisdiction]:
Sec. 39.03 Amend Section 103.5 Fees of 2012 IPMC
A. In addition to payment of all direct costs incurred by the Village for hiring a contractor for
mowing or removal of weeds, a $50 fee shall be charged for the Village removal of weeds
as per Section 302.4 of the IPMC.
B. In addition to all direct costs incurred by the Village for recording and releasing a lien, a $50
fee shall be charged for the releasing of any lien placed on property by the Village under the
authority of the 2012 IPMC and its amendments herein.
Sec. 39.04 Amend Section 111 Means of Appeal of 2012 IPMC
Replace Section 111 of the 2012 IPMC in its entirely with the following: ”The Village Board shall
function as the Board of Appeals. All appeals shall be submitted in writing no more than 30 days after
the issuance of a violation notice.
Sec. 39.05 Amend Section 303.14 Insect Screens of 2012 IPMC
Insert “May 1st and October 15th in the [Date] spaces provided.
39-1-1
Sec. 39.06 Amend Section 602.3 Heat Supply of 2012 IPMc
Insert “October 15th and May 1st in the [Date} spaces provided.
Sec. 39.07 Amend Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces of 2012 IPMC
Insert “October 15th and May 1st in the [Date][ spaces provided.
Sec. 39.08 Amend Section 302.4 Weeds of 2012 IPMC
A. Insert “10 inches” in the [jurisdiction to insert height in inches] space provided.
B. Add the following subsection:
302.4.1 Definition of Noxious Weeds: For the purpose of this Chapter, noxious weeds are
defined as poison ivy, ragweed, Canada thistles, perennial sow thistles, European
bindweed, leafy spurge, Russian knapweed, hoary cress and other weeds of whatever kind.
39-1-2
41-1-1
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 41
OFFENSES
Article I. Anti-Vandalism and Parental Responsibility
Sec. 41.01. Findings.
Sec. 41.02. Definitions.
Sec. 41.03. Offenses.
Sec. 41.04. Penalty - Conditional Discharge - Resolution - Violation of Conditional Discharge.
Sec. 41.05. Parental Irresponsibility - Offense.
Sec. 41.06. Parental Irresponsibility - Presumption.
Sec. 41.07. Parents - Court Appearance - Notice.
Sec. 41.08. Parental Irresponsibility - Penalty.
Sec. 41.09. Severability.
Sec. 41.10 Curfew
Sec. 41-11 Halloween Trick or Treating Hours
Sec. 41.12 Blank
Article II. Sale or Distribution of Tobacco Products to Minors
Sec. 41.13. Definitions.
Sec. 41.14. Sale or Distribution of Tobacco Products to Minors.
Sec. 41.15. Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products.
Sec. 41.16 - 20 Blank
Article III. Other Offenses
Sec. 41.21. Criminal Trespass to Residence.
Sec. 41.22. Criminal Trespass to Land.
Sec. 41.23. Criminal Damage to Property.
Sec. 41.24 Disorderly Conduct
Sec. 41.25 Theft
Sec. 41.26 Retail Theft
Sec. 41.27 Offenses Against the Person
Sec. 41.28 Public Indecency
Sec. 41.31 Offenses Relating To Drugs
Sec. 41.34 Video Gaming Prohibited
Sec. 41.35 Offenses Involving Alcohol and Minors
Last Revision: Ordinance A-274-02-11, November 28, 2011
41-1-2
Article I. Anti-Vandalism and Parental Responsibility
Sec. 41.01. Findings.
The Corporate Authorities hereby find that the incidence of acts of vandalism and similar offenses by
juveniles resulting in damage to real and personal property within this Village have increased, thus
posing a threat to the value of the property within the Village, and also threatening the general health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Village, and also recognize the need to provide the means
to eliminate such problems in order to insure the safety of the property and residents of the Village.
The Corporate Authorities further find that increased parental responsibility is essential for the
effective control and elimination of such juvenile offenses. Furthermore, the Corporate Authorities
further find that it is in the best interests of the Village that such acts be prosecuted by the Village as
a local offense; that penalties therefore be imposed which are related to the nature of the act and the
type of offender; and that parents or legal guardians of minors found guilty of such acts be held
responsible for any monetary penalty or order of restitution or reparation imposed. The diligent
pursuit of such interest will tend to increase parental supervision of minors and reduce the incidence
of juvenile vandalism, thus advancing the welfare of residents of the Village.
Sec. 41.02. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) "Person" shall include any individual, firm, partnership association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
(2) "Property" shall include any real estate including improvements thereon, and tangible
personal property.
(3) "Legal guardian" shall include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor
by the Circuit Court of this State, but does not include a person appointed guardian, or
given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act.
(4) "Minor" shall be a person who has attained eleven (11) years of age but who has not yet
reached eighteen (18) years of age.
Sec. 41.03. Offenses
Within the corporate limits of the Village no person shall:
(1) Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without his consent; or
(2) Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any motor vehicle, trailer,
bicycle, aircraft, or water craft or any part thereof of another person without his consent; or
(3) Knowingly commit any violation of a state statute or Village ordinance concerning
vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly conduct, obscene conduct, trespass, or use of an
alcoholic liquor, cannabis, or controlled substances, or any other offense of wilful or
malicious acts to persons or property.
Sec. 41.04. Penalty - Conditional Discharge - Resolution - Violation of Conditional Discharge.
Every person found guilty of an offense as defined in Sec. 41.03 hereof shall be subject to either or
41-1-3
both of the following penalties for each offense:
(1) A fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $750.00.
(Amended by A-274-1-96)
(2) A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one (1) year.
The conditions of a conditional discharge shall include that the defendant:
(a) Not violate any criminal statute of quasicriminal ordinance of any jurisdiction; and
(b) Report to and appear in person before such person or agency as directed by the
court.
The conditions of conditional discharge may, in addition, require that the defendant:
(a) Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
(b) Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug addition or
alcoholism;
(c) Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or damage
to property and pecuniary loss; and
(d) If a minor, to reside with his parent or in a foster home; attend school; attend a
non-residential program for youth; or contribute to his own support at home or in
a foster home.
When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for a conditional discharge, the
court shall determine the amount and conditions or payment. When the conditions of
payment have not been satisfied, the court, at any time prior to the expiration or termination
of the period of conditional discharge may impose an additional period of not more than
two (2) years. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such
additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence,
including the authority to modify or enlarge the original conditions and to revoke the penalty
of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are violated during such additional
period.
When a petition is filed charging a violation of a conditional discharge, the court:
(a) May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a warrant for the
offender's arrest where there is a danger of his fleeing the jurisdiction or causing
serious harm to other or when the offender fails to answer a summons.
The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the sentence of conditional
discharge until the final determination of the charge, and the term of conditional
discharge shall not run so long as the offender has not answered the summons
or warrant.
(b) Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The Court may admit the
offender to bail pending the hearing.
41-1-4
(c) Shall receive evidence in the open court with the right of confrontation, crossexamination
and representation by counsel. The Village has the burden of going
forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the preponderance of the
evidence.
(d) Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply with conditions of a
sentence which imposed financial obligations upon the offender unless such
failure is due to his wilful refusal to pay.
(e) May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on motion of the Village or
in its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to all parties and a
hearing.
If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time prior to the expiration
or termination of the period, it may continue to the offender on the existing period, with or
without modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was
available at the time of the initial penalty.
A judgement revoking probation or conditional discharge is a final appealable order.
Sec. 41.05. Parental Irresponsibility - Offense.
It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such
parent or legal guardian to fail to exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing or permitting said
minor to commit any violation of a Village ordinance or state statute concerning vandalism, battery,
curfew, disorderly conduct, obscene conduct, trespass, or possession or use of alcoholic liquor,
inhalants, cannabis, or controlled substances, or any other offense of wilful or malicious acts to
persons or property. (Amended by A-274-1-98)
Sec. 41.06. Parental Irresponsibility - Presumption.
A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have allowed or permitted said minor to have
committed a violation of a Village ordinance or state statute under all of the following conditions:
(1) Said minor has been either adjudicated to be in the violation of the provisions of Sec. 41.03
above, or has been charged with any such violation (except if found to be not guilty); or has
incurred non-judicial sanctions from any peace officer, or conservator of the peace resulting
from an admission of guilt to any such offense; and
(2) Said parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by certified mail (return receipt
requested) or by personal service is substantially the following form:
LEGAL NOTICE
To: (Parent's Names)
From: Village of Burr Ridge
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been involved with a violation of an
ordinance or state statute concerning vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly conduct,
obscene conduct, trespass, or possession or use of alcoholic liquor, cannabis, or controlled
substances, or any other offense of wilful or malicious acts to persons or property.
41-1-5
If said minor is again involved with a violation one of the above-type ordinances or state
statutes you may be found guilty of the offense of Parental Irresponsibility. Conviction for
said offense can result in a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00. You are
hereby notified that you must exercise proper parental responsibility over said minor by
controlling his unlawful conduct.
(3) Said minor, within two years of the receipt of said notice by the parent or legal guardian,
has been either adjudicated to have committed, has been charged with the violation
(except if found not to be guilty), or has admitted to have committed any violation of any
ordinance or state statute as described in (1) above.
Sec. 41.07. Parents - Court Appearance - Notice.
It is the policy of the Village of Burr Ridge that a parent or legal guardian of a minor be notified and
required to appear in Court whenever that minor is charged with a violation of an ordinance of state
statute which requires the minor's appearance in Court. To this end, it is hereby directed that a
notice in substantially the following form be sent to the parents or legal guardians of the minor:
LEGAL NOTICE
To: (Parent's Names)
From: Village of Burr Ridge
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been charged with an offense which is a
violation of a Village ordinance or state statute and which requires the appearance of said
minor in Court. You are further notified that one of the parents of said minor must appear
in Court before the case will be tried or be disposed.
If you fail to appear, the Village Prosecutor has been directed to have issued a subpoena
to bring you into Court. Failure to obey a subpoena can result in contempt of Court, with a
fine of imprisonment as the penalty.
The Village Prosecutor is hereby directed to have subpoenas issued whenever a parent or legal
guardian of a minor does not appear in Court after the first two times said case has been before the
Court.
Sec. 41.08. Parental Irresponsibility - Penalty.
Any parent found guilty of a violation of the parental irresponsibility provisions of the Chapter shall be
fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs. (Amended by A-274-1-96)
Sec. 41.09. Severability.
Should any provision of the Chapter 41 be declared by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than
the part so declared invalid, it being hereby declared that it would have been the intention of the
Corporate Authorities of the Village to adopt this Chapter 41 without the provision so declared invalid.
41-1-6
Sec. 41.10. Curfew. (section added by A-274-01-04)
(1) It shall be unlawful and a violation of Sec. 41.03 for a minor to be present at any public
assembly or in any public building, park, sidewalk, street or highway or other public place:
(a) Between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday;
(b) Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and 6:00 a.m.
on the following day.
(2) The curfew set forth in subsection (1) does not apply to a child who is:
(a) Accompanied by a child’s parent, legal guardian or custodian;
(b) Accompanied by a responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age
approved by the child’s parent, legal guardian or custodian;
(c) Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this State authorize a
person less than 17 years of age to perform;
(d) Participating in, going to, or returning from an emergency involving the protection
of a person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or
substantial damage.
(e) Participating in, going to, or returning from an activity involving the exercise of the
child’s rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution or Article 1, Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Illinois Constitution of 1970,
or both, such as freedoms of religion and speech and the right of assembly, to
include, but not be limited to:
(i) a religious event, including, but not limited to, prayer and vigil services;
or
(ii) a political event, including, but not limited to, observing or influencing a
legislative session and attending a political rally or event;
(f) Participating in, going to, or returning from an activity conducted by a nonprofit or
governmental entity that provides recreation, education, training, or other care
under the supervision of one (1) or more adults; or
(g) Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location outside Illinois to
another location outside Illinois with the permission of a parent or legal guardian.
(3) It shall be a violation of Sec. 41.05 for a parent, legal guardian, or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate subsection (1) above.
(4) Prior to arresting or citing a child for curfew hereunder, a police officer must make
reasonable inquiry to determine whether any of the exceptions contained in subsection (2)
apply, in addition to the age and time requirements set forth in subsection (1). An officer
shall issue a citation or make an arrest for curfew only if the officer has reasonable grounds
to believe that the minor has violated this section and that no exceptions apply.
41-1-7
Sec. 41.11 Halloween Trick or Treating Hours
That, for the safety of all those participating and the regulation of street traffic during the period when
far more than the normal number of minors are out moving about the Village, and to prevent any
vandalism that might otherwise occur, trick-or-treating within the Village of Burr Ridge shall be held
only on the 31st day of October (Halloween) of each year and shall not begin prior to 3:00 p.m. and
shall not extend beyond 8:00 p.m. on said date. (added by A-274-02-11)
Sec. 41.12 Blank
41-2-1
Article II. Sale or Distribution of Tobacco Products to Minors
Sec. 41.13. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions are adopted:
"Minor" Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
"Tobacco Products" Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes,
cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
Sec. 41.14. Sale or Distribution of Tobacco Products to Minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away, buy for, distribute samples of,
deliver or furnish any tobacco products to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
Sec. 41.15. Purchase or Possession of Tobacco Products.
It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase tobacco products or
to misrepresent his identity or age or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of
purchasing tobacco products.
It shall also be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to possess any tobacco
products; provided, however, possession by a person under eighteen (18) years of age under the
direct supervision of a parent or legal guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or
guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
(Sections 41.13 - 41.15, added by A-274-1-94)
Sec. 41.16-20 Blank
41-3-1
Article III Other Offenses
(Section added by A-274-3-98)
Sec. 41.21 Criminal Trespass to Residence.
Within the corporate limits of the Village, no person shall commit the offense of criminal trespass to
residence. A person commits the offense of criminal trespass to a residence when, without authority,
he knowingly enters or remains within any residence, including a house trailer. For purposes of this
section, in the case of a multi-unit residential building or a complex, "residence" shall only include the
portion of the building or complex which is the actual dwelling place of any person and shall not
include such places as common recreational areas or lobbies.
Sec. 41.22. Criminal Trespass to Land (amended by A-274-01-11)
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the land, or any part thereof, of another
after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is
forbidden, or to remain upon the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or
occupant to depart.
2. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of this
Section if he or she has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed
or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof.
3. This Section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living
on the land with permission of the owner or of his agent having apparent authority to
hire workers on such land and assign them living quarters or a place of accommodation
for living thereon, nor to anyone living on such land at the request of, or by occupancy,
leasing or other agreement or arrangement with the owner or his agent, nor to anyone
invited by such migrant worker or other person so living on such land to visit him at the
place he is so living upon the land.
4. Criminal trespass to State-Supported Land:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon land supported in whole or in
part with state funds or federal funds administered or granted through state
agencies or any building on such land after receiving, prior to such entry,
notice from the state or its representative that such entry is forbidden, or to
remain upon such land or in such building after receiving notice from the state
or its representative to depart, and who thereby interferes with another
person’s lawful use or enjoyment of such building or land.
B. A person has received notice from the state within the meaning of this section
if
he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed written
notice forbidding such entry to him or a group of which he is a part, has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the
forbidden part thereof.
5. Criminal trespass to vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and
without
41-3-2
authority enter any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part thereof, of another without
his or her consent.
Sec. 41.23 Criminal Damage to Property (amended by A-274-01-11)
1. Definitions: The following words shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them
when used in this section:
A. PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
B. PROPERTY: Any real or tangible personal property
2. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Knowingly damage any property of another without his consent; or
B. Recklessly by means of fire or explosive, damage property of another; or
C. Knowingly start a fire on the land of another without his consent; or
D. Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his consent; or
E. Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, without his consent,
any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intend to
interfere with the use by another of the land or the building; or
F. Damage any property with intent to defraud an insurer;
G. Knowingly shoot a firearm at any portion of a train; or
H. Knowingly damage the property of another without his consent by defacing,
deforming or otherwise damaging such property by the use of paint or other
similar substance; or
I. Willfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with or destroy or deface
any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire engine, or other public or private
firefighting equipment, or any apparatus pertaining to such equipment, or
intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper authorization.
Sec. 41.24 Disorderly Conduct (amended by A-274-01-11)
1. It shall be unlawful to commit disorderly conduct within the corporate limits of the
Village.
2. A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
A. Disturbing the peace: Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm
or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
41-3-3
B. Group Disturbance: While in a group of three (3) or more persons, without
legal justification, causes a breach of the public peace or peace of another
person while either on public or private property; or
C. Mob Action: Mob action consists of any of the following:
1. The use of force or violence in disturbing the public peace by two (2)
or more persons acting together and without authority of law; or
2. The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
3. The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law,
for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of
anyone supposed to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for
the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative powers
over any person by violence.
D. False Fire Alarms: Transmits in any manner to any fire department of any city,
town, village or fire protection district a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that
such a fire exists; or
E. False Bomb Threats: Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the
effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such a
place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of
such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such
bomb or explosive is concealed in such place; or
F. False Alarms to Police: Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public
officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been
committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no
reasonable grounds for believing that such an offense has been committed; or
G.. False Report Regarding Abused Children: Transmits a false report to the
Department of Children and Family Services under section 4 of the Abused
and Neglected Child Reporting Act, 325 ILCS 5/4, as amended; or
H. False Request for Emergency Service: Transmits in any manner to the fire or
police department of any municipality or fire protection district, or any privately
owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an ambulance,
emergency medical technician/ambulance or emergency medical
technician/paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such assistance is required; or
I. False Report to the Department of Public Health: Transmits a false report to
the Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, 310 ILCS
45/1-101 et. seq.; or
J. Window Peeping: Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or
unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through
any window or other opening in it; or
41-3-4
K. Harassment by Collection Agencies: While acting as a collection agency as
defined in the Collection Agency Act, 225 ILCS 425/1 et. seq., or as an
employee of such collection agency, and while attempting to collect an alleged
debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is designed to
harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
L. Harassing Telephone Calls: With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone
call, whether or not conversation ensues; or
M. Public Display of Firearm: Possesses in public view, or causes to be
displayed in public view, an object that can reasonably be construed to be a
firearm.
3. In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, a court shall order any person
convicted of disorderly conduct to perform community service for not less than 30 and
not more than 120 hours. In addition, whenever any person is placed on supervision for
an alleged offense under this Section, the supervision shall be conditioned upon the
performance of the community service.
Sec. 41.25 Theft (added by A-274-01-11)
1. Theft Prohibited: No person shall commit theft.
2. Theft Defined: A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:
A. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
B. Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
C. Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
D. Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen
by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to
believe that the property was stolen; and
1. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property; or
2. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a
manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit;
or
3. Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner
permanently of such use of benefit.
Sec. 41.26 Retail Theft (added by A-274-01-11)
1. Definitions: Whenever the following words or terms are used in this section, they shall
have the meaning ascribed to them below.
A. CONCEAL: To “conceal” merchandise means that, although there may be
41-3-5
some notice of its presence, the merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
B. FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant’s stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
C. MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
D. MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or
any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.
E. PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes but is
not limited to the retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas in
shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf
of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of
such retail mercantile establishment.
F. RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
G. SHOPPING CART: Those pushcarts of the type or types that are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores
and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store.
H. UNDERRING: To cause the cash register or other sales-recording device to
reflect less than full retail value of the merchandise.
2. Retail Theft Prohibited: No person shall commit retail theft. A person commits the
offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
A. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers, or causes to be carried away or
transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a
retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of
the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full
retail value of such merchandise; or
B. Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or
any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment
and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in consort with
another at less than full retail value with the intention of depriving the
merchant the full retail value of such merchandise; or
C. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a
retail mercantile establishment from the container in or which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving
the merchant the full retail value of such merchandise; or
D. Underrings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value
of the merchandise; or
41-3-6
E. Remove a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
F. Represents to a merchant that he, she or another is the lawful owner of
property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts
to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in
exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
G. Uses or possess any theft detection shielding devise or theft detection device
remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale in the retail mercantile establishment without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
3. Presumptions: If any person:
A. Conceals, upon his person or among his belongings, un-purchased
merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment; and
B. Removes that merchandise beyond the last know station for receiving
payments for the merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment:
Such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such
merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use of benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise.
Sec. 41.27 Offenses Against the Person (added by A-274-01-11)
1. Reckless Conduct: Any person who causes bodily harm or endangers the bodily safety
of an individual by any means commits reckless conduct if he or she performs recklessly
the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they otherwise are lawful or
unlawful.
2. Assault: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault within the Village. A
person commits as assault when, without lawful authority, he or she engages in conduct
which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
3. Battery: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a batter within the Village. A
person commits battery if he or she intentionally or knowingly without legal justification
and by any means causes bodily harm to an individual, or makes physical contact of an
insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
Sec. 41.28 Public Indecency (added by A-274-01-11)
Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and older who performs any of the following acts
in a public place commits a public indecency, which is unlawful:
41-3-7
1. An act of sexual intercourse;
2. An act of deviate sexual conduct;
3. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of
the person;
4. A lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person of either sex;
5. Urination
6. Defecation
“Public Place” for the purpose of this section, means any place where the conduct may
reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
Sec. 41.31 Offenses Relating to Drugs (amended by A-274-01-11)
1. Inhaling Drinking or Possessing Certain Substances:
No person shall inhale, breath, drink, or possess with the intent to inhale, any
compound liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone,
toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl acetone, cyclohexanone, or any other substance for
the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational
behavior, or in any manner to change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental
processes. For the purpose of this section, any such condition so induced shall be
deemed to be an intoxicated condition. In addition, for the purposes of this section, the
possession of any item altered so as to facilitate the inhalation or such substance, or the
possession of any other item or device designed to enable the inhalation of such
substance shall create a rebuttable presumption of intent to inhale said substance. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
A. Any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or substances
pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon,
dentist or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
B. Any person who inhales, breathes, drinks, or otherwise in any manner uses
any narcotic, dangerous drug, or other material or substance or combination
thereof, which material or substance or combination thereof is defined by, and
the use of which is prohibited or regulated by any law of this State.
2. Sale of Certain Substances:
No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give away to any person any
substances containing any of the following volatile solvents, where the seller, offerer or
deliverer knows or has reason to believe that the substance will be used for the purpose
of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or
in any manner to change, distort, or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes: toluol,
hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl acetone,
cyclohexanone, or any other substance for the purpose of inducing symptoms of
intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner to
change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes.
41-3-8
3. Possession of Cannabis:
A. Cannabis defined: “Cannabis” includes marijuana, hashish, and other
substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis
sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any
part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or
synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by
extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of
such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of such plant, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
oil, cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
B. Possession Unlawful: It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person
knowlingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis,
except that the effect of this subsection shall be limited to persons knowingly
possessing less than thirty (30) grams of any substance containing cannabis.
4. Drug Paraphernalia Control:
A. Definitions: Whenever the following words or terms are used in this section
they shall have the meanings ascribed to them below unless the context
otherwise requires:
1. CANNABIS: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in subsection
3(A)
above.
2. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to
it
in 720 ILCS 570/102, as amended.
3. DELIVERS OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted
transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not
there is an agency relationship.
4. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are peculiar to or marketed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human
body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the cannabis
control act, 720 ILCS 550/1, or the Illinois controlled substances act,
720 ILCS 570/102, including but not limited to:
41-3-9
a. Kits peculiar to or marketed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or
preparing cannabis or a controlled substance;
b. Isomerization devices peculiar to or marketed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is
cannabis or a controlled substance;
c. Testing equipment peculiar to or marketed for private
home use in identifying or in analyzing strength,
effectiveness or purity of cannabis or controlled
substances;
d. Diluents and adulterants peculiar to or marketed for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
e. Objects peculiar to or marketed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine,
hashish, or hashish oil in to the human body, including,
where applicable, the following items:
i. Water piped;
ii. Carburetion tubes and devices;
iii. Smoking and carburetion masks;
iv. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
v. Carburetor pipes;
vi. Electric pipes;
vii. Air-driven pipes;
viii. Chillums;
ix. Bongs; or
x. Ice pipes or chillers.
f. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by
the seller, is for use in violation of this section.
B. Sale or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person who keeps for sale, offers
for sale, sells, or delivers for any commercial consideration any item of drug
paraphernalia.
C. Possession of Drug Paraphernalia:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of
drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the
human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for
that use.
2. In determining intent under this subsection C, the proximity of the
cannabis or controlled substance to drug paraphernalia or the
presence of cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug
paraphernalia may be considered.
41-3-10
D. Exemptions: This section shall not apply to:
1. Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an
incident to lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not
for sale.
2. Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in
connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of
tobacco or any other lawful substance.
Items exempt under this subsection include but are not limited to
garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigaretterolling
papers.
3. Items which are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items
have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being
used for any illicit purposes prohibited by this section.
4. In determining whether a particular item is exempt under this
subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other
logically relevant factors, the following:
a. The general, usual, customary and historical use to which
the item involved has been put;
b. Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use
of the of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the
design or engineering of the device upon its functioning;
c. Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the
item concerning the purposes of uses to which the item
can or may be put;
d. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at
the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
e. Any national or local advertising concerning the design,
purpose or use of the item involved, , and the entire
context in which such advertising occurs;
f. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item
was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items
displayed for sale or otherwise exhibited upon the
premises where the sale was made;
g. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items in the
41-3-11
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of
tobacco products;
h. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object
in
the community;
E. Intent: It is the intent of this code that the provisions of this section shall be
substantially in accordance with the requirements of the state drug
paraphernalia control act, 720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.
5. Responsibility of Parents and Owners of Residences:
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any person
under nineteen (19) years of age, of which he or she may be the parent or guardian, to
violate any provision of this section.”
Sec. 41.33 Blank
Sec. 41.34 Video Gaming Prohibited (added by A-274-01-10)
Video Gaming, as that term is defined in the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq. is
prohibited. A video gaming license issued by the State of Illinois is not effective within the Village
of Burr Ridge
Sec. 41.35 Offenses Involving Alcohol and Minors (added by A-274-01-11)
1. Sales to Minors:
A. Sales Prohibited: No licensee, and no agent of any licensee, shall sell, give,
or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any minor.
B. Secondary Transfer Prohibited: No person, after purchasing or otherwise
obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such alcoholic liquor to any
minor; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the consumption
of alcoholic liquor by a minor in the performance of a religious ceremony or in
the home of such minor pursuant to the condonation and supervision of the
parent or legal guardian of such minor.
C. Identification Required: If a licensee or any agent of a licensee believes or
has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because the prospective recipient may be a minor, then that person shall,
before making such sale or delivery, demand adequate written evidence of
age.
1. For the purpose of preventing a violation of this section, any
licensee, and any agent of a licensee, may refuse to sell alcoholic
liquor to any individual who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and age.
2. For purposes of this section, “adequate written evidence of identity
and age” means a document issued by a federal, state, county, or
41-3-12
municipal government, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the federal
selective service act, or an identification card issued to a member of
the armed forces.
3. Proof that the licensee, or an agent of the licensee, demanded, was
shown, and reasonably relied on adequate written evidence of
identity and age in any transaction forbidden by this section is an
affirmative defense in any proceeding for the suspension or
revocation of any local liquor license based on the occurrence of
such forbidden transaction. However, it shall not be an affirmative
defense if the licensee, or an agent of the licensee, accepted any
written evidence of identity or age knowing it to be false or
fraudulent.
D. Warning Required: Every licensee shall display at all times in a prominent
and conspicuous place within the licensed premises, a printed card supplied
by the village clerk reading substantially as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER 21
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF NOT LESS THAN $500 UNDER THE
VILLAGE CODE IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR IF YOU
MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR
OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
2. Consumption, Purchase and Possession Prohibited:
No minor shall consume alcoholic liquor, purchase alcoholic liquor, accept a gift of
alcoholic liquor, or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession; provided, however,
that this section shall not prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service or in a home pursuant to the direct
supervision and approval of the parent of legal guardian of such minor, nor the
possession of alcoholic liquor by a minor making a delivery of such alcoholic liquor
pursuant to the order of the parent, legal guardian or employer of such minor.
3. False Identification Prohibited:
A. Misrepresentation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to present or offer to any
licensee, or to the agent of any licensee, any written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of identity or age that is false, fraudulent, or not his or her own for
the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise
procuring or attempting to procure alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any
minor to have in his or her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed
or photostatic evidence of identity or age.
B. Transfer and Alternation of Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any minor to transfer, alter, or deface any written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of identity or age or to obtain any written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of identity or age by means of false or fraudulent information.
41-3-13
C. Conveyance of False Identification Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell, give or furnish to any other person any false or fraudulent
written, printed, or photostatic evidence of identity or age. It shall be unlawful
for any person to sell, give, or furnish to any other person any evidence of
identity or age with the knowledge or intent that such evidence will be used to
circumvent the provisions of this section.
4. Handling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one
(21) to sell, stack, display or otherwise handle alcoholic liquor, except as expressly
provided for under Section 25.27(I) of the Village Code.
5. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian intentionally
or knowingly to permit any minor for whom the parent or guardian is responsible to
violate any provision of this chapter.
6. Prohibited Gatherings: It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally or knowingly to
permit a gathering at a residence that he or she occupies of two (2) or more persons
where any one or more of such persons is a minor if
A. The person occupying the residence knows that any such minor is in
possession of or is consuming any alcoholic liquor; and
B. The possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor by such minor is not
otherwise permitted by this chapter.
7. Use of Rented Room for Consumption by Minors: No person shall rent a hotel or motel
room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with knowledge that such
room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of
twenty one (21).
8. Proof of Consumption or Possession: There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a
minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor in violation of this section where
either:
A. The presence of alcoholic liquor in a minor’s body is shown by a measurement
of blood alcohol concentration; or
B. The arresting officer:
1. Observes one or more recognized indicia of the presence of
alcoholic liquor in the minor’s body, including, without limitation, an
odor of alcoholic liquor on the minor’s breath or impaired motor
coordination or speech; and
2. Offers the minor to submit to a blood, urine or breath test to
determine if alcoholic liquor is present in the minor’s body and the
minor refuses to take such a test.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 42
UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS
Sec. 42.01. Unlawful use of weapons
Sec. 42.02. Exemptions
Sec. 42.03. Confiscation
Sec. 42.04. Penalty
Sec. 42.05. Prosecution
42-1
Sec. 42.01. Unlawful use of weapons
A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he knowingly:
(a) Sells, manufactures, purchases or carries any bludgeon, blackjack, slung-shot, sand-club,
sand-bag, metal knuckles, throwing star or any knife, commonly referred to as a
switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to
a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife; or
(b) Carries on or about his person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun projector or bomb or any
object containing noxious liquid gas or substance, other than an object containing a
nonlethal noxious liquid gas or substance designed solely for personal defense carried by
a person eighteen (18) years of age or older; or
(c) Carries or possesses in any vehicle or concealed on or about his person except when on
his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business any pistol, revolver, stun gun or
taser or other firearm; or
(d) Carries or possesses on or about his person, upon any public street, alley, or other public
lands within the corporate limits of the Village of Burr Ridge, except when an invitee
thereon or therein, for the purpose of the display of such weapon or the lawful commerce in
weapons, or except when on his own abode or fixed place of business, or except when
transporting such weapon in a broken down non-functioning state, any pistol, revolver, stun
gun or taser or other firearm; or
(e) Fires or discharges any pistol, revolver, stun gun, taser, air gun, spring gun or other firearm
within the corporate limits of the Village of Burr Ridge, except in properly regulated
shooting galleries or on any private grounds or residence where the projectile fired or
discharged will not transverse any space not owned by the person, persons or firm owning
the property, grounds or residence where such weapons are used and a proper backstop
to contain the projectile is used and where the noise attendant thereon will not disturb the
peace; provided that this Section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law to
discharge a firearm in the performance of his duty.
A "stun gun" or "taser", as used in this Section, means any device which is powered by electrical
charging units, such as batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire
and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting the person's nervous
system in such a manner as to render him incapable of normal functioning, or any device which is
powered by electrical charging units, such as batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or
clothing worn by a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system
in such a manner as to render him incapable of normal functioning.
Sec. 42.02. Exemptions
Subsections 42.01(b), (c), (d), and (e) of this Chapter do not apply to or affect any person who is
exempt from these provisions as provided for in Chapter 38, Section 24-2 of the Illinois Revised
Statutes, and as it may be amended from time to time.
42-2
Sec. 42.03. Confiscation
In addition to all other penalties, weapons used or possessed in violation of this Ordinance shall be
forfeited to and confiscated by the Village.
Sec. 42.04. Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more
than $750.00 for each offense. (Amended by A-586-1-96)
Sec. 42.05. Prosecution
In the event that any person commits any offense listed in this Chapter 42, and said offense is also
an offense under the Illinois Revised Statutes, and because of prior convictions against said person
under State law, said offense would be prosecuted as a felony if brought under the State law, said
person shall not be charged and prosecuted under his Chapter, but shall be charged and prosecuted
under the applicable State law.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 43
PURCHASING MANUAL
OBJECTIVE: To establish a standard procedure to be followed by all departments in procuring goods and services
and to facilitate purchases with vendors who will offer quantity and cash discounts and obtain quality
goods at the lowest possible prices.
Sec. 1.1-1.6 Bids and Quotations
Sec. 1.7 Equal Opportunity/Non-Discrimination Policy
Sec. 1.8 Shipping and Freight Policy
Sec. 1.9 Vendor Discounts
Sec. 1.10 Cooperative Purchasing
Sec. 1.11 Receiving and Inspection
Sec. 1.12 Purchase Authority
Sec. 1.13 Annual Purchase Orders
Sec. 1.14 Regular Purchases Requiring a Purchase Order
Sec. 1.15 Emergency Purchases
Sec. 1.16 Request for check for under $400.00
Sec. 1.17 Petty Cash Fund
Sec. 1.18 Invoices
(Revised by A-557-1-89)
43-1
Sec. 1.1 Bids & Quotations
All vendors calling on department heads with quotes or bids should confirm prices in writing to the
department heads. Upon receipt, the department heads will review and attach the bids and
quotations to the purchase order requisition and forward them to the Purchasing Agent for review.
By Ordinance, the Village Administrator is the Purchasing Agent.
All bids and quotations will provide the following information:
Description
Quantity
Price
Delivery Time
Shipping Charges
Quantity/Payment Discounts
Any Comments
The purchase order requisition will include:
Date
Department
Quantity
Description
Name of at least three potential suppliers
Fund/Account to be charged
Sec. 1.2 Purchasing Agent will screen the bids and quotations and arrange subsequent meetings with
department heads when the Purchasing Agent feels they may be advantageous to the Village. The
Purchasing Agent will supervise all correspondence with vendors. Exceptions to this will only be
made in cases where technical or other special details make it appropriate and necessary to assign
the responsibility to other departments or individuals. Emergency purchases may only be authorized
by department heads and their authorized delegates. All emergency purchases must be thoroughly
documented.
Sec. 1.3 Upon approval from the Purchasing Agent or Village Board, a designated staff member will transfer
the necessary information to a purchase order. When an order is placed, the vendor will be issued a
purchase order number. If necessary, a vendor copy of the purchase order will be mailed to the
vendor. The purchase order will be marked "Confirming Order". It will be the vendor's responsibility
to place the appropriate purchase order number on all invoices and packing slips.
Sec. 1.4 All purchase orders issued will require:
Vendor Name
Vendor Address
Description
Quantity
Unit Price
Total Price
Delivery Charges
Trade or Cash Discounts
Attachment of the vendor's bid or quote to the purchase order
43-2
Sec. 1.5 Purchasing Agent will approve all completed purchase orders and forward them to the originating
department for distribution.
Sec. 1.6 Department head will distribute the approved purchase order in the following order:
Part 1: Vendor copy - Send to vendor
Part 2: Department copy - retained by department and includes vendor's bid or quote
Part 3: Department copy - used for receiving goods/services
Part 4: Finance copy - to be encumbered
Part 5: Chronological file
Sec. 1.7 Equal Opportunity/Non-Discrimination Policy
It is the policy of the Village of Burr Ridge that all potential suppliers shall have an equal opportunity
to submit bids or quotations and to complete on an equal basis for the Village business.
All purchase orders and contracts to which the Village of Burr Ridge is party, shall contain a nondiscrimination
in employment clause which provides:
"The vendor agrees that in performing under this purchase order with the contracting
municipality, he shall not discriminate against any worker, employee or applicant, or any
member of the public because of race, religion, color, national origin or sex, ancestry, age,
marital status, physical or mental handicap, or unfavorable discharge from clause will be
incorporated in all contracts entered into with suppliers of materials or services who may
perform any such labor or services in connection with this contract."
Even if such clause is not included, the above clause shall be construed to be incorporated
as a part of such purchase orders and contracts.
Sec. 1.8 Shipping and Freight Policy
All bid prices and price quotations shall be F.O.B. Village of Burr Ridge with delivery to a point or
points within the Village.
It is the policy of the Village to avoid paying freight charges whenever possible. Department heads,
when taking informal quotations, should inquire into applicable freight charges. Any charges to be
paid by the Village will be regarded as part of the price quotation when selecting the successful
bidder. Unless otherwise stated in the "notice of call for bids", all formal bid proposals shall include
freight and delivery charges, if any.
Sec. 1.9 Vendor Discounts
It is the policy of the Village to take advantage of all available vendor discounts. The following points
should be kept in mind:
Cash Discounts are offered for prompt payment, usually within ten days of the date of the invoice.
Department heads can aid the Village by ensuring that the receiving report is signed and forwarded
to the Finance Department the same day that materials are delivered.
Trade Discounts are sometimes offered to municipalities for the purpose of attracting their business.
In most cases, the Village will not be offered a trade discount unless the purchaser asks if one is
available. Therefore, it is essential that department heads, when taking informal price quotations, ask
43-3
if trade discounts are available.
Sec. 1.10 Cooperative Purchasing
Cooperative purchasing between the Village of Burr Ridge and the State of Illinois or between the
Village and other local governments can result in significant savings on the purchase price of many
items. It is the policy of the Village to enter into cooperative purchasing agreements when:
Substantial savings will result;
Quality, availability or service will not be sacrificed;
The Village will be separately billed for its purchases;
Ordered items will be delivered directly to the Village (unless otherwise agreed upon).
The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to analyze the feasibility of cooperative purchasing
arrangements. The Village Board encourages cooperative purchasing but maintains the right to
reject any or all such agreements.
Sec. 1.11 Receiving and Inspection
Department heads (or their designates) are responsible for receiving and inspecting all deliveries to
their departments to ensure that items received conform to the specifications and quantities set forth
in the purchase order. All deliveries should be thoroughly inspected to ensure that materials are
received in satisfactory condition, and the invoiced price is compared to that on the purchase order.
Only after all items on a purchase order have been delivered in an acceptable condition should the
departments submit the appropriate forms to the Finance Department so bills may be paid. Each
vendor must accept returned items for full credit. All bills will eventually appear on the Vendor List for
monthly Board approval.
The department receiving the goods will:
Inspect for completeness of delivery
Sign off as received on packing slip or Part 3 of the purchase order
Mark on the packing slip or Part 3 of the purchase order goods damaged or not received
Attach all documents to original invoice for payment
Note on the original invoice any goods not received or damaged
Department head approves the original invoice for payment
Send completed documents to Finance Department for payment
Contacts vendor on any discrepancies
Sec. 1.12 Purchase Authority
All purchase order requisitions must be signed by both the appropriate department head and the
43-4
Purchasing Agent before pricing information is solicited.
The Purchasing Agent must sign all purchase orders before transactions will be allowed to take
place.
The nature and number of required bids or price quotes will be governed by the following dollar
amount categories:
Amount
$0 - $200 A minimum of one quote is required, with verbal quotes being sufficient.
$201 - $500 A maximum of three quotes is required, with verbal quotes being sufficient where
authorized by the Purchasing Agent.
$501 - $9,999 A minimum of three written quotes is required. In some cases, the purchasing
agent may elect to go out for bid.
$10,000 & up Purchases in this range will require formal bidding and Board approval.
At any time, the Village Board may waive any and all purchasing requirements, particularly in any
cases where the Village is soliciting unique professional services or expertise, purchasing used
equipment or in cases where vendors have exclusive marketing rights.(Amended A-557-2-89)
Sec. 1.13 Annual Purchase Orders
Each year the Village Board will approve the issuance of annual purchase orders for selected
vendors with whom the Village regularly does business. The Board will review the dollar amount of
business each department will do with each vendor without having to obtain the approval of the
Village Administrator. It will be the duty of vendors receiving annual purchase orders to provide each
department with a detailed billing for all transactions. Each vendor must agree to give full credit for
returned items, or for unused purchase authority. The maximum limit for any one annual purchase
order will be $2500.
The department will write on the annual purchase orders all purchases made under that specific
department's copy which is part 2 of the purchase order set for each vendor the following:
Invoice number
Date of receipt
Amount of purchase
If necessary, attach a Xerox copy of the purchase order to the original invoice and all receiving
documents
Approve invoice for payment
Fund/account to be charged
Retain original department copy (part 2) in department file for budget control
43-5
Forwards signed documents and original invoice to Finance Department for payment.
Sec. 1.14 Regular Purchases Requiring a Purchase Order
The department will follow the normal procedure, utilizing the purchase order requisition, preparation
of the purchase order, necessary approvals and receipt of goods and services provided.
The department will close the purchase order on completed shipment of goods or services:
Attach the original invoice and original purchase order to the receiving documents
Approve the invoice for payment
Insert the fund/account to charge
Forward completed documents to Finance Department for payment
Sec. 1.15 Emergency Purchases
Emergency purchasing procedures should be used when normal purchasing channels are not
available. Emergency purchases may be made:
When there is need for immediate delivery of items;
To prevent delays in work or construction schedules
When there is an immediate threat to public health or safety; or
To meet emergencies arising from unforeseen causes
Most emergencies occur as a result of parts and/or labor needed for repairs to vehicles and
equipment which must be kept running.
If an emergency purchase is needed during regular working hours, the purchasing agent should be
contacted and advised of the emergency. The purchasing agent will then assign a verbal purchase
order number to the department and ask for a confirming requisition to be supplied by the
department.
If an emergency purchase is needed, and the purchasing agent is not available for consultation,
department heads may procure the items as needed. A confirming requisition, along with an invoice
or packing slip, should then be forwarded to the purchasing agent by the department no later than
two working days after the transaction so the proper paperwork can be completed.
Sec. 1.16 Request for check for under $400.00
In certain situations, and with an upper limit of $400, Village department heads may request that
direct payment for goods or services be authorized without issuing a purchase order. These
situations arise where: 1) the cost of goods is so small that the expense of issuing a purchase order
is not justified, and petty cash cannot be used or 2) the purchase has been previously authorized,
and the issuance of a purchase order would serve no useful purpose. Some examples include:
Advances - travel and others - a travel agent who will accept purchase orders should be used for
43-6
travel and lodging arrangements whenever possible;
Inexpensive mail-order items;
Seminars;
Membership dues;
Limited outside services;
C.O.D. charges
Petty cash reimbursements
Department heads may request direct payment for goods or services using the procedure
outlined below.
Prepare check request to include:
Vendor/Payee
Nature of expenditure
Any comments
Fund/Account to charge
Purchasing Agent/department head approval
All check requests will be paid on a weekly basis. All checks issued from a check request will be
listed on a separate report to be presented to the Board for review.
See Check Request Form, Exhibit A, attached.
Sec. 1.17 Petty Cash Fund
A petty cash fund has been established to expedite the miscellaneous purchases and payment of
small bills which need not be handled through regular Village purchasing procedures. All Village
personnel shall use the petty cash fund administered by the Finance Department. All petty cash
funds will be limited to $200.00 in Administration and $100.00 in Police. Purchases from the petty
cash fund will not exceed $30.00. The Purchasing Agent may waive this dollar limit in certain
situations. The Police Chief and Village Receptionist will hold responsibility over their respective
petty cash funds.
The following items are prohibited from payment out of petty cash:
Regularly stocked items;
Contractual services;
Cashing of personal checks
43-7
Items which may be paid from the petty cash funds will include:
Postage due
Small UPS and other freight charges
Minor out-of-pocket expenditures
All petty cash requests for purchases will use the following procedure:
Original request will be written "Advance - to be accounted for";
Signed by the requestor;
Requestor, after making the cash purchase, will return a receipt for the cash purchase and any
excess funds;
Original petty cash advance will then be voided;
A new petty cash request will be prepared, recording the purchase price and attached receipt;
The new petty cash request will again be signed by the requestor;
The fund/account charged for the purchase will be recorded on the petty cash receipt.
Request for petty cash reimbursements will be made in the form of a check request which will be
reviewed and approved by the Purchasing Agent.
Attached to the check request for petty cash reimbursement will be the following:
Petty cash receipts;
All receipts supporting petty cash expenditures;
Signatures supporting petty cash expenditures
Sec. 1.18 Invoices
It will be noted that the Finance Department will pay for goods and services on original invoices
only.
No payments will be paid on statements or copies of invoices unless the department head attests to
the fact in writing that the original invoice is lost and that the invoice copy is replacing the original
invoice that is lost.
No invoice or copy of invoice will be paid unless there is sufficient documentation to warrant such
payment.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 44
SMOKING BAN – PUBLIC PLACES
Sec. 44.01 Findings
Sec. 44.02 Definitions
Sec. 44.03 Village-owned Facilities
Sec. 44.04 Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places
Sec. 44.05 Prohibition of Smoking in Unenclosed Public Places and Outdoor Venues
Sec. 44.06 Prohibition of Smoking in Open Air Dining
Sec. 44.07 Reasonable Distance
Sec. 44.08 Declaration of Establishment as Non-smoking
Sec. 44.09 Non-retaliation
Sec. 44.10 Violations and Penalties
Sec. 44.11 Other Applicable Laws
Sec. 44.12 Severability
Last Revision: Ordinance A-1067-01-18, 10-08-2018
44-1
Village of Burr Ridge
Chapter 44
SMOKING BAN – PUBLIC PLACES
Sec. 44.01 Findings
A. Secondhand smoke, which contains 4,000 chemicals, 63 of which cause cancer, is the third
leading cause of preventable death in the United States, and the National Cancer Institute
determined in 2000 (Monograph #10) that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early
deaths of as many as 65,000 Americans annually.
B. Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air
pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco
smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, strokes,
respiratory disease, and lung cancer.
C. The Public Health Service’s National Toxicology Program has listed secondhand smoke as
a known carcinogen (U.S. DHHS, 2000, citing Cal. EPA, 1997).
D. The ills of smoking and secondhand smoke are well documented in all of the independent
medical studies and secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people,
individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function,
including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease.
E. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory
infections, sudden death syndrome, development abnormalities, and cancer.
F. The Americans With Disabilities Act, which requires that disabled persons have access to
public places and workplaces, deems impaired respiratory function to be a disability.
G. (1) The U.S. Surgeon General has determined that the simple separation of
smokers and nonsmokers within the same air space may reduce, but does not eliminate,
the exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke; (2) the Environmental Protection
Agency has determined that secondhand smoke cannot be reduced to safe levels in
businesses by high rates of ventilation; (3) air cleaners, which are only capable of filtering
the particulate matter and odors in smoke, do not eliminate the known toxins in
secondhand smoke; (4) American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning
Engineers (ASHRAE) bases its ventilation standards on totally smoke-free environments
because it cannot determine a safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke, which
contains cancer-causing chemicals, and ASHRAE acknowledges that the technology
does not exist that can remove from the air chemicals that cause cancer.
H. A recently promulgated ASHRAE Position Document on Environmental Tobacco Smoke
concludes that, at present, the only means of eliminating health risks associated with
indoor exposure is to ban all smoking activity.
I. The ASHRAE Position Document further concludes that no current ventilation, air
cleaning or other technologies have been demonstrated to control health risks from
environmental tobacco smoke exposure in spaces where smoking occurs.
44-2
J. A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace, and
employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25% to 50% higher risk of heart
attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as
increased acute respiratory disease and a measurable decrease in lung function
K. Smoke-filled workplaces result in higher worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease,
lower productivity, higher cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance
rates and increased liability claims for diseases related to exposure to secondhand
smoke.
L. Numerous economic analyses examining restaurant and hotel receipts and controlling for
economic variables have shown either no difference or a positive economic impact after
enactment of laws requiring workplaces to be smoke-free
M. Creation of smoke-free workplaces is sound economic policy and provides the maximum
level of employee health and safety.
N. Smoking is a potential cause of fires, cigarette and cigar burns and ash stains on
merchandise and fixtures, and contributes to the economic damage of businesses.
O. The United States Food and Drug Administration has warned about the possible adverse
health effects brought about by the use of electronic cigarettes (“e-cigarettes”) as they have
been found to contain carcinogens and toxic chemicals such as diethylene glycol, an
ingredient used in antifreeze, and has further warned that the health effects of e-cigarettes,
including any potential negative health effects of second-hand smoke inhalation, are
unknown at this time. (added by A-1067-01-18)
P. The United States Food and Drug Administration has issued a caution related to ECigarettes
because the safety and efficacy of E-Cigarettes have not been fully researched
and studied, and it is not known if the use of E-Cigarettes may lead young people to try
tobacco products, including conventional cigarettes, which are known to cause disease and
lead to premature death. (added by A-1067-01-18)
Q. Recent studies indicate that E-Cigarettes pose significant health risks to both users of ECigarettes
and to those in the vicinity of users. (added by A-1067-01-18)
R. The Mayor and Board of Trustees find and declare that the purposes of this Chapter are
(1) to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in all public places and
places of employment, and (2) to guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smokefree
air which shall have priority over the desire to smoke.
Sec. 44.02 Definitions
E-Cigarette: Any electronic products or devices that use an atomizer or similar device that provides a
gas or vapor derived from nicotine and/or other chemicals and inhaled by the user to simulate smoking
without the use of fire, smoke, or ash, including, but not limited to, electronic cigars, electronic
cigarillos, electronic pipes, electronic hookah pipes, vape pens, advanced personal vaporizers, box
mods, any cartridge or other component of the device or related product, and any other device
capable of delivering aerosolized nicotine or other chemicals through inhalation. (added by A-1067-01-
18)
Open Air Dining Area: Any seating area within the Village open to the air that is accessory to a
44-3
restaurant, hotel, cafeteria, club, or other public place engaged in purveying commercial food or
beverage service where members of the public, members or guests are invited to sit and receive food
and beverage service for a consideration.
Outdoor Venue: Any outdoor theater, amphitheater, plaza, street, or other improved area that is
used as a public venue or forum to which members of the general public are invited to listen, view
or otherwise participate in an outdoor event within the Village.
Park: Any public park or recreation area within the Village that is open to and used by the general
public.
Picnic: Any gathering of 6 or more persons, when a permit is issued to the group for such purpose
by the Park District.
Public Place: Any open air dining area (as defined herein), park (as defined herein), outdoor venue
(as defined herein), or enclosed indoor area used by the general public and/or to which the general
public is invited or permitted, or which serves as a place of employment, including but not limited
to:
A. Health care facilities, nursing homes, food service establishments, restaurants,
taverns/bars, retail food stores, banquet halls, commercial establishments, hotels,
motels, resorts, inns, lodges, bed and breakfast establishments, indoor theatres, libraries,
museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, auditoriums, arenas,
common or public areas of condominium buildings and health care facilities (including
nursing home care facilities), Laundromats, public transportation facilities, marketing
establishments, educational facilities, retail stores, convention facilities, bingo facilities,
galleries, shopping malls, arenas and meeting rooms, polling places, school or other
government buildings, offices and office buildings, factories, warehouses and other
places of work. (amended by A-1067-01-07)
B. Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, offices, elevators, and other common
areas.
C. Meeting places, meeting or conference rooms, cafeterias, room chambers, places of
public assembly, offices used by more than one employee, residences (other than singlefamily
detached homes) used as a day care facility.
D. Taxis and vehicles of public conveyance.
E. Facilities used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or
other similar performance.
A public place does NOT include:
A. Private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility
or any other home-based business open to the public. (amended by A-1067-01-07)
Smoking: (added by A-1067-01-18)
A. Lighting or possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any
other lighted weed or plant, including, but not limited to, a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or
cigarette of any kind.
44-4
B. The use of an E-Cigarette of any kind.
Sec. 44.03 Village-owned Facilities
All enclosed vehicles and facilities, including without limitation buildings and vehicles owned,
leased or operated by the Village of Burr Ridge, shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter
44
Sec. 44.04 Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places and places of employment within the
Village of Burr Ridge
Sec. 44.05 Prohibition of Smoking in Unenclosed Public Places and Outdoor Venues
A. It is unlawful to smoke in the following unenclosed public places and/or events:
1. The seating areas of all outdoor arenas, stadiums and amphitheaters.
2. Public parks and recreation areas within 15 feet of any play area, any
playground, or any scheduled activity group of any kind including but not limited
to a game, show, party, event or similar activity, but excluding, however,
parades and picnics.
3. School grounds.
4. Public sidewalks within 15 feet of a public entrance, but excluding any person
who is temporarily in such area for the purpose of walking or traversing through
such area.
5. Public sidewalks within 15 feet of an open air dining area, but excluding any
person who is temporarily in such area for the purpose of walking or traversing
through such area.
6. At any scheduled outdoor event to which the public is permitted or invited,
including but not limited to games, shows, festivals, parties or any similar event
or activity, excluding, however, parades and picnics.
B. It is unlawful to smoke in or within 15 feet of an outdoor venue during the time that an
outdoor event is taking place.
Sec. 44.06 Prohibition of Smoking in Open Air Dining.
A. It is unlawful to smoke in any open air dining area.
B. It is unlawful for the owner or other person in control of an open air dining area knowingly
to permit smoking in that open air dining area.
C. It is unlawful to smoke within 15 feet of an open air dining area.
Sec. 44.07 Reasonable Distance
44-5
Smoking is prohibited within fifteen feet (15’) of any entrance to an enclosed area in which smoking is
prohibited.
Sec. 44.08 Declaration of Establishment as Non-smoking
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter 44, an owner, operator, manager or other person
in control of an establishment, facility or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility or
outdoor area as a non-smoking place.
Sec. 44.09 Non-retaliation
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against an employee,
applicant for employment or customer because that employee, applicant or customer exercises any
rights afforded by this Chapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this Chapter.
Sec. 44.10 Violations and Penalties (amended by A-1067-01-08)
A. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by this Chapter 44 shall be
guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
not more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). A person who owns, operates, or
otherwise controls a public place or place of employment that violates this Chapter 44
smoking ban shall be fined (i) not less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for the
first violation, (ii) not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within
one year after the first violation, and (iii) not less than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) for each additional violation within one year after the first violation and a sixty
(60) day suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the
premises on which the violation occurred.
B. Any person violating this Chapter 44 smoking ban, or any person, firm or corporation who
owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment, may be issued
a citation or “P” ticket. In lieu of prosecution for any such violation and in consideration for
the waiver of such prosecution, for each violation the citation or ticket violators may settle
and compromise the claim by paying to the Village the respective amounts set forth in the
following schedule and within the times set forth in the following schedule:
1. Payment of the fine set forth in the citation or “P” ticket for each violation within 10
days of the date of the original violation.
2. A FINAL NOTICE, which stipulates the date on which collection of the fine shall be
turned over to a collection agency approved by the Village for collection will be
issued after 10 days.
3. In the event that said payment is made after the FINAL NOTICE and prior to the
collection agency taking any action to collect the penalty, the payment of the fine
for each violation, plus any additional $50.00 fee, will be accepted as settlement.
4. If the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim or request a
hearing in the Circuit Court of DuPage County (or other circuit court with
44-6
jurisdiction, if required by law), s/he must request of the Chief of Police within 10
days of the date of the notice of violation that an administrative hearing by held.
Upon receipt of a hearing request, the Chief of Police of the Village, or the
designee of the Chief of Police, shall conduct the hearing. The person requesting
a hearing shall be notified of the time, date and place of the administrative
hearing. After the person accused of a violation has had an opportunity to present
his or her testimony, the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of Police shall
advise the person of his/her findings. If the Chief of Police or the designee of the
Chief of Police determines that the violation notice was valid and that an
ordinance violation occurred, the fine shall be due and payable within 10 days. If
the offender fails to pay the fine, the claim may be turned over to a collection
agency as set forth above.
5. In the event that actions taken by the collection agency fail to result in payment of
the penalty due, a FINAL NOTICE, which stipulates the date on which filing of a
complaint with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of DuPage County will be
commenced, will be issued. Payment of any fine and costs shall be in such
amounts as may be determined and established by the Court.
Sec. 44.11 Other Applicable Laws
This Chapter shall not be interpreted or be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted
by other applicable laws.
Sec. 44.12 Severability
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect the other provisions of this Chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 48
RAFFLES
Sec. 48.01. Raffles and Chances License
Sec. 48.02. Limitation on Value of Prize Awarded
Sec. 48.03. Validity
Sec. 48.04. Time for Issuance
Sec. 48-05 Sale of Raffle Chances
Sec. 48.06. License Restrictions
Sec. 48.07 Denial of License
Sec. 48.08. Raffle Restrictions
Sec. 48.09 Fidelity Bond Required
Sec. 48.10 Records To Be Kept
Sec. 48.11 Scope of Regulations
Sec. 48.12 Penalties
48-2
Sec. 48.01 Raffles and Chances License
There is hereby established a "Raffles and Chances License," which license shall be issued only to
bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that
operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period
of five (5) years immediately before making application for the license as provided for in this
subchapter and which have had during the entire five year period a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objectives and who have complied with the provisions of this
subchapter and the provisions of the Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., as amended, or to a
non-profit fundraising organization that the Village determines is organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme
financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
Sec. 48.02 Limitation on Value of Prize Awarded
A limitation in the amount of $50,000.00 is hereby imposed upon the aggregate retail value of all
prices or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle. A limitation in the amount of
$50,000.00 is hereby imposed upon the maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee
in a single raffle. A limitation in the amount of $125.00 is hereby imposed upon each raffle chance
which is issued or sold in a single raffle. The number of days a licensee may sell chances for a
single raffle is limited to one-hundred-twenty (120) days prior to such raffle.
Sec. 48.03 Validity
Licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for one raffle only and may be
suspended or revoked by the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Burr Ridge for any violation of
this subchapter or of the Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., as amended.
Sec. 48.04 Time for Issuance
The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Burr Ridge shall act upon any application for
licenses submitted to and pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter within thirty (30) days from
the date such application shall have been filed with the Village Clerk.
Sec. 48.05 Sale of Raffle Chances
Raffle chances authorized to be issued or sold pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may
be sold only within the boundaries specified on the license.
Sec. 48.06 License Restrictions
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
1. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle governed by the provisions of this
subchapter without first having obtained a license therefor as provided for in this
subchapter.
2. An application for a license pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter must specify the
area or areas within the Village within which raffle chances may be sold or issued, the
time period during which raffle chances may be sold or issued, and the time and place for
48-3
the determination of the winning chance.
3. The license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter must specify the area or
areas within the Village within which raffle chances may be sold or issued, the time
period during which raffle chances may be sold or issued, and the time and place for the
determination of the winning chance or chances.
4. An application for a license pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter must contain a
sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee
organization and that the organization meets all the requirements of this subchapter and
the Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., as amended, and must be signed by the
presiding officer and secretary of such organization.
Sec. 48.07 Denial of License
The following are ineligible for any license issued pursuant to this subchapter:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
2. Any person who has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
3. Any person who is not of good moral character;
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subparagraphs (1), (2) or (3) has a
proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;
5. Any organization in which a person defined in subparagraphs (1), (2) or (3) is to
participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in this subchapter; and
6. Any organization which fails to meet all the requirements of this subchapter and the
Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., as amended.
Sec. 48.08 Raffle Restrictions
Each raffle conducted pursuant to a Raffle and Chances License issued as provided for in this
subchapter shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes
of the organization permitted to conduct the raffle;
2. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in
the management or operation of the raffle;
3. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or
operation of the raffle;
4. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chances in a raffle
only from an organization which is also licensed under the provisions of this subchapter;
5. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license and
winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license; and
6. No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting of raffles or
48-4
chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where winning
chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or guardian.
Sec. 48.09 Fidelity Bond Required
All operations of and the conduct of raffles as provided for in this subchapter shall be under the
supervision of a single manager designated by the organization. Such manager shall give a fidelity
bond in the sum of $5,000.00 or two times the aggregate value of prizes, whichever is less, in favor
of the licensee conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his duties. The bond shall
provide that notice shall be given in writing to the Village of Burr Ridge not less than thirty (30) days
prior to cancellation. Bonds as provided for in this Section may be waived by the Village by the
inclusion of a waiver provision in the license provided that a license containing such a waiver
provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization.
Sec. 48.10 Records To Be Kept
Each organization licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to conduct a raffle shall
keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single raffle. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single raffle shall be documented with receipts or other records
indicating the amount, a description of the purchased items or service or other reason for
deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
Gross receipts from the operation of each single raffle shall be segregated from other revenues of
the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same
non-profit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records
of each separate raffle. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
from the operation of each raffle shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of
the organization.
Each organization licensed to conduct a raffle under the provisions of this subchapter shall report
to its membership, and to the Village of Burr Ridge, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
from each raffle and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this Section.
Records required by this Section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall
make available their records relating to operation of any raffle for public inspection and inspection
by the Village at reasonable times and places.
Sec. 48.11 Scope of Regulations
Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or operating of
any gambling scheme, enterprise activity or device other than raffles as provided for in this
subchapter.
Sec. 48.12 Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any provision of this subchapter
shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) and no more than Seven Hundred
and Fifty Dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 50
REFUSE CONTROL
(Sections renumbered by A-240-01-17)
Sec. 50.01 Definitions
Sec. 50.02 Excusive Disposal contract for Residences
Sec. 50.03 Disposal from Other Dwellings and Buildings
Sec. 50.04 Uncovered Garbage
Sec. 50.05 Wind-blown refuse
Sec. 50.06 Deposits on streets
Sec. 50.07 Dumping prohibited
Sec. 50.08 Disposal
Sec. 50.09 Incineration
Sec. 50.10 Collection starting and ending times
Sec. 50.11 Placement or Collection - Time Limit
Sec. 50.12 License Required
Sec. 50.13 License Applications
Sec. 50.14 License Fees
Sec. 50.15 License Term
Sec. 50.16 Insurance Required
Sec. 50.17 Denial, Suspension and Revocation Procedure; Hearing
Sec. 50.18 Recyclable Material Program
Sec. 50.19 Recyclable Material Program - Multi-Family Developments
Sec. 50.20 Recycling Bins
Sec. 50.21 Fee Required
Sec. 50.22 Non-Licensed Scavenging Prohibited
Sec. 50.23 Scavenger's Responsibilities
Sec. 50.24 Record Keeping
Sec. 50.25 Landscape Waste Program
Sec. 50.26 No Dumping
Sec. 50.27 Penalties
Last revision Ordinance A-240-01-17, 5-8-17
50-1
Sec. 50.01. Definitions (Amended A-240-01-17)
Residential Unit:
Single family attached or detached dwelling where refuse, recycling and landscape waste is collected
adjacent to the street at the curb or alley pavement and within (5 or 10 feet) thereof.
Bulk Items:
Shall mean and refer to any items that are too large to fit into an approved refuse container, but can be
handled through the conventional method of collection. Examples include sofas, tables, chairs,
dressers, bookcases, mattresses and box springs, and other large household furniture or household
appliances that do not contain CFC or HCFC refrigerant gasses or PCB-containing capacitors,
mercury switches or other hazardous components, i.e., vacuum cleaners, mixers, lamps, food
processors, etc. Bulk items shall not include appliances, vehicle tires, car batteries, electrical waste or
large vehicle parts.
Kraft Paper Bag:
Shall mean and refer to a special biodegradable paper bag not to exceed thirty-five (35) gallons in size
and weighing less than fifty (50) pounds, which will shred and degrade quickly in the composting
process.
Landscape Waste:
Shall mean and refer to grass clippings, leaves, branches and brush, other yard and garden
trimmings, vines, garden plants and flowers, weeds and other similar organic waste materials
accumulated as a result of the cultivation and maintenance of lawns, shrubbery, vines, trees and
gardens. Brush and branches shall not exceed four (4) feet in length and three (3) inches in diameter.
Recycling/Recycling Material:
Shall mean and refer to those materials specified in this Contract, which are to be collected for
recycling or reuse and which are generated by residential units.
Refuse:
Shall mean and refer to all garbage, rubbish, trash, and household and kitchen waste, including food
and food residues, as defined by Section 3.535 of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS
5/3.535), including waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food;
waste from the handling, storage and sale of produce; combustible trash, including, but not limited to,
paper cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, bedding; non-combustible trash, including, but not
limited to, discarded toys, discarded clothing, metals, tin cans, dirt, small quantities of rocks and pieces
of concrete, glass, crockery and other mineral wastes.
Household refuse shall not include waste from any manufacturing process, construction materials,
broken concrete, lumber, large rocks and other similar or unacceptable materials. The term “refuse”
shall not be deemed to include recyclable material or landscape waste and shall not include any items
declared by the landfills to be exempt materials, including, but not limited to, hazardous or medical
waste materials, tires, batteries, or excessive amounts of brick, concrete, asphalt, stone, dirt and/or
sod.
White Goods:
Shall mean and refer to any domestic and/or commercial large appliance that contains CFC or HCFC
refrigerant gasses or PCB-containing capacitors, mercury switches or other hazardous components.
Examples include, but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, ranges (both electric and
gas), humidifiers, dehumidifiers, water heaters, furnaces and other similar large appliances.
50-2
Construction Debris:
Waste resulting from the construction, building renovation or repair projects, including but not limited to
drywall, lumber, windows, roofing materials, large pieces of concrete, lead or PVC pipe, etc.
Ashes
Residue from fires used for commercial cooking and for heating buildings, and from commercial
processing.
Multi Family Developments
Residential units containing three (3) or more dwelling units where residents do not place their refuse
at the curb for pick-up and provide communal refuse collection.
Sec. 50.02. Exclusive Disposal Contract for Residences:
The Village shall enter into an exclusive contract with a solid waste contractor licensed by the Village
for the Collection and disposal of solid waste from all single-family and two-family residential premises
in the Village. All such residential premises shall be served by, and exclusively by, the licensed Village
contractor, and all such residential premises are prohibited from hiring any private scavenger service in
lieu of the licensed Village contractor without prior approval by the Village Board. (Added A-240-01-17)
Sec. 50.03. Disposal from Other Dwellings and Buildings:
The owners or persons in charge of commercial and industrial buildings and of multiple-family
developments of three (3) or more units, including without limitation condominiums in buildings
containing three (3) or more units, shall properly collect, remove, and dispose of their own solid waste
at their own expense, using qualified scavenger contractors licensed by the Village. (Added A-240-01-
17)
Sec. 50.04. Uncovered garbage
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the Village any garbage, refuse, ashes, or
other material subject to decay, other than leaves or grass, except in an appropriate covered or
otherwise sealed container. Recyclable materials must be placed in bins that are filled in such a way
as to prevent the possibility of their contents becoming wind-blown. (A-240-1-02)
Sec. 50.05. Wind-blown refuse
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes, or trash or any material
anywhere in the Village except in an appropriate covered or otherwise sealed container so that it
cannot be blown away by the wind. Recyclable materials must be placed in bins that are filled in such
a way as to prevent possibility of their contents becoming wind-blown. (A-240-1-02)
Sec. 50.06. Deposits on streets
It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any garbage, refuse, ashes or
recyclable materials on any public street or alley in the Village; provided, that this section shall not be
construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse, ashes or recyclable materials in an appropriate
container preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided herein
and at the times set forth in Section 50.12 herein. (Amended A-240-01-17)
Sec. 50.07. Dumping prohibited
50-3
It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse, ashes or recyclable materials on any
premises in the Village. (A-240-5-90)
Sec. 50.08. Disposal
Except as otherwise permitted under this Ordinance, it shall be unlawful to dispose of any garbage,
refuse, ashes or recyclable materials anywhere in the Village except by placing the same in
appropriate containers for collection by the Village’s approved scavenger contractors.(Amended A-
240-01-17)
Sec. 50.09 Incineration
It shall be unlawful for any person to incinerate any solid waste, ashes, or landscape waste anywhere I
the Village. (Added A-240-01-17)
Sec. 50.10. Collection starting and ending times
It shall be unlawful for anyone, including but not limited to garbage disposal contractors or private
scavenger services, to collect garbage, refuse, ashes or recyclable materials in the Village other than
during the following hours: (A-240-5-90)
Territories in the Village except those zoned industrial:
7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.
Territories in the Village zoned non-residential:
6:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. (A-240-1-02)
Sec. 50.11. Placement or Collection - Time Limit
It shall be unlawful to deposit or place any garbage, refuse, ashes, or recyclable materials for
collection at curbside or elsewhere in the Village more than 24 hours in advance of the time when such
collection is scheduled with a garbage disposal or private scavenger service. All refuse and landscape
waste recycling containers and recycling bins must be removed from curbside within 24 hours after
collection. Other than the 24 hours before and after scheduled collection, all such containers and bins
for residential properties must be stored adjacent to the side or rear wall of the residence or inside a
garage or other building. All such containers for non-residential properties shall be stored as required
by the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance. (A-240-01-09)
Sec. 50.12. License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the scavenger business or in the collection or disposal
of garbage, refuse or any other animal waste, recyclable material or landscape waste, without first
having obtained a license therefore (hereinafter collectively referred to as a scavenger or scavenger
business). (A-240-2-90)
Sec. 50.13. License Applications
Applications for a license shall be made to the Village Clerk upon such forms and supplying such
information as the Village Clerk may from time to time reasonably require for applications. The Village
Clerk shall refer all applications for scavenger licenses to the Village Administrator, and no license
shall be issued except upon the order of the Village Administrator. The Administrator may refuse to
grant a license upon determination that there exists no need for the granting of such license or that the
50-4
granting of such license would not tend to further the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Village. (A-240-4-90)
Sec. 50.14. License Fees
The initial fee for a license to engage in the business of being a scavenger shall be One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00). Thereafter, the annual fee for a license to engage in the business of being a
scavenger shall be Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). (A-240-1-90)
Sec. 50.15. License Term
Each license granted hereunder shall be an annual license, based on the Village's fiscal year, the term
of which shall commence on May 1 of any given year and continue until April 30 of the following year.
The annual license fee required hereunder shall be paid in full with no pro-ration or abatement based
on the date of any application for a scavenger license. (A-240-3-90)
Sec. 50.16. Insurance Required
Any scavenger licensed under this Chapter shall provide the Village Clerk with evidence that the
scavenger has currently in force adequate worker's compensation insurance and a policy of general
liability insurance with such limits and coverages as the Village may, from time to time, require. Each
scavenger licensed hereunder shall indemnify and hold the Village, its officers, employees, agents,
departments and agencies harmless from and against claims for damages arising by reason of any
contract or the performance or non-performance of the scavenger service hereunder or by reason of
any act or omission of such scavenger. The Village Clerk shall require any scavenger licensed
hereunder to produce a certificate of insurance indicating the insurance required hereunder shall be in
force during the term of the license, said certificate to further reflect that the Village, its officers,
employees, agents, departments and agencies shall be additional named insured parties thereunder
and that such insurance cannot be non-renewed or terminated without at least thirty (30) days
advance written notice to the Village. (A-240-1-90)
Sec. 50.17. Denial, Suspension and Revocation Procedure; Hearing
Any application for a Scavenger Business License may be denied or an existing Scavenger Business
License may be suspended or revoked in accordance with this Section for the violation by the
applicant or licensee of any ordinance provision relating, directly or indirectly, to the Scavenger
Business License, the subject of the Scavenger Business License or the premises occupied. The
denial, suspension or revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed and shall be in accordance
with the procedures set forth below. However, in any situation where the public health, safety, morals
or welfare is immediately threatened by the continued operation of the scavenger business, the Village
Administrator shall be and is hereby authorized to order the immediate cessation of business and/or
the closing of the premises, and the immediate suspension of any Scavenger Business License for a
period not to exceed 21 days pending the hearing required below. If the Village Administrator finds
any cause listed in (E) below, he shall recommend to the Trustees the denial, suspension or
revocation of the Scavenger Business License pending the hearing required below.
(A) Notice of Denial, Suspension or Revocation
Within three days after the Village Administrator has denied a Scavenger Business License,
he shall notify the applicant, by mail, of the action taken. Such notice is deemed received by
the applicant or licensee two (2) days after mailing. If the applicant desires a hearing on the
denial, he must then notify the Village Administrator by certified or registered mail, return
50-5
receipt requested, within seven (7) days of the mailing of the original notice sent by the
Village Administrator.
Whenever the Village Administrator receives a request for or initiates the suspension or
revocation of a Scavenger Business License, he/she shall notify the licensee, by mail. Such
notice shall be deemed received by the applicant or licensee two (2) days after mailing.
Such notice shall indicate the alleged basis for suspension and/or revocation and the date,
time and place where the Village Administrator will hold a hearing thereon. The
Administrator will hear the request for suspension or revocation and render a
recommendation to the Trustees at their next meeting.
(B) Hearing
Within ten (10) days after the Village Administrator has received a proper request for a
hearing on the denial of a Scavenger Business License, he/she shall call a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether or not the Scavenger Business License should be denied.
Within ten (10) days after the Village Administrator receives a request for the suspension
and/or revocation of a Scavenger Business License, he/she shall call a hearing on such
suspension and/or revocation. Any such hearing shall be started no earlier than five (5)
days, nor later than fourteen (14) days, after the call has been made.
(C) Notice of Hearing
Notice of the hearing for denial, suspension or revocation of a Scavenger Business License
shall be given to the applicant, licensee or permittee, in writing, setting forth specifically the
grounds therefor and the time, date and place of the hearing pursuant to (A) above. The
notice shall be sent to the applicant or licensee at his last known address or at the address
indicated on the latest application for a Scavenger Business License.
(D) Hearing Procedures
At the hearing, the Village Attorney shall present the complaint and evidence and shall
represent the Village. The applicant or licensee shall be permitted counsel and shall have
the right to submit evidence and cross-examine witnesses. The Village Administrator shall
evaluate the evidence and present his recommendation to the Trustees at the next meeting
of the Village Board. The Board of Trustees and the President shall take final action on the
Village Administrator's recommendation.
(E) Causes for Denial, Suspension or Revocation
Scavenger Business Licenses applied for or issued under the ordinances of the Village,
unless otherwise provided, may be denied, suspended or revoked (as the case may be) for
any of the following causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the petition for the
Scavenger Business License;
2. Any violation by the Scavenger Business License holder of ordinance provisions
relating directly or indirectly to the Scavenger Business License;
3. Conviction of the Scavenger Business Licensee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
50-6
4. Failure of the Scavenger Business Licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to
the Village;
5. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling by the Village, or any interference
with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the performance of his
or her duties in making such inspection;
6. Denial, suspension or revocation by any other municipality of a comparable
license for comparable or similar reasons as stated above.
(F) If an application for a Scavenger Business License has been denied, or a license has been
revoked, the applicant or holder may not seek another Scavenger Business License from
the Village earlier than 12 months after the final denial or revocation.
(G) Suspension
A Scavenger Business License that has been suspended may be reinstated by the Village
upon proper request by the licensee, if the terms and conditions established by the Trustees
for such reinstatement are met. Upon request to the Village by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, by the applicant or licensee, a meeting with the Village
Administrator will be held within ten (10) days to consider the request of the applicant or
licensee. The Village Attorney may present information against or in support of such
request at the hearing. The Village Administrator will present his recommendation to the
Trustees at the next meeting of the Village Board. The Board of Trustees and the President
shall take final action on the Village Administrator's recommendation. Such meeting need
not be held if the suspension was for a stated period of time, and the Village Administrator
determines that there is no need for such a meeting and no reason not to reinstate the
license. (A-240-1-90)
Sec. 50.18. Recyclable Material Program
The Village has determined that it is in the best interests of its residents and in furtherance of the
public health, welfare and safety to institute a program for the recycling of recyclable material within the
Recyclable Material Program Area.
Any person who is licensed to engage in the scavenger business, that is, in the collection of refuse,
must participate in the Recyclable Material Program. The Recyclable Material Program includes the
weekly collection of recyclable materials by the scavenger at the curbside, which is separate from the
normal collection of refuse but which must be collected on the same day as the normal collection of
refuse, using trucks and equipment specifically designated for the collection of recyclable materials.
No person shall purchase and/or collect recyclable material within the Recyclable Material Program
Area unless licensed by the Village to engage in the scavenger business.
From and after April 22, 1990, it shall be the duty of any scavenger providing the collection of refuse
from residences located within the Recyclable Material Program Area to charge and collect from each
resident the recycling program charge in the same manner that such scavenger otherwise charges
and collects its residential collection rates.
A scavenger shall terminate the collection of refuse from any residence within the Recyclable Material
Program Area which fails to pay promptly when due the recycling program charge. Such termination
shall be in the same manner as such scavenger would otherwise terminate service for failure to pay
50-7
the customary residential collection rates of such scavenger. (A-240-1-90)
Sec. 50.19. Recyclable Material Program - Multi-Family Developments
Any person who is licensed to engage in a scavenger business; that is, in the collection of refuse, must
participate in the Recyclable Material Program for Multi-Family Developments. The Recyclable
Material Program for Multi-Family Developments includes the weekly collection of recyclable materials
by the scavenger which is separate from the normal collection of refuse, using trucks and equipment
specifically designated for the collection of recyclable materials.
From and after August 1, 1991, it shall be the duty of any scavenger providing the collection of refuse
from multi-family developments to charge and collect from each development a reasonable monthly
recycling program charge per unit to be collected in the same manner as such scavenger otherwise
charges and collects its multi-family development collection rates. This charge may be reflected
separately on the monthly bill or may be included in the total monthly fee for scavenger services. (A-
240-1-02)
A scavenger shall terminate the collection of any refuse from any multi-family development which fails
to pay promptly when due the recycling program charge. Such termination shall be in the same
manner as such scavenger would otherwise terminate service for failure to pay the customary multifamily
development collection rates of such scavenger. (A-240-1-91)
Sec. 50.20. Recycling Bins
It shall be the responsibility of the scavenger to supply, at their sole cost and expense, one recycling
bin to each and every customer within the recyclable material program area. The scavenger may
charge the customer for additional bins. (Amended A-240-01-17)
Sec. 50.21. Fee Required
Scavengers licensed under this Chapter shall charge each residential customer within the Recyclable
Material Program Area a reasonable monthly recycling program charge regardless of whether such
residence actively participates in the recycling program. This charge is in addition to the residential
collection rates that a scavenger may charge for his services and is permitted only to allow the
scavenger to defer the cost of maintaining a recycling program. This charge may be reflected
separately on each customer’s monthly bill or may be included in the total monthly fee for scavenger
services. (A-240-1-02)
Sec. 50.22. Non-Licensed Scavenging Prohibited
From time of placement of recyclables at the curb in recycling containers for collection in accordance
with the Village's recycling program, items shall remain the property of the householder until such time
as they are collected by a licensed scavenger hereunder. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for
any person unauthorized by the Village to collect or cause to be collected any such items. Any and
each such collection in violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided. (A-240-4-91)
Sec. 50.23. Scavenger's Responsibilities
The scavenger shall be responsible for the proper handling of all recyclable materials upon pickup
from residents and shall be responsible for the sale of such recyclable materials. At no time shall the
scavenger dispose of recyclable materials in a landfill without the prior written approval of the Village
50-8
Administrator. (A-240-1-91)
Sec. 50.24. Record Keeping
An accounting of the volume of recyclable materials collected and sold shall be maintained by the
scavenger and reported to the Village on a monthly, quarterly and annual basis. In addition to the
amount of recyclable waste collected, said monthly, quarterly and annual reports shall also include
information as to resident participation rates and information as to the price received for the recyclable
materials. (A-240-1-91)
Sec. 50.25. Landscape Waste Program
The Village has determined that it is in the best interest of its residents and in the furtherance of state
law and the public health, welfare and safety to institute a program for the collection and disposal of
landscape waste within the Village. The Landscape Waste Program includes the weekly collection of
landscape waste units by the scavenger at the curbside which is separate from the normal collection of
refuse but which must be collected on the same day as the normal collection of refuse, using trucks
and equipment specifically designated for the collection of landscape waste. No person shall collect
landscape waste within the Village unless licensed by the Village to engage in a scavenger business.
It shall be unlawful for any person: (1) to mix landscape waste that is intended for collection or
disposal at a landfill with any refuse; (2) to place for collection and pickup any landscape waste unless
it is packaged as a landscape waste unit; (3) to deposit or place any landscape waste collected by a
commercial company (i.e., lawn maintenance company or landscaping company) at curbside or
elsewhere In the Village. (Amended A-240-01-17)
A reasonable fee may be imposed by the scavenger for the collection of each landscape waste unit
within the Village. The payment of such user fees shall be evidenced by a landscape waste tag which
shall be affixed to each landscape waste unit placed for collection and pickup, unless the landscape
waste collection service is provided on a cost inclusive or subscription basis, in which case a
landscape waste tag is not required for the disposal of landscape waste. (A-240-1-02)
Any scavenger who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to license suspension or
revocation proceedings under Section 50.14 hereof. (A-240-1-91)
Sec. 50.26. No Dumping
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or place any refuse, recyclable material and/or
landscape waste upon real property owned by another without the consent of the owner or person in
possession of such real property, and otherwise in conformance with all applicable regulations set forth
in this chapter. (A-240-1-91)
Sec. 50.27. Penalties
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this ordinance or any regulation
promulgated pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), except that the maximum fine for failure to comply with Section
50.17 hereof shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense or three hundred
dollars ($300.00) for a second offense. (A-240-1-96)
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 55
SIGNS
Re-adopted by Ordinance 923
Article I. Purpose and Scope
Sec. 55.01. Purpose
Sec. 55.02. Definitions
Article II. Standards by Zoning District
Sec. 55.03. General Provisions
Sec. 55.04. Residence District Signs
Sec. 55.05. Transitional Districts Signs
Sec. 55.06. Business District Signs
Sec. 55.07. Manufacturing District Signs
Sec. 55.08 Office District Signs
Article III. Temporary, Exempt and Prohibited Signs
Sec. 55.09. Temporary Signs
Sec. 55.10. Exempt Signs
Sec. 55.11. Prohibited Signs
Article IV. Permits
Sec. 55.12. Permits Required
Sec. 55.13. Application for Permit
Sec. 55.14. Permit Fees
Sec. 55.15. Issuance of Permits
Sec. 55.16. Term of Permits
Sec. 55.17. Revocation of Permits
Article V. Construction and Maintenance
Sec. 55.18. Building Code
Sec. 55.19. Electrical Code
Sec. 55.20. Painting and/or Maintenance
Sec. 55.21. Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements
Sec. 55.22. Sign Labeling
Article VI. Unsafe or Unlawful Signs
Sec. 55.23. Removal of Unsafe or Unlawful Signs
Sec. 55.24. Immediate Peril - Removal Without Notice
Sec. 55.25. Sign No Longer Advertising Bona Fide Business - Removal
Article VII. General Provisions
Sec. 55.26. Interference with Traffic Devices
Sec. 55.27. Illinois Highway Advertising Control Act
Sec. 55.28. Obstruction to Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes
Sec. 55.29. Location - General
Sec. 55.30. Visibility - Ground Signs
Article VIII. Illumination Standards
Sec. 55.31. Internally Illuminated Signs
Sec. 55.32. Externally Illuminated Signs
Sec. 55.33. Sign Colors
Article IX. Non-Conforming Signs and Uses
Sec. 55.34. Signs in Compliance with Previous Regulations
Sec. 55.35. Removal of Prohibited Signs
Sec. 55.36. Signs Erected Without Permits
Sec. 55.37. Alteration or Relocation of Non-Conforming Signs
Sec. 55.38. Non-Conforming Uses
Article X. Variations
Sec. 55.39. Variations
Sec. 55.40. Variation Fee
Article XI. Conditional Signs
Sec. 55.41. Conditional Sign Approvals
Sec. 55.42. Conditional Sign Fee
Last Revision Ordinance A-923-02-19, 1-28-2019
55-1-1
Article I. Purpose and Scope
Sec. 55.01. Purpose
The sign regulations set forth in this Chapter are made in accordance with an overall plan and
program for the public safety, area development, preservation of property values, and the general
welfare of the Village of Burr Ridge. The intent is to safeguard the general welfare of the property
owner, to maintain the beauty and country atmosphere of the community while balancing this with the
growth and development of the area. In setting the standards, the following findings are made:
A. That a multiplicity of signs is distracting to motorists and a hazard to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
B. That a proliferation of off-premises commercial signs obscures the legitimate effort of local
business establishments to reasonably identify the location and nature of their businesses.
C. That it is a legitimate public purpose to limit signs in the Village to those reasonably
necessary to identify local businesses. Such limitations are established so as to:
1. Limit distraction to motorists and reduce the danger to other motorists and
pedestrians.
2. To preserve the beauty of the landscape and residential and commercial
architecture, one of the prime assets of the Village of Burr Ridge.
D. That signs should be:
1. Compatible with their surroundings.
2. Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain.
3. Legible in the circumstance in which they are seen.
E. Severability Clause
1. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause,
term, or word in this code is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity
or enforceability of the remaining portions of the code. (added by A-923-04-17)
F. Message Substitution Clause
1. A non-commercial message may be substituted for any commercial message
displayed on a sign, or the content of any non-commercial message displayed on a
sign may be changed to a different noncommercial message, without the need for any
approval, provided that the size of the sign is not altered. (added by A-923-04-17)
Sec. 55.02. Definitions
In the construction of this code, the definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied,
except when the context herein clearly indicates otherwise.
A. Address Sign: A sign that identifies the numerical and street address of a property or building
and does not contain text identifying the occupant of a property (other than the occupant of a
single-family residence), the use of the property or any other such advertisement.
55-1-2
B. Attention-getting-device: Any pennant, flag, valance, banner, propeller, spinner, streamer,
search light, balloon and similar device or ornamentation designed for purposes of promotion or
advertising or attracting attention.
C. Attraction Panels with changeable letters: Panels on which individual letters may be
temporarily affixed in order to advertise tenants, special sales, products, or other facts nonessential
to the identity of the basic business conducted on the premises.
D. Awning: An awning shall include any flexible structure, typically made from a canvas material,
attached to a building and intended to provide shelter over a walkway or building entrance.
E. Back-Lit Sign: An externally illuminated sign made of individual, opaque characters that is
illuminated by lighting located behind each individual character and wherein the light is not visible
except as a silhouette or halo around each individual character.
F. Blade Sign: A sign attached perpendicular to the front façade of a store for the primary purpose
of identifying the storefront from an adjacent sidewalk. (A-923-06-14)
G. Billboard: A single or double-faced ground sign including changeable copy signs, used for the
display of commercial information not associated with the conduct of a business or enterprise
located on the same premises of such sign. Also referred to as an off-premise advertising sign.
H. Building Frontage: The distance between side building lines (building width) measured at the
front building line.
I. Canopy: see Awning.
J. Construction Sign: A sign that identifies the architects, engineers, contractors, and other
individuals and firms involved with the construction of a building and announcing the character of
the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended. Construction signs may
include the name of future occupants but may not advertise specific products or services to be
provided.
K. Development Sign: A temporary sign that identifies the name of a subdivision, multi-family
building, or non-residential building, the address and telephone number of the owner or agent,
and the number, size, type, and price of lots and/or units. (amended by A-923-04-17)
L. Externally Illuminated Sign: A sign illuminated by a source of light which is cast upon or falls
upon the surface of the sign to illuminate by reflection only.
M. Flag: A sign bearing any non-commercial emblem, design or insignia, including but not limited to
countries, states, cities, or other civic institution, or other ideological perspective. (amended by A-
923-04-17)
N. Flashing Sign: Any illuminated sign which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color
effects by any means whatsoever.
O. Gasoline Pricing Sign: A sign that identifies the type and price of gasoline for sale on the
premises of a legally established gasoline sales station.
P. Ground Sign: A sign completely or principally self-supported by posts or other supports
independent of any building or other structure, anchored in or upon the ground and indicating
only the business name and address, the major enterprise of each tenant or the building name
or a combination of these.
55-1-3
Q. Internally Illuminated Sign: A sign, all or any part of the letter or design of which is made of
incandescent, neon or other types of lamps; or a sign with painted, flush or raised letters lighted
by an electric lamp or lamps attached thereto; or a sign having a border of incandescent or
fluorescent lamps thereto attached and reflecting light thereon; or a transparent glass sign
whether lighted by electricity or other illuminant.
R. Non-Commercial Sign: A sign that displays any form of speech that is non-commercial in
nature and intends to share an ideological viewpoint, perspective, or other non-commercial
belief. (amended by A-923-04-17)
S. Parcel Frontage: The distance between side lot lines (lot width) measured at the front lot line or
along the set back line, whichever is less.
T. Pennant: A long, narrow, relatively small flag, often triangular, used for signaling or
identification.
U. Portable Sign: Any sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground; a
sign designed to be moved from place to place. These signs include, but are not limited to, signs
attached to wood or metal frames designed to be self-supporting and moveable; paper,
cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around supporting poles. Also included are those signs
commonly trailer mounted, which are designed to be moved from place to place.
V. Portable Sidewalk Sign: A sign made of a rigid material (i.e. not a banner, placard or pennant),
not attached to the ground or a building, and easily carried and moved by one person. (A-923-
04-12)
W. Posterboard: Same as Billboard.
X. Projecting Sign: A sign supported by a building or other structure and which projects over any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way or public easement, or which projects more than twelve
inches from the face of any building, structure, or supporting wall.
Y. Real Estate Sign: A sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of all or a part of the premises on
which the sign is located.
Z. Roof Sign: A sign erected, constructed upon, supported, extending above, or maintained in
whole or in part upon, above, or over the roof of a building or structure.
AA. Shopping Center: A single parcel or building or multiple parcels and buildings developed and
used primarily for retail businesses that share access, parking and other common features.
BB. Sign: The term "Sign" shall mean and include every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof
sign, illuminated sign, projecting sign, temporary sign, marquee, awning, canopy, and street
clock, and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration,
insignia, or logo used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is
placed out of doors in view of the general public.
CC. Streamer: A long, narrow flag, banner or pennant.
DD. Subdivision Entryway Sign: A permanent ground or wall sign or other approved entryway
feature located at the principal roadway entrance or entrances to a particular subdivision
indicating only the name of such subdivision and identifying the subdivision as being within the
Village of Burr Ridge. Such signs serve identification, directional, and emergency vehicle
information purposes. (amended by A-923-04-17)
55-1-4
EE. Temporary Sign: Any sign constructed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or as otherwise defined and permitted in Sec. 55.09 hereof.
FF. Traffic Directional Sign: A sign that identifies and provides direction for the circulation of
traffic on or through private property. (amended by A-923-04-17)
GG. Wall Sign: A sign mounted or attached to the outside surface of a wall (including a solid
fence) or building in a plane parallel to that of the supporting wall and indicating only the
business name and address, the major enterprises of each tenant or the building name or a
combination of these.
HH. Window Sign: A sign painted on, attached or affixed to or placed against any window, or
hung within 4 feet behind the window, which is displayed for the purpose of attracting the
attention of the passerby to a sale, or to promotional items, or to other products or services or
any similar lighted sign hung beyond 4 feet from the window but visible through the window.
(Amended by A-923-03-06)
55-2-1
Article II. Standards by Zoning District
Sec. 55.03. General Provisions
A. Sign Regulations by Zoning District
The following sign standards by zoning district are intended to include every district in the
Village of Burr Ridge. The Zoning Ordinance and official zoning map define the districts
referred to herein. Only signs as described herein and as regulated by this Chapter or as
may be permitted by Section 55.09 - Temporary Signs and Section 55.10 – Exempt Signs
will be permitted in each particular district.
If any district is omitted from this Chapter, or if a new district is created after the enactment
of this code, no signs shall be permitted therein until this Chapter shall have been amended
to include provisions relating to such district.
B. Measurement of Sign Area: All signs shall be measured as per the following guidelines.
1. Area of Ground Signs and Box Signs: Ground signs and wall signs that are
contained in a box or other uni-body structure shall be measured by multiplying the
horizontal dimension by the vertical dimension. Only one plane of a two-sided ground
sign shall be measured for purposes of determining the area of the sign unless the
distance between the two sides exceeds 18 inches. Under no circumstances may the
third plane (the edge of the sign) contain sign text or characters without all faces of the
sign being counted toward the total sign area. In the case of a V-shaped sign structure
or a sign structure wherein the two planes are more than 18 inches apart, both planes
of the sign structure are included in the sign area.
Example 55.03.B.1: Area of Ground Sign
Area = X * Y
2. Measurement of Wall Signs with Individual Letters: Wall signs made from
individual letters (sometimes referred to as channel letters) shall be calculated by
measuring the area within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straightline
geometric figure consisting of right angles and that encloses the extreme limits of
the sign characters.
BURR RIDGE Y
X >18”
55-2-2
Example 55.03.B.2
Measurement of Wall Signs with Individual Letters
(Amended by A-923-04-17)
Sec. 55.04 Residence District Signs
This section shall apply to all districts designated by the Zoning Ordinance as a Residence District.
Residence Districts include the R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 Districts.
A. Permitted Signs: The following signs are permitted in all residential districts. Unless specifically
stated otherwise, a sign permit is not required for Permitted Signs in Residence Districts.
1. Temporary Signs as per Section 55.09, herein.
2. Exempt Signs as per Section 55.10, herein.
B. Conditional Signs: The following signs are subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees
upon review by the Plan Commission. Unless specifically stated otherwise, conditional signs
require issuance of a sign permit prior to construction.
1. Subdivision Entryway Sign(s): A maximum of one sign per entryway may be
allowed provided each sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and four feet
in height. The text of all subdivision entryway signs shall include the words “Burr
Ridge” as for example, “Oak Subdivision of Burr Ridge”. The lettering for “Burr
Ridge” may be in smaller font but must be legible. (amended by A-923-08-02)
2. Ground Sign(s): One sign may be allowed for each multi-family residential or nonresidential
lot or parcel provided it does not exceed 16 square feet in area, is
located 10 feet from all lot lines and does not exceed 8 feet in height.
3. Wall Sign(s): One sign may be allowed for each multi-family residential or nonresidential
lot or parcel provided it does not exceed 16 square feet in area
4. Temporary Signs; Any deviation from the standards for permitted temporary signs
as found in Section 55.09 herein may be subject to the procedures and standards
for Conditional Signs. (added by A-923-01-11)
Sec. 55.05 Transitional District Signs
This section shall apply to all districts designated by the Zoning Ordinance as Transitional Districts.
Transitional Districts include the T-1 and T-2 Districts.
55-2-3
A. Permitted Signs: The following signs are permitted in all Transitional Districts. Unless
specifically stated otherwise, a sign permit is not required for Permitted Signs in a
Transitional District.
1. Temporary Signs as per Section 55.09, herein.
2. Exempt Signs as per Section 55.10, herein.
B. Conditional Signs: The following signs are subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees upon review by the Plan Commission. Unless specifically stated otherwise, a
sign permit is required prior to erection of a Conditional Sign in a Transitional District.
1. Subdivision Entryway Sign(s): A maximum of one sign per entryway may be
allowed provided each sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and four feet
in height. The text of all subdivision entryway signs shall include the words “Burr
Ridge” as for example, “Oak Subdivision of Burr Ridge”. The lettering for “Burr
Ridge” may be in smaller font but must be legible. (amended by A-923-08-02)
2. Ground Sign(s): One sign may be allowed for each multi-family residential or nonresidential
lot or parcel provided it does not exceed 50 square feet in area, is
located 10 feet from all lot lines and does not exceed 8 feet in height.
(A-923-01-11)
3. Wall Sign(s): One sign may be allowed for each multi-family residential or nonresidential
lot or parcel provided it does not exceed 16 square feet in area.
4. Temporary Signs: Any deviation from the standards for permitted temporary
signs as found in Section 55.09 herein may be subject to the procedures and
standards for Conditional Signs. (A-923-01-11)
Sec. 55.06. Business District Signs
This section shall apply to all districts designated by the Zoning Ordinance as a Business District.
Business Districts include the B-1 and B-2 Districts.
A. Permitted Signs: The following signs are permitted in all business districts. Unless
specifically stated otherwise, permitted signs require issuance of a sign permit prior to
construction.
1. Ground Sign: One ground sign shall be permitted for each lot or parcel provided
the lot or parcel has at least 100 feet of frontage on a public street, that the height
of such sign does not exceed 8 feet, that the sign is located a minimum of 10 feet
from all property lines, and that the combined area of all ground signs and wall
signs shall not exceed 100 square feet.
2. Wall Sign: One wall sign per street frontage shall be permitted for each lot or
parcel provided that the combined area of all wall signs and ground signs shall
not exceed 100 square feet. Permitted wall signs shall be mounted no higher
than the height of the building wall or twenty feet (20') whichever is lower, and no
lower than five feet (5') above average surrounding grade.
3. Where the building frontage is on more than one street, the area of the signs
facing each street shall be computed on the basis of the building frontage for the
street they face, as provided above, but in no case shall the total sign area
exceed the maximum provided above.
55-2-4
4. Gasoline pricing signs shall be permitted for gasoline sales stations subject to the
following regulations:
a. Gasoline pricing signs shall not be independently free-standing, but
must be permanently attached below a pre-existing free-standing sign,
to a gasoline pump island canopy support or, to a building;
b. A maximum of four (4) sign faces, with a total area not to exceed forty
(40) square feet, shall be permitted, provided that no single sign face
shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
c. Such signs shall in no case exceed a height, to the top of the sign, of
eight feet (8') above ground level.
5. Window signs shall be permitted subject to the standards listed below. Window
signs do not require a sign permit.
a. The sum total of all window signs shall not exceed 40 percent of the
total area of the windows in which they are located.
b. Window signs shall not have any moving parts.
c. A series of windows that are separated by frames and supporting
material of less than six inches in width shall be considered as a single
window for the purpose of computation.
d. Window signs may include the use of neon lighting. Neon window
signs shall not exceed 16 square feet or 30 percent of the area of a
window whichever is less and shall be counted toward the total area
permitted for window signs. Calculation of the area of neon window
signs, for purposes of compliance with the maximum 40 percent area
as permitted herein, shall be based on the perimeter dimensions of
said neon lighting.
6. Temporary Signs as per Section 55.09, herein.
7. Exempt Signs as per Section 55.10, herein.
B. Conditional Signs: The following signs are subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees upon review by the Plan Commission. Unless specifically stated otherwise,
conditional signs require issuance of a sign permit prior to construction.
1. Shopping Center Wall Signs: One sign per tenant space within a shopping center
may be allowed subject to the following:
a. A comprehensive package of standards for wall signs shall be provided
that includes consistent materials, colors, lighting, and placement for all
wall signs within a shopping center. Upon approval of the
comprehensive sign package, all subsequent signs that comply with
the approved standards shall be considered permitted signs.
b. Each wall sign shall not exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of
the storefront or tenant space width with a minimum area allowed of 25
square feet and a maximum area allowed of 50 square feet with the
exception that allowable sign area for one to three designated anchor
55-2-5
tenants may be increased by transferring sign area to the anchor
tenant(s) from other tenants.
2. Shopping Center Ground Sign: One shopping center ground sign may be allowed
subject to the following:
a. Shopping center ground signs shall be consistent in design, materials,
and colors with the wall signs.
b. Shopping center ground signs shall be a maximum area of 100
square feet in area (to be calculated independent of the size of wall
signs).
c. Shopping center ground signs shall not exceed a maximum height of
8 feet except as allowed by paragraph e below.
d. Shopping center ground signs shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet
from all property lines except as required by paragraph e below;
e. The height of shopping center ground signs may be increased up to
12 feet provided that the sign is setback an additional 3 feet for each
1-foot increase in height. For example, a 9-foot-high sign would
require a 13-foot setback from all property lines, a 10-foot-high sign
would require a 16-foot setback.
3. Light Pole Banners: Banners affixed to light poles and announcing a federal,
state or local holiday, a business anniversary, or a similar event but not
advertising any specific products or services offered, may be allowed for a limited
time not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year. Light pole banners do not
require issuance of a sign permit.
4. Subdivision Entryway Sign(s): A maximum of one sign per entryway may be
allowed provided each sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and four feet
in height. The text of all subdivision entryway signs shall include the words “Burr
Ridge” as for example, “Oak Subdivision of Burr Ridge”. The lettering for “Burr
Ridge” may be in smaller font but must be legible. A subdivision entryway sign
shall not be allowed in conjunction with a shopping center sign. (A-923-08-02)
5. Signs with more than Three Colors: Signs otherwise prohibited by Section
55.11.Q herein may be allowed.
6. Wall Signs mounted more than 20 feet above grade: Wall signs that do not
exceed the height of the building wall but mounted more than 20 feet above the
surrounding grade and meeting all other standards herein, may be allowed.
(A-923-01-06)
7. Temporary Signs: Any deviation from the standards for permitted temporary
signs as found in Section 55.09 herein may be subject to the procedures and
standards for Conditional Signs. (A-923-01-11)
8. Portable Sidewalk Signs: (section added by A-923-04-12)
a. The sign structure shall not exceed 4 feet in height and 9 square feet
in area.
b. The sign copy shall not exceed 4.5 square feet in area.
55-2-6
c. One sign per storefront is permitted. Additional signs may be used
for shopping center event signs provided the total number of signs in
a shopping center does not exceed one per storefront
d. Storefront signs shall only be displayed during business hours and
shall be removed at any time the business is not open.
e. The sign shall not interfere with any pedestrian area or block
necessary sight lines for pedestrians or vehicles. Under no
circumstances shall a sign cause the sidewalk to be less than 4 feet
in usable width.
f. Sign shall be of sufficient weight or design to prevent its movement in
the wind.
g. Changeable copy on the sign shall be permitted provided the sign is
designed to accommodate changeable copy (for example, chalk
board signs). Changeable copy signs using individual plastic letters
are generally discouraged.
h. The sign structure shall be metal or wood. Plastic A-frame signs are
not permitted.
9. Blade Sign: One blade sign may be allowed per tenant storefront in a shopping
center. A blade sign does not require a permit but must comply with the
following: (added by A-923-06-14)
1. One blade sign may be allowed for each tenant storefront.
2. Formed plastic, injection molded plastic, and internally illuminated
panels are prohibited.
3. A minimum clearance of 7’-8” is required between the sidewalk and the
bottom of the sign.
4. The maximum allowed horizontal projection is 3’-3” from the
storefront.
5. The maximum allowed area is 6 square feet.
6. The maximum allowed depth of the sign panel shall be 6”
7. Blade signs shall not be illuminated.
Sec. 55.07. Manufacturing District Signs (section amended by A-923-02-19)
This section shall apply to all districts designated by the Zoning Ordinance as Manufacturing Districts.
Manufacturing Districts include the RA, LI, and GI Districts.
A. Permitted Signs: Unless specifically stated otherwise, a sign permit is required for all
Permitted Signs in Manufacturing Districts. The following signs shall be permitted in all
Manufacturing Districts:
1. For buildings of less than 100,000 square feet, each tenant is permitted one wall
sign, up to three wall signs, subject to the following conditions:
55-2-7
a. The gross square footage of each wall sign shall not exceed the linear
street frontage of the subject property divided by three. The permitted
gross surface area of each wall sign shall be a minimum of 50 square
feet but shall not exceed 75 square feet.
b. Tenants occupying at least 10,000 square feet in gross square footage
are permitted to erect one wall sign not to exceed 75 square feet in
gross surface area.
2. For buildings in excess of 100,000 square feet, each tenant shall be permitted
one wall sign, up to three tenants, subject to the following conditions:
a. The gross surface area of each wall sign shall not exceed 150 square
feet, up to three tenants.
b. Tenants occupying at least 10,000 square feet in gross square footage
are permitted to erect one wall sign not to exceed 150 square feet in
gross surface area.
3. For Manufacturing District properties that are contiguous to the I-55 right-of-way
including those properties contiguous to North Frontage Road and South
Frontage Road, the following sign are limitations shall apply:
a. For buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet and with a minimum lot
frontage of 150 feet, one wall sign shall be permitted per tenant not to
exceed 100 square feet in gross surface area plus one square foot for
each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area above 50,000 square feet
with a maximum sign area not to exceed 150 square feet, not to
exceed three wall signs.
b. Tenants occupying at least 10,000 square feet in gross square footage
shall be exempt from the tenant cap and are permitted to have one wall
sign not to exceed 150 square feet in gross surface area.
4. All Manufacturing District properties are permitted one ground sign, subject to the
following conditions:
a. The ground sign may not exceed 75 square feet in gross surface area,
including any monument base.
b. Height: The total height of any ground sign measured to the top of the
sign shall not exceed eight feet (8’) above the level of the street upon
which said sign face, or above the level of the ground at the base of the
sign if such ground level is above street level.
c. Additional Height and Setback: An additional one foot (1’) in height
above the eight foot (8’) height limitation, to a maximum of twelve feet
(12’) measured to the top of the sign, shall be permitted for every three
feet (3’) it is set back beyond the minimum feet (10’) setback.
5. One address sign containing only numbers indicating the building’s street number
and prefix shall be permitted per principal building, not to exceed 25 square feet.
6. Temporary Signs as per Section 55.09, herein.
55-2-8
7. Exempt Signs as per Section 55.10 herein.
B. Conditional Signs; The following signs are subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees upon review by the Plan Commission, unless specifically stated otherwise,
1. Wall and Ground Signs for Hotels, as permitted by Section IX.D.2(d) of the
Village of Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, exceeding the maximum area permitted
but not exceeding a combined area of 300 square feet may be allowed.
Consideration of conditional approval for additional sign area shall be based on a
positive relationship between the proposed sign area and the size of the property
and the size of the building on which the sign(s) are located.
2. Wall and Ground Signs exceeding the maximum number of signs allowed by one.
Consideration of conditional approval for an additional sign shall be based on a
positive relationship between the proposed sign area and the size of the property
and building on which the sign(s) are located.
3. Light Pole Banners: Banners affixed to light poles and announcing a federal,
state or local holiday, a business anniversary, or a similar event but not
advertising any specific products or services offered, may be allowed for a limited
time not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year.
4. Subdivision Entryway Signs: One sign per entryway may be allowed provided
that each entryway sign shall not exceed 50 square feet. Entryway signs shall be
located at the principal roadway entrance or entrances to a particular subdivision.
Such signs shall be at such locations specifically approved by the Board of
Trustees, and the design of which, including landscaping, shall be as specifically
approved by the Board of Trustees. Such signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height. The text of all subdivision entryway signs shall include the words “Burr
Ridge” as for example, “Oak Subdivision of Burr Ridge”. The lettering for “Burr
Ridge” may be in smaller font but must be legible.
5. Signs with more than Three Colors: Signs otherwise prohibited by Section 55.11.
Q herein may be allowed.
6. Temporary Signs: Any deviation from the standards for permitted temporary
signs as found in Section 55.0 herein may be subject to the procedures and
standards for Conditional Signs
Sec. 55.08. Office District Signs (section amended by A-923-02-19)
This section shall apply to all districts designated by the Zoning Ordinance as Office Districts. Office
Districts include the O-1 and O-2 Districts.
A. Permitted Signs: Unless specifically stated otherwise, a sign permit is required for all
Permitted Signs in Office Districts. The following signs shall be permitted in all Office
Districts
1. For buildings of less than 100,000 square feet, each tenant is permitted one wall
sign, up to three wall signs, subject to the following conditions:
a. The gross square footage of each wall sign shall not exceed the linear
street frontage of the subject property divided by three. The permitted
gross surface area of each wall sign shall be a minimum of 50 square
feet but shall not exceed 75 square feet.
55-2-9
b. Tenants occupying at least 10,000 square feet in gross square footage
are permitted to erect one wall sign not to exceed 75 square feet in
gross surface area.
2. For buildings in excess of 100,000 square feet, each tenant shall be permitted
one wall sign, up to three tenants, subject to the following conditions:
a. The gross surface area of each wall sign shall not exceed 250 square
feet, up to three tenants.
b. Tenant occupying at least 10,000 square feet in gross square footage
are permitted to erect one wall sign not to exceed 250 square feet in
gross surface area.
3. For Office District properties that are contiguous to the I-55 right-of-way including
those properties contiguous to North Frontage Road and South Frontage Road,
the following sign are limitations shall apply
a. For buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet and with a minimum lot
frontage of 150 feet, one wall sign shall be permitted per tenant not to
exceed 100 square feet in gross surface area plus one square foot for
each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area above 50,000 square feet
with a maximum sign area not to exceed 250 square feet, not to
exceed three wall signs.
b. Tenant occupying at least 10,000 square feet in gross square footage
shall be exempt from the tenant cap and are permitted to have one wall
sign not to exceed 150 square feet in gross surface area.
4. All Office District properties are permitted one ground sign, subject to the
following conditions:
a. The ground sign may not exceed 75 square feet in gross surface area,
including any monument base.
b. Height: The total height of any ground sign measured to the top of the
sign shall not exceed eight feet (8’) above the level of the street upon
which said sign faces, or above the level of the ground at the base of
the sign if such ground level is above street level.
c. Additional Height and Setback: An additional one foot (1’) in height
above the eight foot (8’) height limitation, to a maximum of twelve feet
(12’) measured to the top of the sign, shall be permitted for every three
feet (3’) it is set back beyond the minimum ten foot (10’) setback.
5. One address sign containing only numbers indicating the building’s street number
and prefix shall be permitted per principal building, not to exceed 25 square feet.
6. Temporary Signs as per Section 55.09, herein.
7. Exempt Signs as per Section 55.10, herein.
B. Conditional Signs; The following signs are subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees upon review by the Plan Commission, unless specifically stated otherwise,
55-2-10
1 Wall and Ground Signs for Hotels, as permitted by Section IX.D.2(d) of the
Village of Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, exceeding the maximum area permitted
but not exceeding a combined area of 300 square feet may be allowed.
Consideration of conditional approval for additional sign area shall be based on a
positive relationship between the proposed sign area and the size of the property
and the size of the building on which the sign(s) are located.
2. Wall and Ground Signs exceeding the maximum number of signs allowed by one.
Consideration of conditional approval for an additional sign shall be based on a
positive relationship between the proposed sign area and the size of the property
and building on which the sign(s) are located.
3. Light Pole Banners: Banners affixed to light poles and announcing a federal,
state or local holiday, a business anniversary, or a similar event but not
advertising any specific products or services offered, may be allowed for a limited
time not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year.
4. Subdivision Entryway Signs: One sign per entryway may be allowed provided
that each entryway sign shall not exceed 50 square feet. Entryway signs shall be
located at the principal roadway entrance or entrances to a particular subdivision.
Such signs shall be at such locations specifically approved by the Board of
Trustees, and the design of which, including landscaping, shall be as specifically
approved by the Board of Trustees. Such signs shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height. The text of all subdivision entryway signs shall include the words “Burr
Ridge” as for example, “Oak Subdivision of Burr Ridge”. The lettering for “Burr
Ridge” may be in smaller font but must be legible.
5. Signs with more than Three Colors: Signs otherwise prohibited by Section
55.11.Q herein, may be allowed.
6. Temporary Signs: Any deviation from the standards for permitted temporary
signs as found in Section 55.09 herein may be subject to the procedures and
standards for Conditional Signs.
55-3-1
Article III. Temporary, Exempt and Prohibited Signs
Sec. 55.09. Temporary Signs
The following signs shall be permitted anywhere within the Village and shall not require a permit. .
Temporary signs may only be erected on private property by or with the express consent of the
property owner. (amended by A-923-04-17)
A. Construction Work or Activity: Not more than two (2) signs regarding construction work
or activity on the property with a total combined surface area not to exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet and a maximum height, to the top of each sign, of eight (8) feet. Not more than
one (1) such sign, with an identical message to another, shall be permitted. The signs shall
be confined to the site of construction, may be erected after a complete building permit
application is submitted, and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the issuance of
an occupancy permit. (amended by A-923-04-17)
B. Property Sale, Lease, or Rental: Signs regarding the sale, lease, or rental of property, not
exceeding a total area of twelve (12) square feet and a maximum height, to the top of each
sign, of five (5) feet advertising the sale, rental or lease of all, or part, of the premises on
which the signs are displayed. One such sign is permitted for each lot or parcel and such
signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale is closed or the lease is signed.
(amended by A-923-04-17)
C. Non-Commercial: Non-commercial signs, as defined herein, not exceeding sixteen (16)
square feet in area for each sign. Not more than one (1) such sign, with an identical
message to another, shall be permitted. Maximum height, to the top of such signs, shall be
five (5) feet. These signs shall be confined within private property. Signs shall be removed
within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the event to which they pertain, if any, except
as otherwise authorized or required by state and federal law. In no case may a temporary
non-commercial sign be displayed for longer than one (1) year, except as otherwise
authorized by state or federal law. Temporary non-commercial signs that do not meet the
temporal requirements of this subsection shall require a permit. (amended by A-923-04-17)
D. Development of Property: Signs regarding property development not exceeding one
hundred (100) square feet in area. Maximum height to the top of such signs shall be twenty
(20) feet. One such sign shall be permitted for each thoroughfare or highway frontage of
the development. Such signs may be erected upon approval of a preliminary plat of
subdivision or upon submission of a building permit application and shall be removed within
seven (7) days after the last lot or unit is sold. (amended by A-923-04-17)
E. Right-of-Way: Signs may be placed within the public right-of-way under the following
conditions:
1. Signs shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height and a maximum of four (4)
feet per face.
2. Signs may be placed on Saturdays and Sundays only between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
3. That the written consent of the homeowner be obtained prior to installing signs in
the public right-of-way adjoining the front, side or rear of any residential property.
4. Signs must be free standing, not attached to any utility pole or structure nor any
traffic control sign and placed at least 3 feet from the curb or edge of pavement.
55-3-2
5. No sign shall be placed within any portion of a twenty-five (25) foot sight triangle
at the intersection of two streets. The sight triangle is determined by extending
the curb or edge of pavement lines to a point of intersection; then measuring
back along these extended curb or edge of pavement lines for a distance of
twenty-five (25) feet to two points. A line drawn connecting the above determined
points completes a triangle.
6. That only one sign be permitted within 150 feet of an intersection which relates to
the same topic and that the next closest sign be no closer than 150 feet.
Additionally, there shall be only one sign of the same topic placed in front of a
single lot.
7. No attention or attracting devices such as pennants, streamers, balloons,
inflatable shapes, banners, flashing lights or other illumination shall be attached
to a sign or placed in the public right-of-way.
8. Each sign must have attached an adhesive label or other means to identify the
name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the
placement and removal of each sign.
9. That a fine in the amount of $50.00 will be charged to the person whose name is
on the sign, if the sign is in violation of any of the above restrictions. If no names
are found on the sign, the party or entity identified on the sign will be assessed
the fine. Notice of each violation shall be in writing. Any person, firm or
corporation charged with said violation may be issued a citation or “P” ticket.
Violators issued such notices may request a hearing in the Circuit Court of
DuPage County within 10 days of the date of the original violation or may settle
and compromise the claim by paying to the Village the respective amounts set
forth in the following schedule and within the times set forth in the following
schedule: (Section 9 Amended by A-923-07-02)
1. Payment of $50.00 for each violation within 10 days of the date of the
original violation.
2. A FINAL NOTICE, which stipulates the date on which collection of the
$50.00 penalty shall be turned over to a collection agency approved by
the Village for collection will be issued after 10 days.
3. In the event that said payment is made after the FINAL NOTICE and
prior to the collection agency taking any action to collect the penalty,
$100.00 shall be accepted as settlement.
4. If the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim or
request a hearing in the Circuit Court of DuPage County, he/she must
request of the Chief of Police within 10 days of the date of the notice of
violation that an administrative hearing be held. Upon receipt of a
hearing request, the Chief of Police of the Village, or the designee of
the Chief of Police, shall conduct the hearing. The person requesting a
hearing shall be notified of the time, dale and place of the
administrative hearing. After the person accused of a violation has had
an opportunity to present his or her testimony, the Chief of Police or the
designee of the Chief of Police shall advise the person of his/her
findings. If the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of Police
determines that the violation notice was valid and that an ordinance
violation occurred, the $50.00 penalty shall be due and payable within
55-3-3
10 days. If the offender fails to pay the fine, the claim may be turned
over to a collection agency as set forth in paragraphs 2 and 3 above.
5. In the event that actions taken by the collection agency fail to result in
payment of the penalty due, a FINAL NOTICE, which stipulates the
date on which filing of a complaint with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of
DuPage County will be commenced, will be issued. Payment of any
fine and costs shall be in such amounts as may be determined and
established by the Court.
10. That signs which are removed will be kept by the Village for a period of no more
than three (3) weeks. In order to retrieve the signs, the fine must be paid within
the three-week period of time, otherwise they will be discarded.
11. Any noncomplying sign shall be removed.
C. Grand Opening Banners: One, temporary grand opening banner sign, advertising the
opening of a new business, may be erected subject to the following.
(Added by A-923-02-15)
1. The banner shall be professionally printed, shall not exceed 12 square feet in
area; and shall be securely attached to the wall of the building so as not to move
in the wind.
2. A grand opening banner may be used for a period of 14 consecutive days
anytime within 90 days after the issuance of a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy.
Sec. 55.10. Exempt Signs
The following types of signs are exempted from all provisions of this Chapter, except for construction,
maintenance and safety regulations, or except as otherwise provided for herein:
A. Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are situated or
from any public thoroughfare or right of way.
B. Official signs of any public or government agency.
C. Any sign of any official court or public office, notices thereof, or any flag, emblem or
insignia of a government entity.
D. Any sign which is located completely within an enclosed building, and which sign is not
visible from outside of the building.
E. Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary/memorial plaques or remembrances of
persons or events that are non-commercial in nature.
F. Any official traffic signs authorized by the Illinois Revised Statutes, the Illinois Vehicle Code
and/or the Village.
G. Temporary signs celebrating the occasion of traditionally accepted patriotic or religious
holidays as well as National and State holidays, or temporary signs of charitable, public,
religious, educational or fraternal institutions or organizations to advertise a special event
when such sign shall be displayed for not more than seven (7) days and shall not exceed
sixteen (16) square feet for each lot. Maximum height, to the top of such signs, shall be five
55-3-4
(5) feet. These signs shall be confined within private property and shall be removed within
seven (7) days after the date of the special event.
H. No trespassing or soliciting signs, warning signs (e.g. "Beware of Dog"), no parking, towing,
and other such signs regulating the use of property when such signs do not exceed two (2)
square feet in area, per each exposed face. (amended by A-923-04-17)
I. Changing of changeable letters of attraction panels, as permitted in Section 55.11.K, and
changing of copy in a display encasement or bulletin board, where no structural changes
are made.
J. Address signs and private (non-commercial) nameplate identification signs when such
signs do not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
K. Tablets, memorials and cornerstones naming a building or date of erection when built into
the walls of the building.
L. Private traffic direction signs directing traffic movement onto a premise or within a premise,
not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height for each sign.
Illumination of these signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations contained
in this Chapter.
M. Other non-commercial signs providing they meet the bulk regulations for signs in the zoning
district in which the lot or parcel to be improved with said sign is located, except as
hereinafter otherwise provided.
N. Vending/Dispending Machine Signage: Permanent, non-flashing signage on vending
machines, gasoline pumps, ice or milk containers, or other similar machines providing
information on the contents of such devices, the pricing of the contents contained within,
directional or instructional information as to use, and other similar information is allowed,
provided that it shall not exceed four (4) square feet in gross surface area for each exposed
face, nor exceed an aggregate gross surface area of eight (8) square feet. (amended by A-
923-04-17)
O. Signs located inside a building and more than four feet from a window.
P. Signs printed on awnings or canopies provided such signs identify only the name of the
occupant and address of the property on which the awning is located and that the lettering
is in a single row not to exceed 6 inches in height.
Q. Village-Owned Property: Signage on village-owned water tanks and towers, and banners
and other installations on Village-owned streetlight poles or fixtures or other Village
property, where approved by, and installed by, the Village, in furtherance of public
purposes. (amended by A-923-04-17)
Sec. 55.11. Prohibited Signs
The following signs are hereby expressly prohibited for erection, construction, repair, alteration or
relocation within the Village, except as otherwise hereinafter specifically provided:
A. Commercial Posterboards, except as otherwise provided for by law.
B. Commercial Billboards, except as otherwise provided for by law.
55-3-5
C. Roof Signs
D. Signs on fences except for approved Subdivision Entryway Signs
E. Projecting Signs
F. Signs in the shape of products sold
G. Pennants
H. Streamers
I. Signs on vehicles, boats, or trailers in place
J. Signs which move or have moving parts, which movement is caused either by the wind or
mechanically
K. Attraction panels with changeable letters (except when used by movie theaters, hotels or
gas stations)
L. Signs using reflective paints or tape
M. Signs with lights between opaque letters and an opaque background
N. Neon Signs
O. Flashing Signs
P. Signs with more than three colors
Q. Commercial Signs not advertising bona fide businesses conducted, or a product sold or
service provided on the same premises where the sign is to be located.
R. Portable Signs; including but not limited to portable signs carried by a person for the
purpose of advertising a retail business or commercial sales event. (A-923-01-11)
S. Signs hung across any street, alley, or public right-of-way, except as otherwise permitted
herein.
T. Signs which contain statement, words, pictures or other depictions of an obscene, indecent
or immoral character and which offend public morals or decency.
U. Ground and wall signs advertising or displaying interest rates or the price of merchandise,
commodities, goods or services for sale or lease except as may otherwise be specifically
allowed by other provisions of this Ordinance.
V. Internally illuminated signs with a transparent or translucent background that transmits any
significant amount of light.
W. Miscellaneous advertising devices, other than signs which conform to the provisions of this
Chapter.
X. Signs in conflict with traffic signals, vehicular or pedestrian travel, or which impede access
to fire hydrants and fire lanes and exits, and other signs which impede or impair the public
health, safety and welfare.
55-3-6
Y. Signs painted on the walls or windows of any building, except as hereinafter permitted.
Z. Attention-getting devices.
AA. Signs on microwave, radio, transmission or receiving towers and satellite dishes.
BB. Exposed LED (light emitting diode) (Added by A-923-06-07)
CC. Ground Signs using Stucco or EIFS (Added by A-923-01-11)
55-4-1
Article IV. Permits
Sec. 55.12. Permits Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, change any lettering or graphics on or
relocate any sign, except as otherwise permitted within the Village without first obtaining a permit from
the Building Commissioner and paying the fee required, except as otherwise provided herein.
Sec. 55.13. Application for Permit.
Application for permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Building Commissioner and shall
include the following information.
A. Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
B. Location of the building, structure or parcel of property to which or upon which the sign is to
be attached or erected.
C. Position of sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures.
D. Three copies of plans and specifications showing method of construction, location, support,
illumination and the lighting intensity measured in terms of foot candles.
E. Sketch showing sign faces, exposed surfaces and proposed message thereof, accurately
represented in scale as to size, proportion and color.
F. Name of persons, firm, corporation or association erecting the sign.
G. Written consent of the owners of the building, structure or land on or to which the sign is to
be erected.
H. Such other information as the Building Commissioner shall require to show full compliance
with this and all other laws and ordinances of the Village.
Sec. 55.14. Permit Fee.
Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $75.00 for
examination of plans. Every applicant, before being granted a permit, shall pay a permit fee of $1.25
per square foot, with a minimum fee of $75.00.
Sec. 55.15. Issuance of Permits
It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner, who shall be the enforcing officer, upon the filing of
an application for a permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises
upon which it is proposed to erect, construct, alter or relocate the sign or other advertising structure
and issue a permit if all requirements of this Chapter are satisfied.
Sec. 55.16. Term of Permits
If work authorized under the permit has not been completed within six (6) months after the date of
issuance, the said permit shall become null and void.
Sec. 55.17. Revocation of Permits
The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit upon failure of
the holder thereof to comply with any provision of this Chapter.
55-5-1
Article V. Construction and Maintenance
Sec. 55.18. Building Code
All signs shall be constructed of materials approved by the Village and shall comply with the
requirements of the Village Building Codes and any amendments thereto as adopted by the Village
from time to time.
Sec. 55.19. Electrical Code
All signs in which any electrical wiring and/or connections are to be used shall comply with the Village
Electrical Code and any amendments thereto as adopted by the Village from time to time.
Sec. 55.20. Painting and/or Maintenance
The owner of any sign shall paint and otherwise maintain all parts and supports thereof as necessary
to maintain the sign in a clean and attractive condition comparable to its original condition and to
prevent rusting, rotting or deterioration.
Sec. 55.21. Wind Pressure & Dead Load Requirements
All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty
pounds per square foot and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the Building
Code and any amendments thereto or other applicable ordinances of the Village. Any existing sign
not so constructed shall be considered as an immediate peril to persons and property. (See section
regarding removal of unsafe or unlawful signs.)
Sec. 55.22. Sign Labeling
Every sign hereafter erected shall have placed in a conspicuous place thereon, in legible letters, the
date of erection, the name of the permittee and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in
connection therewith, such information to be contained in a single area occupying not more than ten
(10) square inches and located in such a way as to be readable from ground level.
55-6-1
Article VI. Unsafe or Unlawful Signs
Sec. 55.23. Removal of Unsafe or Unlawful Signs
If the Building Commissioner shall find that any sign is unsafe, insecure or a menace to the public, or
has been constructed, erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, or has not
been completed within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the permit for its construction or
erection, he shall give written notice of the violation to the owner or lessee thereof stating that the
Village shall initiate such legal proceedings as may be required to compel the removal of said sign
and the recovery of any costs incurred, including any legal costs, in connection therewith if the owner
or lessee fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten
days after receipt of such notice. If the owner's or lessee's address cannot be located, the notice may
be sent to the person last paying the real estate taxes on the premises. Receipt of such notice shall
be conclusively presumed from proof of mailing such notice as provided above. Service in any other
manner where there is actual receipt of notice also shall be satisfactory service for the purposes of
this Section. Such owner or lessee shall be entitled to a hearing before the Village Administrator upon
filing of a written request with the Village Clerk for such a hearing within 48 hours after receipt of such
notice, which request shall state the reasons why such sign should not be removed. Such hearing will
be held within 48 hours after receipt of such request for a hearing, if possible, but in any event shall be
held prior to the initiation of any proceedings as provided above.
Sec. 55.24. Immediate Peril -- Removal Without Notice
The Building Commissioner may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate
peril to persons or property to be immediately removed or repaired if, after notice, either verbal or
written, the owner or lessee fails to take corrective action or if the owner or lessee cannot be located
in sufficient time to remedy the immediate peril. In addition to the penalty provisions in this Code, the
Building Commissioner or the Village may also file a complaint for injunction or any other appropriate
remedy, including the recovery of any costs incurred therewith, including legal fees.
Sec. 55.25. Sign No Longer Advertising Bona Fide Business -- Removal
Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the
premises where said sign is located, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person
having the beneficial use of the building or structure or property upon which such sign may be found,
or application shall be made for a permit to change the face of the sign to advertise a bona fide
business conducted or a product sold on said premises, within 30 days after the business conducted
or product sold ceases to exist on the premises. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the
time specified in such notice, the Village shall initiate such legal proceedings as may be required to
compel the removal of said sign(s) and the recovery of any cost incurred in connection therewith,
including legal fees.
55-7-1
Article VII. General Provisions
Sec. 55.26. Interference with Traffic Devices
In order to obtain and secure traffic safety, no sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner
as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any traffic sign, signal or
device, as determined by the Building Commissioner. Accordingly, no sign, marquee, canopy or
awning shall make use of the words, "Stop", "Go", "Look", "Slow", "Danger", or a similar word, phrase,
symbol or character or employ any red, yellow, orange, green or other colored lamp in such a manner
as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
Sec. 55.27. Illinois Highway Advertising Control Act
No sign permitted under this Chapter shall be allowed or maintained if the sign shall in any way violate
the Illinois Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971, as amended. No sign which shall be allowed
under the Illinois Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971, as amended, shall exceed the size,
location and height standards as set forth in Article II of this Chapter 55. (Amended by A-499-1-88)
Sec. 55.28. Obstruction to Doors, Windows, or Fire Escapes
No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free access to or egress from, any
door, window, fire escape or any other way required by the Building Code.
Sec. 55.29. Location - General
No sign shall be attached to a utility pole, a tree, a standpipe, gutter, drain or fire escape, nor shall any
sign be erected so as to impair access to a roof.
Sec. 55.30. Visibility - Ground Signs
Ground signs greater than five feet in height shall have an open space not less than five feet between
the base line of the sign and the ground level if such sign impedes visibility of traffic or pedestrians.
Ground signs five feet and lower in height shall have an open space of not less than two feet,
between the base line of the sign and the ground level, provided no such open space shall be
required for signs five feet in height or lower that do not impede a motorist's visibility of traffic and
pedestrians. No ground sign shall be nearer than five feet to any other sign, building or structure.
55-8-1
Article VIII. Illumination and Color Standards
Sec. 55.31. Internally Illuminated Signs
Internally illuminated signs shall be allowed subject to the type and manner of illumination being
specifically restricted by the following:
A. In no case shall the method of illumination be visible to view.
B. In no case shall the lighting intensity exceed the limit of 70 foot candles measured with a
standard light meter perpendicular to the face of the sign at a distance equal to the
narrowest dimension of the sign, whether it be the height or the width.
C. In no case shall the area of the sign exceed 75 square feet.
(section amended by A-923-02-05)
Sec. 55.32. Externally Illuminated Signs
Externally illuminated signs shall be allowed subject to the type and manner of illumination being
specifically restricted by the following:
A. Lighting shall be uniformly distributed over the area of the sign or portion thereof and not
extend beyond the edges of the sign except that lighting for back-lit signs may extend
beyond the edges of the sign text but not beyond the edges of the sign structure or building
wall upon which the sign is located.
B. The lighting shall not shine into dwellings or create a traffic hazard.
C. The light reflectance when measured perpendicular one foot from the surface of the sign
shall not exceed 50 foot candles at its brightest area when measured with a standard light
meter.
D. Goose neck reflectors and lights shall not be permitted.
E. Illumination shall be what is known as white and not colored light and shall not be blinking,
fluctuating or moving.
F. Light rays shall shine only upon the sign or upon the property within the premises and shall
not spill over the property lines in any direction.
Sec. 55.33. Sign Colors
Signs shall not include more than three colors except signs containing more than three colors in a
Business, Manufacturing, or Office District may be allowed as per Section 55.50 herein.
55-9-1
Article IX. Non-Conforming Signs and Uses
Sec. 55.34. Signs in Compliance with Previous Regulations
Signs existing at the time of the enactment of this Chapter and not conforming to its provisions but
which were constructed in compliance with previous regulations shall be regarded as non-conforming
signs which may be continued for a period of five (5) years from the date of their construction or three
(3) years from the date of the enactment of this Chapter, whichever is longer, if properly repaired and
maintained as provided herein and continue to be in conformance with other ordinances of this
municipality. At the end of this period they shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having
beneficial use of the structure or land on which the signs are located.
Sec. 55.35. Removal of Prohibited Signs
Any sign existing in violation of Section 55.11 (Prohibited Signs) of this Chapter shall be removed, or
altered or repaired in such a manner to bring said sign into conformance with the provisions of this
Chapter within six (6) months after the date of the adoption of this Chapter.
Sec. 55.36. Signs Erected Without Permits
Any sign existing at of the time of the enactment of this Chapter for which no sign permit has ever
been given, shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the time of enactment of this Chapter unless
such sign fully complies with the provisions of this Chapter or is altered so as to so fully comply within
said thirty (30) day period, and a sign permit is applied for and issued.
Sec. 55.37. Alteration or Relocation of Non-Conforming Signs
Non-conforming signs which are structurally altered, relocated or replaced shall comply immediately
with all provisions of this Code.
Sec. 55.38. Non-Conforming Uses
Any sign to be constructed on any building or parcel of land, the use of which does not conform to
the Zoning Ordinance provisions for the district in which such building or land is located shall,
nevertheless, comply with all provisions of this Chapter for the district in which it is located.
55-10-1
Article X. Variations
Sec. 55.39. Variations
Variations from the requirements of this Chapter may be requested by the filing of a written petition in
the form required by the Village. Such written petition shall be filed with the Director of Community
Development who shall in turn refer the variation request to the Plan Commission for its review and
recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees. The Plan Commission shall file its written
recommendation, including any applicable findings of fact, with the Village Board after considering the
petition. Upon receipt of the recommendation and findings of fact of the Plan Commission, the Village
Board of Trustees is empowered to permit variations from the requirements of this Chapter under the
following circumstances:
A. Variations shall be permitted only when they are in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this Chapter; and only when the plight of the petitioner is due to unique
circumstances; and only in cases when there are practical difficulties or particular hardship
in the way of carrying out the requirements of this Chapter; and only when the variation, if
granted will not alter the essential character of the locality.
B. Every variation approved by the Village Board of Trustees shall be accompanied by findings
of facts specifying the reasons for granting the variation and shall be in ordinance form.
Sec. 55.40. Variation Fee
Every application for a variation shall be accompanied by the non-refundable fee set forth in Article II,
Section 4, of Ordinance Number 339.
55-11-1
Article XI. Conditional Signs
Sec. 55.41. Conditional Sign Approval
It is hereby acknowledged that certain signs may or may not be appropriate due to their size, location,
function, or similar characteristic. Such signs are classified herein as “Conditional Signs” and may
only be approved in conformance with the following:
A. Conditional sign approval may be requested by the filing of a written petition in the form
required by the Village. Such written petition shall be filed with the Director of Community
Development who shall in turn refer the request to the Plan Commission for its review and
recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees. The Plan Commission shall file its
written recommendation, including any applicable findings of fact, with the Village Board
after considering the petition.
B. The Plan Commission shall not recommend approval of a Conditional Sign unless it finds
that the sign will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Chapter as
described in Section 55.01 herein, that the sign will not adversely impact or be a detriment
to the surrounding area, that the sign will be in character with the site design and building
architecture of the property on which it is located, and only when the sign will not alter the
essential character of the locality.
C. The Board of Trustees shall not approve a Conditional Sign unless it finds that the sign is in
compliance with the standards described in Section 55.50.B above. Every conditional sign
approved by the Village Board of Trustees shall be accompanied by findings of facts
specifying the reasons for approving the conditional sign and shall be in ordinance form.
Sec. 55.42. Conditional Sign Fee
Every application for a Conditional Sign shall be accompanied by the non-refundable fee set forth in
Article II, Section 4, of Ordinance Number 339.
56-1
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 56
SOLICITORS
Sec. 56.01 Definitions
Sec. 56.02 Permit Required
Sec. 56.03 Permit Exemption for Minors
Sec. 56.04 Solicitation Permit
Sec. 56.05 Regulations Applicable to All Solicitation and Canvassing
Sec. 56.06 Charitable Solicitation on Public Rights of Way
Sec. 56.07 Violations Declared to be Nuisances
Sec. 56.08 Effective Period
Sec. 56.09 Revocation
Sec. 56.10 Appeal of Denial or Revocation
Sec. 56.11 Change in Information
Sec. 56.12 Administrative Record
Sec. 56.13 Penalty
Last Revision: Ordinance A-558-01-09, dated 09-28-09
56-2
Sec. 56.01. Definitions
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Applicant Any person that files an application for a solicitation permit as provided for in this
chapter.
Canvasser A person engaged in canvassing.
Canvassing Going from place to place in the Village seeking to make personal contact with
residents or other persons where there is no request, invitation or appointment for such contact,
but excluding persons engaged in solicitation as defined herein.
Charitable Organization A charitable organization as defined in Illinois’ Solicitation for Charity
Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq.
Charitable Solicitation Solely seeking to obtain donations, gifts, or contributions of money or
tangible personal property on behalf of a charitable organization.
Chief Of Police The chief of police or any of his or her authorized representatives.
Person Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
trust, or any combination of the foregoing.
Premises Any occupied building or structure, or any separate dwelling unit contained within any
occupied building or structure, of any type within the village.
Solicit or Soliciting The act of engaging in solicitation.
Solicitation Seeking: a) to solicit funds or b) to propose or engage in a commercial transaction
involving a sale, an offer for a sale, delivery of a commercial good or service, or a commercial
exchange, or any similar transaction, except, as to both a) and b), when such activity is conducted
within a building zoned to permit such activity and under the ownership or control of the solicitor.
Solicitation shall not include any activity which is purely expressive in nature, such as attempts to
enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue,
candidate or other cause that does not involve either the solicitation of funds or a proposal to
engage in a commercial transaction.
Solicitor A person engaged in solicitation.
Transient Merchant A solicitor who engages temporarily in the retail sale of goods, wares or
merchandise in the Village and in pursuance of such sales occupies any building, room, vehicle,
structure of any kind, or vacant lot. Transient Merchants and solicitors shall not include a person
selling goods, wares or merchandise, including vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products, at an
established Village farmers market or other Village-sponsored event or market, or at a church fair
or other similar event of limited duration held by a unit of local government or not-for-profit
organization for fund-raising purposes.
Sec. 56.02. Permit Required
Except as provided in section 56.03 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
solicitation in the village without having first applied for and obtained a valid solicitation permit
therefore. Persons engaged in canvassing shall not be subject to permitting requirements but are
subject to certain other time, place and manner restrictions, as provided in this Chapter.
Sec. 56.03. Permit Exemption for Minors
Persons under the age of seventeen (17) years engaged in charitable solicitation within the village
shall not be required to obtain a solicitation permit. However, any such person shall comply with all
other applicable provisions of this chapter.
56-3
Sec. 56.04. Solicitation Permit
(a) Application Procedure And Contents: Each applicant for a solicitation permit shall file with
the chief of police a properly completed application therefor on a form provided for such
purpose by the chief of police. Each applicant shall verify under oath all statements made
on or in connection with the application. A new application shall be required to solicit after
the expiration of any permit issued hereunder. Except as indicated elsewhere in this
Chapter, each application shall contain, at a minimum, the following information and
materials:
(1) Two (2) copies of a two inch by two inch (2" x 2") photograph showing the full
facial features of the applicant. Such photograph shall have been taken within
thirty (30) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application.
(2) The applicant's name and current residence address, and the length of time the
applicant has resided at such address.
(3) The applicant's local address, whether temporary or permanent, if different
from the applicant's current residence address.
(4) The applicant's business address, if different from the applicant's residence
address.
(5) The name and address of a principal officer, director, or chief executive officer
of the applicant's business or organization with the authority to determine
matters related to the application, and the registered agent for the business or
organization for service in Illinois, if any.
(6) The applicant's social security number and driver's license number, or, if the
applicant has neither, then some other official form of identification.
(7) The applicant's physical description, including sex, height, weight, hair color,
and eye color.
(8) The name and address of the applicant's current employer, and the length of
the applicant's employment with such employer.
(9) The name and address of the business or organization or other person or entity
that the applicant represents for purposes of the solicitation for which the
permit is sought, if different from the applicant's current employer.
(10) A description of the subject matter and purpose of the applicant's solicitation.
(11) The date(s) for which the applicant seeks a solicitation permit.
(12) The solicitation methods that the applicant and the applicant's business or
organization will employ within the village.
(13) If more than one solicitor will be soliciting on behalf of a business or
organization, then the names(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the
person(s) who will be in direct charge of the solicitors on behalf of such
business or organization.
56-4
(14) The date of the most recent previous application for a solicitation permit filed
with the village by the applicant or the business or organization the applicant
represents, if any.
(15) Information regarding the applicant's violation within the previous five (5) years
of any provision of any previous Village solicitation regulation, of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or of any local, state, or federal solicitation
regulation.
(16) Information regarding whether the applicant has been convicted, within the
previous five (5) years, of any felony under the laws of the state of Illinois, any
other state, or the United States, or has been convicted of a misdemeanor for a
crime involving moral turpitude or truth and veracity, under the law of the State
of Illinois, any other state, or the United States, and the nature of any such
conviction.
(17) If the applicant seeks a permit to conduct charitable solicitation, then a written
statement by the Illinois attorney general, made within six (6) months
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, that the business or
organization represented by the applicant is in full compliance with all
applicable provisions of Illinois’ Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01
et seq.
(18) If the applicant is subject to payment of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax, a copy
of the applicant’s certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois under
the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax imposed by Section 60-3 of this Code.
(19) The solicitation permit fee in an amount equal to eight dollars ($8.00), or, in the
case of solicitors who are transient merchants, an amount equal to one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
(b) Issuance: The chief of police shall issue a solicitation permit to an applicant within two (2)
business days after the chief of police receives the application, if, but only if, the chief of
police finds and determines all of the following:
(1) The applicant has properly provided all information required by the chief of
police and the application, the material statements made in the application are
true, and the fee has been paid.
(2) The applicant has not been convicted within five (5) years immediately prior to
the date of filing of the application of a felony under the laws of the state of
Illinois, any other state, or the United States, or convicted of a misdemeanor for
a crime involving moral turpitude or truth and veracity, under the laws of the
State of Illinois, any other state, or the United States.
(3) The applicant has not had a village solicitation permit revoked or suspended
within five (5) years immediately prior to the date of filing of the application.
(4) The applicant has not been convicted of violating any provision of this chapter,
any provision of any previous village solicitation regulation, or any provisions of
any local, state, or federal solicitation regulation within five (5) years
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application.
(c) Denial: If the chief of police determines that the applicant has not met one or more of the
conditions set forth in subsection (b) of this section, then the chief of police shall deny
56-5
issuance of the solicitation permit, shall give the applicant a written notification and
explanation of such denial, and return the solicitation permit fee. The chief of police's
notice of denial shall be delivered in person or by first class U.S. mail addressed to the
applicant's current residence address as set forth in the application. The solicitation
permit shall be deemed denied on the day that the notice of denial is delivered or is
placed in the U.S. mail as provided in this subsection. If the chief of police does not issue
or deny the solicitation permit within two (2) business days after the chief of police
receives the application, then the permit applied for shall be deemed to have been
issued. The applicant may appeal the denial of a solicitation permit pursuant to the
provisions of section 56.10 of this chapter.
(d) Form And Display Of Permit: A solicitation permit shall be issued by the chief of police
and shall consist of a plastic enclosed pin on or clip on card, approximately two inches by
four inches (2" x 4") in size, containing the full facial photograph of the solicitor that was
submitted with the application. The name of the solicitor and the business or organization
the solicitor represents, if any, the date(s) solicitation shall occur under the permit, and
the effective dates of the permit shall be printed on the solicitation permit in easily
readable form. Solicitation permits also shall bear the name of the village, the signature
of the chief of police or the chief of police's duly authorized designee, and the relevant
permit application number. Each solicitor shall display the permit in a conspicuous place
on his or her person at all times while engaged in soliciting in a manner that allows it to
be readily seen by other persons.
Sec. 56.05. Regulations Applicable to All Solicitation and Canvassing
Except as otherwise specified elsewhere in this Chapter or below, all solicitors and canvassers
shall comply with the following regulations:
(a) "No Solicitation" Notices: No person shall solicit or canvass at or in any premises that has
posted on or near its principal entrance a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing", "No
Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or any other similar notice indicating in any manner that the
occupants of such premises desire not to be solicited or canvassed or to have their right
to privacy disturbed, unless the occupants have specifically requested such solicitation or
other contact. The chief of police or the chief of police's duly authorized designee may
make available weatherproof cards bearing a notice of the type herein described for
posting on or near the principal entrance to any premises.
(b) No Solicitation From Vehicles: No person shall solicit from a motorized vehicle at any
time in any location within the village. Nothing in this Section or Chapter shall be
construed to regulate mobile food service vendors who are not equipped with any sound
making device and who serve food such as sandwiches and drinks such as coffee
primarily to construction sites or commuters from a fixed location on private property for a
limited amount of time each day. Such vendors are not considered to be solicitors under
this Chapter but are subject to any other applicable Village ordinances or regulations
related to their business activities.
(c) No Advertising Or Use Of Sound: No person shall advertise any solicitation at any time
within the village by use of signs, sound, or any other method. Nor shall any person use
music or any other sound when soliciting.
(d) Principal Approach And Entrance Only: Every solicitor or canvasser who goes from
house to house shall approach a premises only by using the principal approach route
thereto, and every such solicitor or canvasser shall attempt to make contact with the
occupants thereof only at the principal entrance to such premises.
56-6
(e) Discontinuance On Request: No solicitor or canvasser shall solicit or canvass any person
or premises at any time after any such person or the occupant of such premises requests
that the solicitor or canvasser leave the premises or otherwise cease soliciting or
canvassing.
(f) Hours When Solicitation Prohibited: Except as provided in subsection 56.06(c) of this
chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation or canvassing in the
Village of Burr Ridge at any time prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on any weekday
and at any time prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on Saturday or at any time on
Sunday or on a State holiday, or, in the case of Transient Merchants, to engage in
business at any time prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on any day.
(g) Immediate Identification: Every solicitor or canvasser who goes from house to house
shall immediately identify himself or herself and the purpose of the solicitation or
canvassing activity.
(h) Display Of Permit: Every solicitor who goes from house to house shall display the
solicitation permit in a conspicuous place on his or her person at all times while engaged
in soliciting in a manner that allows it to be readily seen by other persons.
(i) Impeding Traffic Prohibited: No person shall solicit anywhere in the village in a manner
that completely or substantially impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in, on,
or around any sidewalk or public property, way, or place. No person engaged in
solicitation shall have the exclusive right to any sidewalk or other public property, way, or
place, or the right to establish a permanent stationary location for such solicitation.
(j) Soliciting Rides Or Business On Public Rights Of Way: No person shall stand in a public
right of way within the village for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any
vehicle, or for the purpose of soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any
vehicle.
(k) Fraud Or Misrepresentation: No person shall perpetrate a fraud or misrepresentation of
any kind while engaged in solicitation or canvassing within the village.
(l) Public Health And Safety: No person shall engage in solicitation or canvassing within the
village in such a manner that creates a danger or threat of any kind to the public health,
safety, and welfare.
Sec. 56.06. Charitable Solicitation on Public Rights of Way
Charitable solicitation on public rights of way within the village shall be allowed only if such
charitable solicitation is conducted in strict compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter,
including, without limitation, section 56.05 of this chapter, and only if such charitable solicitation
also complies with the following regulations:
(a) Permit Required; Fee; Application Requirements: No person shall engage in charitable
solicitation on any public right of way within the village without first having applied for and
obtained a valid solicitation permit therefor pursuant to this chapter. Because solicitation
on a public right of way does not involve door to door activities, such solicitation does not
involve the same considerations related to public health, safety, and welfare as are
raised by door to door solicitation. Accordingly, the application for a permit to solicit on a
public right of way shall be made only by the charitable organization on behalf of all of
the individuals who shall be soliciting. Such application shall include the names and
addresses of all such individuals and shall conform to the requirements of subsections
56.04(a)(5), (10), (11), (13) and (17) of this chapter. There shall be no fee for a permit for
a charitable organization to solicit charitable contributions on a public right-of-way.
56-7
(b) Number of Permits Limited: Permits shall be issued on a first-come, first-serve basis and
are limited to one permit per charitable organization. No more than one charitable
organization shall engage in charitable solicitation on public rights of way within the
village on any one day.
(c) Hours When Permitted: No person shall engage in charitable solicitation on any public
right of way within the village at any time between the hours of seven thirty (7:30) P.M. or
dusk, whichever is earlier, and six thirty (6:30) A.M. or dawn, whichever is later.
(d) Locations: Charitable solicitation on public rights of way within the village shall be
engaged in only at intersections with traffic control signal lights and only when traffic has
come to a full and complete stop. No such solicitation shall be allowed at the intersection
of Route 83 and Central at any time. Neither the solicitor nor the business or organization
represented by the solicitor shall engage in charitable solicitation at any more than four
(4) such intersections at one time within the village.
(e) Annual And Consecutive Days Limitations: No solicitor, or the business or organization
represented by the solicitor, shall engage in charitable solicitation on public rights of way
within the village on more than two (2) days within any one calendar year. A permit for
two (2) consecutive days shall only be allowed if the charitable solicitation will be
conducted on a Friday and Saturday.
(f) Minimum Age: No person younger than seventeen (17) years of age shall engage in
charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the village.
(g) Protective Clothing: Every person engaged in charitable solicitation on any public right of
way within the village shall wear a high visibility vest at all times while engaged in such
solicitation.
(h) State Registration: Every business or organization represented by a solicitor engaged in
charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the village shall be registered with
the Illinois attorney general as a charitable organization pursuant to Illinois’ Solicitation
for Charity Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq.
(i) Statewide Activity: Every business or organization represented by a solicitor engaged in
charitable solicitation on any public right of way within the village shall be engaged in
statewide fundraising activity.
(j) Liability: Every solicitor engaged in charitable solicitation on any public right of way within
the village, and the business or organization represented by the solicitor, shall be liable
for all injuries to any person or property that occur during or as a result of the solicitation
that are causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the solicitor or the business
or organization the solicitor represents.
(k) Insurance: Before engaging in any charitable solicitation pursuant to this section, the
solicitor shall provide to the chief of police a certificate of insurance issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in Illinois indicating that the insurance
company will insure the solicitor and the business or organization represented by the
solicitor against any injury to any person or property during the solicitation that is causally
related to an act of ordinary negligence of the solicitor or of the business or organization
represented by the solicitor. Such certificate of insurance shall name the village as an
additional insured, shall state that the insurance policy shall not be amended or canceled
during the period of the permitted solicitation, and shall reflect that at least the following
coverage has been provided:
56-8
(1) Personal injury coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person.
(2) Property damage coverage of at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
Sec. 56.07. Violations Declared to be Nuisances
Every violation of any term, provision, condition, restriction, or duty stated in this chapter or in any
solicitation permit issued pursuant thereto is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Sec. 56.08. Effective Period
Except as otherwise provided in subsection 56.06(b) of this chapter, a solicitation permit issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for sixty (60) consecutive calendar days. An expiration date
shall be printed on the face of each solicitation permit.
Sec. 56.09. Revocation
The chief of police shall immediately revoke any solicitation permit issued pursuant to this chapter
if the chief of police determines that the solicitor is in violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter or of the solicitation permit issued pursuant hereto, or if the solicitor
made a false material statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the
issuance of a solicitation permit under the terms of this chapter. Immediately after such revocation,
the chief of police shall take custody of the solicitation permit. The chief of police shall give written
notice of the revocation to the solicitor as soon as practicable thereafter, in the form of a citation
that states the reason for the permit revocation or such other form approved by the chief of police
that clearly states the reason for such revocation. The chief of police shall serve the citation or
other form of notice on the solicitor in person or by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the residence address set forth in the solicitor's application. The permit shall become
null and void immediately on service of the notice of revocation as provided in this section.
Sec. 56.10. Appeal of Denial or Revocation
Any person aggrieved by the chief of police's denial or revocation of a solicitation permit shall have
a right to appeal such decision to the village administrator as provided in this section. Within five
(5) business days after service of the chief of police's notice of denial or revocation, the applicant or
permit holder may make a written request for a hearing regarding the denial or revocation. The
village administrator, after receipt of the written request for a hearing, shall set a time and date
certain for such hearing within five business (5) days after such receipt. The village administrator
shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant or permit holder at least three (3) business
days in advance of the hearing date. At the hearing, the applicant or permit holder may present and
submit evidence and witnesses to rebut the reasons cited by the chief of police for revoking or
denying the permit. Within two (2) business days after the close of the hearing, the village
administrator shall render a decision in writing. The village administrator may reinstate a revoked
permit, grant the requested permit or a renewal thereof, or affirm the chief of police's decision. The
action taken by the village administrator shall be final.
Sec. 56.11. Change in Information
During the pendency of an application for, or during the term of, any solicitation permit, the
applicant or permit holder shall promptly notify the chief of police in writing of any change in any
material information given by the applicant or permit holder in the application for such permit.
56-9
Sec. 56.12. Administrative Record
The chief of police shall cause to be kept in the chief of police's office an accurate record of every
solicitation permit application received and acted on, together with all other information and
material pertaining thereto, and copies of all solicitation permits issued and revoked pursuant to
this chapter. Permit applications shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit
issued pursuant to this chapter and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the number of the
application upon which it was issued.
Sec. 56.13. Penalty
(a) Penalty For Noncompliance: Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to comply, or
assists in the violation of, any of the provisions of this chapter, or of any order, solicitation
permit, or notice issued pursuant hereto, shall be fined not more than seven hundred and
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such violation. Each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. The chief of police shall give written notice to any such
person of any such violation and the fine imposed by serving a citation in person or by
certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested.
(b) Payment Without Prosecution: Within ten (10) days after the date of the citation, any
person served with a citation issued by the chief of police pursuant to subsection (a) of
this section may avoid prosecution for the violation(s) identified in the citation by
surrendering the citation to the chief of police and by paying at the same time to the chief
of police a sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). The chief of police shall issue a receipt to any
person
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 57
TREES
Article I. Purpose, Scope and Definitions.
Sec. 57.01 Purpose
Sec. 57.02 Definitions
Article II. Authority and Permits.
Sec. 57.03 Authority
Sec. 57.04 Permits Required – Public Property
Sec. 57.05 Permits Required – Private Property
Sec. 57.06 Application for Permit
Sec. 57.07 Permit Fees
Sec. 57.08 Issuance of Permit
Sec. 57.09 Duration of Permit
Sec. 57.10 Revocation of Permit
Article III. Regulations.
Sec. 57.11 General Provisions - Incorporation of Standards.
Sec. 57.12 Tree Planting
Sec. 57.13 Permitted Plant Species
Sec. 57.14 Prohibited Plant Species
Article IV. Obstructions & Hazardous Trees
Sec. 57.15 Obstructions
Sec. 57.16 Hazardous Trees
Sec. 57.17 Notice to Prune or Remove
Sec. 57.18 Right to Appeal
Sec. 57.19 Failure to Comply - Pruning or Removal by Village - Lien
Sec. 57.20 Lien - Release
Article V. Tree & Plant Diseases
Sec. 57.21 Inspection
Sec. 57.22 Nuisance Declared
Sec. 57.23 Removal of Infected Trees
Sec. 57.24 Treatment of Infested Trees
Sec. 57.25 Removal of Infested Trees
Sec. 57.26 Abatement of Nuisance
Article VI. Protection of Trees – Public Property
Sec. 57.27 Abuse of Mutilation of Public Trees
Sec. 57.28 Tree Fencing During Construction or Excavation
Sec. 57.29 Materials on Public Property
Article VII Protection of Trees – Private Property
Sec. 57.30 Removal of Five or More Trees
Article VIII New Development
Sec. 57.31 Tree Regulations
Last revision Ordinance A-779-01-18
57-1-1
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 57.01. Purpose.
In order to enhance the aesthetics of the public rights-of-way and other open areas of the Village of
Burr Ridge and to ensure a proliferation of good quality, durable trees which will improve the
environment, and in order to protect the public safety, it is the purpose of this Chapter:
a. To regulate the planting, preservation and protection, and removal of trees along the public
streets and parkways and other open areas of the Village, except as regulated by the
Subdivision Regulations Ordinance of the Village of Burr Ridge, as well as on other
municipally-owned property; (A-779-02-08)
b. To provide for the issuance of permits for the planting and removal of trees along the public
streets or parkways and other open areas of the Village, except for the planting and
maintenance of trees required for new developments under the Subdivision Regulations
Ordinance of the Village of Burr Ridge, as well as on other municipally-owned property;
(A-779-02-08)
c. To provide requirements for the pruning and removal of trees and other vegetation on
private property which endanger the public health, safety and welfare; (A-779-02-08)
d. To provide for the prevention and control of diseases which threaten trees along the public
streets or parkways and other open areas of the Village, as well as on other municipallyowned
property; (A-779-02-08)
e. To provide for the protection of existing trees along any public streets and parkways and
other open areas of the Village, as well as on other municipally-owned property.
(A-779-02-08)
Sec. 57.02. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
D.B.H." or "Diameter Breast Height The diameter of the tree measured at four and one-half feet (4.5')
above the existing grade at the base of the tree.
Infected shall mean the presence of a disease which is deemed a nuisance by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture, the presence of circumstances that make it reasonable to believe that such
a disease is present, or the presence of any plant disease that is liable to spread to other plants, trees,
or shrubs, or to cause injury to humans or property. Examples of such nuisances include but are not
limited to: Dutch Elm disease, verticillium wilt, and Oak wilt. (A-779-01-08)
Infested shall mean the presence of a pest which is deemed a nuisance by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture or the United States Department of Agriculture, the presence of circumstances that make it
reasonable to believe that such a pest is present, or the presence of any insect or pest that is liable to
cause injury to other plants, trees, or shrubs, or to humans or property. Examples of such nuisance
pests include but are not limited to Asian Longhorn Beetle and Emerald Ash Borer. (A-779-01-08)
Parkway That part of any street that lies between the pavement edge or back of curb and the nearest
property line.
Public Access Easement An easement granted to the public by recorded document for the purposes
of public access (either for vehicles and pedestrians or solely for pedestrians). A public access
57-1-2
easement need not be improved with a paved or concrete surface.
Street All land dedicated to or used by the public for thoroughfare or highway purposes.
Tree Any self-supporting woody plant having a well-defined, elongated main stem and a well-defined
crown, with few or no branches on its lower part.
Village Arborist The Public Works Department full-time employee who is a certified arborist.
Village Forester The professional forester retained as a consultant by the Village of Burr Ridge.
57-2-1
ARTICLE II. AUTHORITY AND PERMITS
Sec. 57.03. Authority.
The Village Administrator, with the professional assistance of the Village Forester, the Village Arborist
and such other assistants designated by the Village Administrator, shall have the authority and
jurisdiction to regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and other vegetation on public
streets and parkways and other open areas of the Village, as well as other municipally-owned
property, and shall have the authority and jurisdiction to enforce all other provisions of this Chapter.
(A-779-02-08)
Sec. 57.04. Permits Required – Public Property
No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground or otherwise disturb
any tree on any public street, parkway or other municipally-owned property without first filing an
application for and obtaining a permit.
Sec. 57.05. Permits Required – Private Property
No person shall remove five or more trees from any lot of record located within the corporate
boundaries of the Village without first filing an application for and obtaining a permit, subject to the
provisions of Section 57.30 of this Chapter. (A-779-02-08)
Sec. 57.06. Application for Permit.
Application for permit shall be made upon forms provided. The application shall include, at a
minimum, the following information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
b. Location of the proposed work, including a simple sketch indicating the location of each tree.
c. Nature of and reason for the proposed work.
d. Any other information, as shall be required.
Sec. 57.07. Permit Fees.
There shall be no fee for a permit under the provisions of this Chapter.
Sec. 57.08. Issuance of Permit.
A permit shall be issued following review of the application, if, in the judgment of the Village, the
proposed work will foster the purposes of this Chapter, and the proposed methods conform to the
standards set forth herein.
Sec. 57.09. Duration of Permit.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire ninety (90) days after its issuance,
or as specified on the permit. The work authorized shall be completed in the time indicated on the
permit and in the manner therein described.
Sec. 57.10. Revocation of Permit.
57-2-2
Failure of the holder of a permit to comply with the terms of the permit or with any provisions of this
Chapter shall result in revocation of the permit. In addition, any person violating the provisions of this
Chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this Code.
57-3-1
ARTICLE III. REGULATIONS
Sec. 57.11. General Provisions - Incorporation of Standards.
Performance standards for activities required under this Chapter shall be in accordance with the then
latest available revision of the applicable standards as herein described, unless specific exceptions are
approved by the Village Administrator upon receipt of a recommendation from the Village Forester or a
Certified Arborist retained by the Village. Said standards, including those contained in the American
National Standards Institute publication Z133.1 ("American National Standard for Tree Care
Operations - Pruning, Trimming, Repairing, Maintaining, and Removing Trees, and Cutting Brush -
Safety Requirements") and "American Standard for Nursery Stock", published by the American
Association of Nurserymen, as such may be amended from time to time, be and are hereby
incorporated and adopted by reference as the standards of the Village of Burr Ridge for the purposes
of this Chapter. At least 3 copies of such standards, including any subsequent amendments thereto,
shall be on file with the Village Clerk and made conveniently available for public inspection, use and
examination, and 3 copies have been on file and available for public use, inspection and examination
in the office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least 30 days prior to the adoption hereof.
Sec. 57.12. Tree Planting.
The grade of all planting stock regulated by this Chapter shall be in conformance with the "American
Standard for Nursery Stock" published by the American Association of Nurserymen. Park grade trees
shall not be allowed. The planting of trees and other vegetation shall be in accordance with accepted
horticultural practices, including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Tree Standards.
The following general standards for trees to be planted on Village streets, parkways, or other
municipally-owned property shall be applicable:
1. All trees selected shall be grown in a nursery located in the northern half of the
State of Illinois.
2. All trees selected shall be healthy and shall be free of insects and diseases, bark
bruises and scrapes on the trunk or limbs before and after planting.
3. Each tree selected shall be consistent in form and character with the species and
shall have a straight trunk with limbs not lower than six feet (6') above the ground.
4. All trees selected shall have a trunk diameter, measured six inches (6") above the
ball, of not less than three inches (3").
b. Spacing and Location.
Trees to be planted in the parkway shall be spaced no more or less than forty feet (40')
apart, unless otherwise approved. They shall be no closer than:
1. Five feet (5') back from the curb or, in the case of streets without curbs, five feet
(5') back from the pavement edge or from the edge of any swale or ditch.
2. Forty feet (40') from the nearest corner of the pavement of intersecting streets,
said distance to be measured away from the corner along both of the streets.
57-3-2
3. Ten feet (10') from driveways.
4. Fifteen feet (15') from street lights.
5. Five feet (5') from fire hydrants, buffalo boxes, vaults, and the like.
6. Five feet (5') from sidewalks, unless otherwise required or approved.
c. Planting Seasons.
The fall planting season shall be from October 1 to December 1 and the spring planting
season shall be from March 15 to May 15, unless otherwise specifically approved.
d. Planting Standards.
The following general standards for the planting of trees on Village streets, parkways, or
other municipally-owned property shall be applicable:
1. Trees shall be balled and burlapped and shall not be dug for removal from the
nursery until immediately prior to their planting.
2. The planting hole shall be twelve inches (12") larger in diameter than the diameter
of the ball.
3. All trees shall be hand planted and planted straight.
4. The tree shall be planted the depth at which it was growing in the nursery. The
ball shall be placed in undisturbed soil on the bottom of the hole to prevent
settling.
5. In most instances, the backfill around the ball shall be the same soil as that which
was removed from the hole; however, in cases where rocks, stones, etc. are
encountered, topsoil shall be used.
6. Any excess soil, debris or trimmings shall be removed from the planting site
immediately upon completion of planting.
7. Where necessary, trees shall be staked to ensure that they remain straight.
8. All tags, wires, plastic ties and wire baskets shall be removed from each tree.
9. Tree holes may be machine dug; but if the existing lawn is damaged, it shall be
the responsibility of the permittee to restore the lawn to its original condition, using
sod. The sides of all holes that are machine dug shall be hand-shaped to
eliminate glazing.
10. The permittee shall also secure all necessary underground utility locations prior to
planting.
Sec. 57.13. Permitted Plant Species.
A list of permitted plant species shall be maintained in the Village of Burr Ridge Tree Administration
Manual, as such may be amended from time to time. The approval of a species for a particular site
57-3-3
shall be dependent upon the following criteria:
a. Compliance with permitted species list.
b. Compatibility of the species with the site.
c. The overall species balance in the immediate area surrounding the proposed location, as
well as the overall species balance in the Village.
Sec. 57.14. Prohibited Plant Species.
The following plant species shall not be planted on any public street, parkway, or other municipallyowned
property: (A-779-01-08)
Botanic Name Common Name
Coniferales ord. Evergreens of any type
Acer negundo Box Elder
Acer Saccharinum Silver Maple
Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven
Catalpa speciosa Catalpa
Crataegus spp. Hawthorn (varieties with thorns)
Elaeagnus spp. Russian Olive
Franxinus spp. Ash of any type
Ginko biloba (female) Female Ginko
Juglans spp. Walnut of any type
Maclura pomifera Osage Orange
Malus pumila Apple
Morus spp. Mulberry
Populus spp. Cottonwood, Poplar, Aspen
P. alban nives Silver White Poplar
Prunus spp. Cherry plum
Pyrus calleryana “Bradford” Bradford pear
Quercus palustris Pin Oak
Rhamnus spp. Buckthorn of any type
Robina pseudoacacia Black Locust (var. with thorns)
Salix spp. Willow
Ulmus spp. Elms of any type (unless Dutch Elm Disease
resistant)
57-4-1
ARTICLE IV. OBSTRUCTIONS & HAZARDOUS TREES
Sec. 57.15. Obstructions.
It shall be the duty of any person(s) owning or occupying real property bordering on any street or other
public access easement to prune any trees and other vegetation located on said property in such
manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The
minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet (10') over sidewalks and
twelve feet (12') over all street pavements, except in the case of truck thoroughfares, which shall have
a clearance of sixteen feet (16').
Sec. 57.16. Hazardous Trees
It shall be the duty of any person(s) owning or occupying real property bordering on any street or other
public access easement to remove any trees (or portions thereof) located on said property which, due
to storm damage, disease, infection, infestation or any other causes, have died or become diseased,
loose, broken, cracked, leaning or otherwise hazardous because of the increased risk that said trees
(or portions thereof) may fall onto the street or other public access easement, or have fallen across
private property lines. (amended by A-779-01-18)
Sec. 57.17. Notice to Prune or Remove.
Should any person(s) owning real property bordering on any street or other public access easement
fail to properly prune trees and other vegetation as hereinabove provided or to properly remove
hazardous trees (or portions thereof) as hereinabove provided, the Village Administrator shall order
such person(s), within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice, to so prune or remove such trees (or
portions thereof) and other vegetation.
Sec. 57.18. Right to Appeal.
Any person receiving a notice as hereinabove provided shall have the right to appeal. The appeal
shall be in the form of a letter to the Village Administrator and shall outline the specific reasons and
justification for the appeal and shall request a hearing before the Village Administrator. The appeal
must be received within five (5) days of the receipt of said notice. The decision of the Village
Administrator, made after hearing the appeal, shall be final.
Sec. 57.19. Failure to Comply - Pruning or Removal by Village - Lien.
When a person to whom a notice to prune or remove is directed shall fail to comply within the specified
time, it shall be lawful for the Village to cause such trees and other vegetation to be pruned or removed
at reasonable cost, which shall be reimbursed by the property owner within 30 days.
All Village costs for pruning or removal not reimbursed shall be a lien upon the real estate affected,
superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens. Within ninety (90) days after said costs
are incurred, the Village shall file notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook or
DuPage County, Illinois, or in the office of the Registrar of Taxes in Cook County, whichever is
applicable. Said notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out:
a. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof.
b. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service.
57-4-2
c. The date or dates when said cost or expenses were incurred and payment thereof became
delinquent.
The failure to record the lien or failure to record within said sixty (60) day period shall not relieve the
owner of the property (as determined at the time the pruning or removal violation occurred) of the
obligation to reimburse the Village in full, and such obligation will continue in effect until paid.
Sec. 57.20. Lien - Release.
Upon payment of the cost and expenses, including the cost of recording said notice, and, in addition,
the payment of a fifteen dollar ($15.00) release fee, by the owner of or persons interested in said lot,
piece or parcel of land, a release of said lien by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been
filed shall be delivered to the person so paying the cost and expenses.
57-5-1
ARTICLE V. TREE & PLANT DISEASES
Sec. 57.21. Inspection.
The Village or the person performing tree and plant inspections by authority of the Village is hereby
authorized and directed to enter on and upon private property whereon there is located any tree or
plant having the appearance of or suspected of having the Dutch elm disease, the elm yellows disease
(formerly called phloem necrosis), oak wilt, pine wilt or any other infectious disease, or insect
infestation, including infestation by Emerald Ash Borer beetles (Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire) for the
purpose of inspecting said trees and, if required in order to verify the presence of disease or
infestation, removing therefrom samples or portions thereof to be tested. In addition, the Village or
said person making inspections is hereby authorized and directed to enter on and upon private
property whereon there is located any pile of cut wood suspected of or having the potential for
harboring the diseases or infestations hereinabove listed. (A-779-01-08)
Sec. 57.22. Nuisance Declared.
In the event that it is determined that the tree is in fact diseased or infected with the Dutch elm disease,
elm yellows disease, oak wilt, pine wilt or any other infectious disease, or that the tree is infested by
Emerald Ash Borer beetles (Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire), said tree shall forthwith be and it is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. Also, that trees or parts thereof in a dead or dying condition and wood piles
which serve as a breeding place for the elm bark beetle, Emerald Ash Borer, or other disease
spreading insect, bug or vector are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (A-779-01-08)
Sec. 57.23. Removal of Infected Tree
The owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which said infected diseased tree or plant or
wood pile exists shall forthwith remove said tree or plant or wood pile from the corporate municipal
limits within ten (10) days of notification to such owner, occupant or agent by the Village to do so. All
infected plant material must be disposed of in a manner which conforms with all applicable laws. Any
material that is chipped must not exceed one (1) square inch on any final chip surface. (A-779-01-08)
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the Village to permit any tree, plant or wood pile or
portion thereof infected with an infectious disease to remain on such premises.
Sec. 57.24. Treatment of Infested Trees
If the Village arborist deems that the canopy of the infested tree is less than 30% dead, the owner,
occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which said infested tree or plant or wood pile exists shall
forthwith provide the Village Arborist with proof of annual insecticidal treatment. For trees infested with
Emerald Ash Borer, treatment shall consist of the annual application of an Injectable insecticide (Tree-
Age ™) with active ingredient Emamectin Benzoate, or Village approved equal, or annual application
of a Imidacloprid basal root drench systemic insecticide (Bayer Advanced Garden ™ Tree and Shrub
Insect Control), with active ingredient Imidacloprid, or Village approved equal.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the Village to permit any tree, plant, or wood pile,
or portion thereof which is infested to any degree, and for which insecticidal treatment has not been
applied within the previous 12 month period, to remain on such premises. (A-779-01-08)
Sec. 57.25. Removal of Infested Trees
If the Village arborist deems that the canopy of the infested tree is more than 30% dead, or if a owner
has failed to provide treatment for an infested tree which is less than 30% dead, then the infested tree
must be removed. The owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which said infested tree or
57-5-2
plant or wood pile exists shall forthwith remove said tree or plant or wood pile from the corporate
municipal limits within thirty (30) days of notification to such owner, occupant or agent by the Village to
do so, provided that removal of the tree takes place during the non-flight season for the subject pest.
For trees infested with Emerald Ash Borer, removal of the tree must take place between October 1
and May 1. If an owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land receives a notice of infestation
between May 1 and October 1, the thirty (30) day removal term will commence on October 1. All
infested plant material must be disposed of in a manner which conforms with all applicable laws. Any
material that is chipped must not exceed one (1) square inch on any final chip surface.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the Village to permit any tree, plant or wood pile or
portion thereof which is infested, and which has canopy death of more than 30%, to remain on such
premises.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the Village to permit any tree, plant, or wood pile,
or portion thereof which is infested to any degree, and for which insecticidal treatment has not been
applied within the previous 12 month period, to remain on such premises.( A-779-01-08)
Sec. 57.26. Abatement of Nuisance.
In all cases where the owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which said diseased, infected,
or infested tree or plant is located cannot be found, or if found and notified as aforesaid, neglects or
refuses to abate said nuisance within ten (10) days of said notification, it shall be lawful for the Village
to abate the same by removal and disposal of said diseased, infected, or infested tree or plant. The
owner, occupant and agent or any of them shall be charged with those expenses incurred by the
Village in the removal or abatement of the diseased infected, or infested tree, plant or breeding place.
The person charged with such removal and disposal may request that the same be done by the
Village or its authorized agent, and all expenses incurred in connection therewith shall be assessed
against the property owner. All expenses incurred by the village which are not paid by the owner or
person interested in the affected real estate shall become a lien upon said real estate upon the service
and filing of a notice of lien pursuant to Section 5/11-20-12 of Chapter 65, Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(A-779-01-08)
57-6-1
ARTICLE VI. PROTECTION OF TREES
Sec. 57.27. Abuse or Mutilation of Public Trees.
Unless specifically authorized, no person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree from
a public street or parkway, or from any other municipally-owned property. Further, unless specifically
authorized by the Village Administrator, no person shall attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising
posters or other contrivance to any such tree, allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is
harmful to such trees to come in contact with them or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire
or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree located on publicly-owned land or dedicated rightof-
way. (A-779-01-08)
Sec. 57.28. Tree Fencing During Construction or Excavation.
All trees on any street, parkway or other municipally-owned property near any excavation or
construction of any building, structure, or street work shall be guarded by those doing any such
excavation or construction work with a substantial barrier, approved by the Village, at a distance in feet
from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches D.B.H. (as measured 4.5' above ground). All
building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside said barrier.
No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches or lay any driveway or sidewalk within a
distance in feet from any tree on any street, parkway or other municipally-owned property equal to the
diameter of the trunk in inches D.B.H. (measured 4.5' above ground) without first obtaining a written
permit from the Village Administrator. (A-779-01-08)
Sec. 57.29. Materials on Public Property.
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the Village any stone, brick,
sand, dirt, sod, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air and
fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing thereon, except with prior written permission of the Village
Administrator. (A-779-01-08)
57-7-1
ARTICLE VII. PROTECTION OF TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Sec. 57.30. Removal of Five or More Trees Prohibited Without a Permit
No person shall remove five (5) or more trees, within any twelve (12) month period from any lot of
record located within the corporate boundaries of the Village, unless
1. Required by the provisions of this Chapter for diseased or infected/infested trees, or as
otherwise authorized by the provisions of this Chapter for diseased or infected/infested
trees, or
2. If such trees are being replaced with other landscaping in accordance with a tree
replacement plan approved by the Village.
Prior to any such removal, regardless of whether it is under 1 or 2 above, an application for a permit
must be submitted to and approved by the Village and a permit must be issued by the Village.
In the case of lots of record developed with a principal building(s) thereon, or if a building permit has
been issued for the construction of a principal building(s) on a lot of record, this prohibition on the
removal of five or more trees from a lot or record shall apply only to the area outside of the buildable
lot area and within the established building setback lines of any lot of record located within the
corporate boundaries of the Village. (Amended by A-779-01-11)
57-8-1
ARTICLE VIII. NEW DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 57.31. Tree Regulations.
The Village of Burr Ridge Subdivision Regulations Ordinance shall regulate the planting of trees in new
developments.(A-779-01-08)
58-1-1
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 58
WATER WORKS SYSTEM
Article I. Rates and Collections
Sec. 58.01. Water rates and charges
Sec. 58.02. Commencement and discontinuance of service; Certificates of service; billing procedures
Sec. 58.03. Parties liable for payment
Sec. 58.03 (A) Consumption and Charge Discrepancies – Residential
Sec. 58.03 (B) Consumption and Charge Discrepancies – Non-Residential
Sec. 58.04. Delinquencies; liens
Sec. 58.05. Foreclosure proceedings for nonpayment of lien
Sec. 58.06. Discontinuance of service for non-payment
Sec. 58.07. Rendering bills; collection of payments
Sec. 58.08. Delivery of revenues to Village Treasurer
Sec. 58.09. Water fund
Sec. 58.10. Recordkeeping; audits
Article II. General Provisions
Sec. 58.11. Administering the water system
Sec. 58.12. Use and operation of fire hydrant; permit requirements
Sec. 58.13. Work with components of water system, damage thereto
Sec. 58.14. Excavations near components of water system; liability for damage
Sec. 58.15. Restricting use of water
Sec. 58.16. Application for service; deposits
Sec. 58.17. Return of deposit
Article III. Meters
Sec. 58.18. Approval of meters required
Sec. 58.19. Testing meters; repairs
Sec. 58.20. Meter failure; excess meter charges
Sec. 58.21. Purchase and replacement of meters
Sec. 58.22. Tampering with meters; penalties
Sec. 58.23. Connection fees; inspection of connections
Sec. 58.23.1 Tear downs; Fees
Sec. 58.24. Additional connection fees
Sec. 58.25. Building permit water charges; temporary meters
Sec. 58.26. Ownership of meters
Sec. 58.27. Turning on water supply
Article IV. Construction Regulations
Sec. 58.28. Connection permits
Sec. 58.29. Water service lines specifications
Sec. 58.30. Records of location of system
Sec. 58.31. Location and connection of meters
Sec. 58.32. Valves
Sec. 58.33. Installation of meters
58-1-2
Sec. 58.34. Customer maintenance of service line
Sec. 58.35. Repair permits
Sec. 58.36. Repairs requiring opening of street; permit required
Sec. 58.37. Repair of street openings
Sec. 58.38. Maintenance of pipes and fixtures
Sec. 58.39. Access to meter
Sec. 58.40. Service lines to separate property or premises
Sec. 58.41. Meters in multiple family or multiple occupancy buildings
Sec. 58.42. Access by Superintendent of Public Works
Sec. 58.43. Tapping ahead of meter; providing water to non-residents of serviced property
Sec. 58.44. Conditions for obtaining water service
Sec. 58.45. Discontinuance of service to properties sharing a service line
Sec. 58.46. Discontinuance of service generally
Sec. 58.47. Liability for damage; temporary shutoff of water
Sec. 58.48. Regulations and specifications for water main distribution system
Sec. 58.49. Approval of extension plans
Sec. 58.50. Ownership of extension
Sec. 58.51. Private agreements for water main installation; connection of property not in Village
Sec. 58.52. Mains outside the Village limits; surety bond
Sec. 58.53. Water service outside the Village limits
Sec. 58.54. Installing water mains; methods
Article V. Connections
Sec. 58.55. Definitions
Sec. 58.56. Cross Connections Prohibited
Sec. 58.57. Technical Requirements
Sec. 58.58. Backflow Prevention Devices Required
Sec. 58.59. Notification of Violation
Article VI. Air Conditioners and Refrigeration Systems
Sec. 58.60. Systems not permitted
Article VII. Fluoride
Sec. 58.61. Use of fluoride
Sec. 58.62. Fluoride levels
Article VIII. General Provisions, Penalties, Severability
Sec. 58.63. Authorization to act for Superintendent of Public Works
Sec. 58.64. Minimum requirements
Sec. 58.65. Filing of ordinance as notice to property owners
Sec. 58.66. Conflicting provisions
Sec. 58.67. Penalties
Sec. 58.68. Effect of prior ordinances
Sec. 58.69. Severability
Sec. 58.70. Effective date; publication
Sec. 58.71. Other Ordinances
Last Revision: Ordinance A-439-01-18, 04-09-18
58-1-3
Article I. Rates and Collections
Sec. 58.01. Water Rates and Charges. (Section amended by A-439-01-18)
Rates or charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the Water Works System of the Village
of Burr Ridge, based (other than the fixed charge provided for below) upon the amount of water
consumed, as shown by water meters, shall be as herein provided. Fixed rates and rates per gallon
used are based on a 2-month billing cycle.
Residential Rates
Fixed Rate
Per 2
Months
Tier 1 Tier 2 Tier 3
Rate Per 1,000
Gallons for
First 70,000
Gallons
Rate Per 1,000
Gallons for
70,001 to
90,000 Gallons
Rate Per 1,000
Gallons for
90,001 plus
Gallons
05-01-2017 to April 30, 2018 $7.48 $6.75 $10.25 $12.79
05-01-2018 to April 30, 2019 $10.00 $7.56 $11.48 $14.32
05-01-2019 to April 30, 2020 $10.00 $8.16 $12.40 $15.47
05-01-2020 to April 30, 2021 $10.00 $8.82 $13.39 $16.71
05-01-2021 to April 30, 2022 $10.00 $9.52 $14.46 $18.05
05-01-2022 $10.00 $10.28 $15.62 $19.49
Non-Residential Rates
Fixed Rate
Per 2
Months
Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
05-01-2017 to April 30, 2018 $0.00 $9.62
05-01-2018 to April 30, 2019 $20.00 $10.77
05-01-2019 to April 30, 2020 $20.00 $11.64
05-01-2020 to April 30, 2021 $20.00 $12.57
05-01-2021 to April 30, 2022 $20.00 $13.57
05-01-2022 $20.00 $14.66
58-1-4
Residential Rates for Users Outside Corporate Limits
Fixed Rate
Per 2
Months
Tier 1 Tier 2 Tier 3
Rate Per 1,000
Gallons for
First 70,000
Gallons
Rate Per 1,000
Gallons for
70,001 to
90,000 Gallons
Rate Per 1,000
Gallons for
90,001 plus
Gallons
05-01-2017 to April 30, 2018 $14.96 $13.50 $20.50 $25.58
05-01-2018 to April 30, 2019 $20.00 $15.12 $22.96 $28.65
05-01-2019 to April 30, 2020 $20.00 $16.33 $24.80 $30.94
05-01-2020 to April 30, 2021 $20.00 $17.64 $26.78 $33.42
05-01-2021 to April 30, 2022 $20.00 $19.05 $28.92 $36.09
05-01-2022 $20.00 $20.56 $31.24 $38.98
Non-Residential Rates for Users Outside Corporate Limits
Fixed Rate
Per 2
Months
Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
05-01-2017 to April 31, 2018 $0.00 $19.24
05-01-2018 to April 31, 2019 $20.00 $21.55
05-01-2019 to April 31, 2020 $20.00 $23.27
05-01-2020 to April 31, 2021 $20.00 $25.13
05-01-2021 to April 31, 2022 $20.00 $27.15
05-01-2022 $20.00 $29.32
Rates for Homeowners Association Landscape Meters
Fixed Rate
Per 2
Months
Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
05-01-2017 to April 31, 2018 $7.48 $6.75
05-01-2018 to April 31, 2019 $10.00 $7.56
05-01-2019 to April 31, 2020 $10.00 $8.16
05-01-2020 to April 31, 2021 $10.00 $8.82
05-01-2021 to April 31, 2022 $10.00 $9.52
05-01-2022 $10.00 $10.28
58-1-5
Sec. 58.02. Commencement and Discontinuance of Service; Certificate of Service; Billing Procedures
Charges for water service shall commence on the date when the water is turned on in accordance with
the written application for water service and shall terminate for the particular applicant when water service
is discontinued and a final meter reading is taken.
Separate applications are required for providing water service to a site during construction for construction
purposes and for water service commencing upon occupancy of the premises once the construction is
completed. The owner(s), general contractor, and any user(s) of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable for water service during construction. A final meter reading shall be taken at the end of construction,
and the general contractor and owner(s) of the property shall be responsible for notifying the Village Clerk
that construction is completed. If there is no meter then the charge for water service during construction
shall be billed under the provisions of Section 58.25 of this Chapter.
In no event shall water be furnished to any premises, except for construction purposes, unless a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Village for the premises. In the event that such service is
provided in error prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, then such service shall be discontinued
upon written notice at least 72 hours before such service is discontinued. Notice shall be given to the
owner(s) of the premises and users of the service, and to the occupants of the premises and users of the
service if different than the owner(s), that such service shall be discontinued for lack of a certificate of
occupancy. Notice shall be given by depositing the same in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to
the occupant(s) of the premises, and to the owner(s) of the premises, at such addresses as are shown on
the then most current records of the Village. Receipt of such notice shall be conclusively presumed from
proof of mailing. Service in any other manner where there is actual receipt of notice also shall be
satisfactory service for the purposes of this Section. Such owner(s), and occupant(s) and user(s) of the
service if different than the owner(s), shall be entitled to a hearing before the Village President, which
hearing shall be held on the date and at the time specified in such notice, but in no event earlier than 48
hours after receipt of such notice or 72 hours after mailing such notice, whichever is sooner. In no event
shall the water service be discontinued prior to the date and time for the hearing as specified in the notice.
The decision of the Village President, made after the hearing regarding whether to discontinue such water
service, shall be final. (Amended by A-439-4-92)
In the event of a change in the ownership of premises receiving water service or a change in the tenancy
of the premises where the new tenant is to be charged for water service, the Village shall be notified
promptly and a new application for water service made and signed; otherwise, the water service will be
discontinued after notice and hearing in the same manner as provided for above for discontinuing water
service because of lack of a certificate of occupancy.
All water furnished shall be charged and paid for as measured and registered by the water meters and the
amount so charged shall be billed and become due and payable quarterly up to and including June 30,
1991, and thereafter shall be billed and become due and payable bi-monthly. All bills for water service
shall be rendered as of the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is billed, and
shall be payable not later than the close of business on the 25th day after the date of the bill. In the event
that the due date should fall on a Sunday or on any legal holiday on which the Village office is closed, the
due date shall be extended to the next following business day on which the Village office is open. If
payment of the full amount of the bill is not made within said period, then an amount equal to 10% of the
total amount of the unpaid portion of the bill shall be added thereto. Such penalty shall be added only
once to any specific unpaid portion of a bill. All payments received, however, shall first be applied to pay
any penalties that have been applied and then next to any unpaid amounts which are overdue (applying it
to any overdue amounts in the order in which they become due--that is, to the longest overdue amount
first, etc.), with the balance, if any, to be applied to the portion of the then current water bill which is unpaid
but not overdue. For, example, if a bill is rendered for $75.00 in June and it is unpaid after 25 days, the
Village will send an overdue statement applying the 10% penalty of $7.50. If such an amount remains
58-1-6
unpaid at the time the August bill is sent, and assuming that the current amount of the August bill is
$100.00, the August bill will be for $182.50. If the August bill remains unpaid, a new overdue bill will be
sent in September in the amount of $192.50 (an addition of $10 representing 10% of the $100 August bill
which is overdue and unpaid). If a payment then comes in September in the amount of $100.00, such
amount will be applied first to the penalties of $7.50 and $10.00 and then next to the $75.00 - June bill;
next to a portion of the $100.00 unpaid bill for August. The Finance Director is authorized to waive such
10% amount, at the written request of the customer, once in every two year period. This waiver will be
automatically granted if the customer has a proven good payment history; i.e., the customer must have
made timely payments of all water/sewer charges during the prior two years. (Amended by A-439-1-92)
In the event charges for service are not paid within 90 days of their due date, such charges shall be
turned over to a collection agency selected by the Village for such purposes. The Village Clerk or the
Clerk's designee shall provide written notice, at least three (3) business days prior to turning the
delinquent charges over to a collection agency, to the owner(s) of the premises as indicated by the
taxpayer shown on the tax bill for the parcel involved and to the occupants of the premises and users of
the service if different than the owner(s). The notice shall state that the past due amount, plus any
penalty previously imposed, shall be turned over to a collection agency unless paid in full on or before a
date certain and that unpaid charges may create a lien on the real estate. If the entire past due amount is
not paid within said period, then an additional penalty, the agency collection charge, shall be added to the
amount due. The agency collection charge for residential users shall be 50% of the total amount of the
bill. The agency collection charge for non-residential users shall be 50% of past due bills in an amount up
to $300.00. If a past due non-residential bill exceeds $300.00, the agency collection charge penalty shall
amount to 50% of the first $300.00 and 25% of any past due amount exceeding $300.00. The notice shall
be given in accordance with the provisions of this section concerning the notice requirements involving
disconnection of water service because of a lack of an occupancy certificate. (Amended by A-439-1-93)
Sec. 58.03. Parties liable for payment.
The owner of the premises being served, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises. Service is furnished to the premises by the
Village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service are jointly and severally liable to the Village therefore.
(A) Consumption and Charge Discrepancies – Residential
The water meter reading shall be relied upon to accurately measure water consumption at any
premises and prevails over all other readings or devices. In the event that a discrepancy is
determined to exist by the Village between the water bill and the volume of water consumed for
any residential premises, as recorded at the water meter, the charges for such discrepancy
between consumption and billing shall become due and owing. In determining the amount
owed due to the discrepancy between the water consumption and the water billings, the rate
charged for the discrepancy amount shall be based on the average historical basic water
consumption charge for residential users (see Sec. 58.01 above). The historical basic water
consumption charge shall be determined by averaging the water charges which were in effect
from the present reading and then for that period extending back to the last time that the Village
has a record of a water meter reading for the premises. The formula for the calculation of the
average historical basic water consumption charge will remove up to the last 4 years which
represent the highest annual water rate charges from the computation. Such rate is determined
on a rolling average dropping off a year annually (for example, in year 2015, years 2015
through 2012 would be eliminated from the calculation of the averages). (added by A-439-02-
14)
(B) Consumption and Charge Discrepancies – Non-Residential
58-1-7
The water meter reading shall be relied upon to accurately measure water consumption at any
premises and prevails over all other readings or devices. In the event that a discrepancy is
determined to exist by the Village between the water bill and the volume of water consumed for
any non-residential premises, as recorded at the water meter, the charges for such discrepancy
between consumption and billing shall become due and owing. In determining the amount
owed due to the discrepancy between the water consumption and the water billings, the rate
charged for the discrepancy amount shall be based on the current water consumption charge
for non-residential users (see 58.01 above). (added by A-439-02-14)
Sec. 58.04. Delinquencies; liens.
In the event the charges for service are not paid within 30 days after rendition of the bill for such service,
such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent. These delinquencies shall
constitute liens upon the real estate for which service is supplied, and the Clerk of the Village of Burr
Ridge, when directed by the Village Administrator of said Village, shall file a notice of such liens in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, if the property is situated in said DuPage
County, or in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois, if the property is situated in said
Cook County (also in the Torrens office in Cook County if the property is registered in Torrens).
Said notice of such liens shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate
upon or for which service was supplied, the amounts of monies due, and the date or dates when such
amount or amounts became delinquent, and a copy of the Notice of Lien shall be sent to the taxpayer
listed on the tax bill for the parcel involved as the owner or record of the real estate. The filing of such
statements in the appropriate Recorder of Deeds office shall be deemed notice for the payment of such
charges for such service. In all cases where a lien has been recorded, a release fee of $50.00 shall be
charged in addition to the delinquent water charges plus current water charges. In addition, such lien
claim shall be deemed a lien claim and notice of lien for all charges for water service subsequent to the
period or periods covered by the bill or bills. (Amended by A-439-1-93)
The failure of the Village Clerk to record or register such notice of any such lien shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as provided in Section 58.05 below nor shall it affect the right to
turn the past due amount over to a collection agency and to charge the additional agency collection
penalty as provided in Section 58.02 above. (Amended by A-439-5-89)
Sec. 58.05. Foreclosure proceedings for nonpayment of lien.
Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for nonpayment of same, and the
proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in the name of the Village. The
Village attorney, when so directed by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village, is hereby
authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the Village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which the bill for water has remained unpaid 30
days after it has been rendered.
Sec. 58.06. Discontinuance of service for nonpayment.
If the charges for such service are not paid within forty-five (45) days after rendition of the bill for service,
such service shall be discontinued after notice and hearing as provided for in this Section 58.06. Notice
shall be given to the owner(s) of the premises, and to the occupants of the premises and users of the
service if different than the owner(s), that such service shall be discontinued for non-payment of the
charges in full. Notice shall be given by depositing the same in the U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to the occupant(s) of the premises and to the users of the service, and to the owner(s) of the premises at
such addresses as are shown on the then most current records of the Village. Receipt of such notice
shall be conclusively presumed from proof of mailing. Service in any other manner where there is actual
58-1-8
receipt of notice also shall be satisfactory service for the purposes of this Section. Such owner(s),
occupant(s) and user(s) of the service if different than the owner(s), shall be entitled to a hearing before
the Village President no less than fifty (50) days from the date the bill was rendered (mailed). Such
hearing shall be held before the Village President and will be held on the date and at the time specified in
such notice, but in no event earlier than 48 hours after receipt of such notice or 72 hours after mailing
such notice, whichever is earlier. In no event shall the water service be discontinued prior to the date and
time for the hearing as specified in the notice. The decision of the Village President, made after the
hearing regarding whether to discontinue such water service, shall be final. Once water service is
discontinued, it shall not be reinstated until all past-due bills, including the additional charges thereon, are
paid in full, together with a payment of the reinstatement charge of $50.00. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the Village from collecting such amounts due by use of a collection agency under the
provisions of Section 58.02 of this Chapter 58. (Amended by A-439-4-92)
Sec. 58.07. Rendering bills; collection of payments.
It is hereby made the duty of the Village Clerk of the Village of Burr Ridge to render bills for service and for
all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all moneys due thereon.
Sec. 58.08. Delivery of revenues to Village Treasurer.
All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water works system shall be held by the
Village Clerk separate and apart from said Clerk's private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the Village, and of said sums, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the Village
Treasurer not more than 10 days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may
from time to time be directed by the President and Board of Trustees.
Sec. 58.09. Water Fund.
The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water works system, and all other funds
and moneys incident to the operation of such system, as the same may be delivered to said Treasurer
and shall deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "Village of Burr Ridge Water Fund". The
Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner now or hereinafter provided by law.
Sec. 58.10. Recordkeeping; Audits.
The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records
and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water
works system, and at regular annual intervals the Treasurer shall cause an audit of the books, records
and accounts, to be made by an independent auditing concern, to show the receipts and disbursements
of the water works system.
58-2-1
Article II. General Provisions
Sec. 58.11. Administering the water system.
The system of water mains and pipes, softening plant, pumping station, wells, reservoirs, grounds,
buildings and appurtenances thereto shall be under the administrative control of the Superintendent of
Public Works subject to the approval of the President and Board of Trustees and to the direction and
authority of the President and Board of Trustees.
Sec. 58.12. Use and operation of fire hydrant; permit requirements.
No person, except a regularly authorized agent of the Village, shall cause water to flow from any public or
private fire hydrant, except that a person other than such an agent of the Village may operate and use
water from a fire hydrant only after a written permit has been issued by the Department of Public Works
permitting such use.
Each applicant for a fire hydrant use permit shall be required to deposit with the Village the sum of
$900.00 for the use of a hydrant meter and hydrant wrench. Said fire hydrant meter must be installed by
the applicant and maintained in good condition for the duration of the period during which the fire hydrant
is in use. Upon completion of the fire hydrant use, the hydrant meter shall be returned to the Village in
good operating condition. Water use recorded on the meter shall be charged at the rate of $10.59 per
thousand gallons for all water consumed. In addition, a fee of $10.00 per day for the use of the hydrant
meter and wrench shall be charged with a minimum charge of $50.00. These charges shall be deducted
from the $900.00 deposit and the balance of the deposit shall be refunded. Any damages to the hydrant
meter and/or hydrant wrench shall be deducted from the $900.00 deposit before a refund is made. Any
damages to the water user system caused by careless opening and closing of hydrants shall be paid by
the applicant from the deposit or otherwise. (Amended by A-439-01-14)
Sec. 58.13. Work with components of water system, damage thereto.
No person, other than a regularly authorized agent of the Village in line of duty, shall interfere in any
manner with any public or private fire hydrant, water main, main line valve or box, or commit any act
tending to obstruct the use thereof, without first obtaining a permit from the Superintendent of Public
Works. No person shall willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, interfere with or disturb the walls,
fixtures, buildings, machinery, apparatus, fencing, reservoirs, storage tanks or any of the appurtenances
of the water system.
Sec. 58.14. Excavations near components of water system; liability for damage.
Any person making an excavation in the vicinity of existing water mains, pipes, public or private fire
hydrants, main line valves or boxes, or other components of the water system, shall be fully responsible
for any damage or leakage to or from said leakage to the Superintendent of Public Works and shall also
repair immediately such damage or leakage to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works and
upon failure to do so shall be subject to the penalties provided in this Chapter.
Sec. 58.15. Restricting Use of Water.
So as to comply with the Illinois Department of Natural Resources Rules and Regulations for the
allocation of water from Lake Michigan, it shall be lawful for any person, firm or corporation to use water
for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns between the hours of 12 o’clock midnight and 12 o’clock noon and
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12 o’clock midnight only on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, Fridays,
Saturdays and Sundays, between the dates of May 15 and September 15. Moreover, lawn sprinkling or
irrigation will be further limited between such dates as follows: Those properties located North of 83rd
Street shall be entitled to sprinkle or irrigate their lawns only on Monday, Thursday and Saturday, and
58-2-2
those properties located South of 83rd Street shall be entitled to sprinkle or irrigate their lawns only on
Tuesday, Friday and Sunday, all in accordance with the hours herein set forth; no lawn sprinkling or
irrigation shall be allowed on Wednesday. These restrictions apply to all commercial, industrial and
residential properties with the following exceptions:
1. Residential use of water in water cans and buckets for gardens, annual flowers, and the like;
and
2. Residential use of water for filling small children’s wading pools and water oriented play devices
when those play devices are being actively used; and
3. Residential use of water for car washing so long as the hose, if any, is fitted with a water shutoff
nozzle or valve and the water is shut off when not being applied to rinse the vehicle; and
4. A commercial or industrial service involving water usage as part of an ongoing business
operation, such as a car wash center.
5. The Village Administrator, or his/her designee, is authorized to permit the sprinkling or irrigation
of newly laid sod or seed at any time and on any day upon owner application for and the Village
issuance of a permit for a time period not in excess of four (4) consecutive weeks.
(amended by A-439-02-15)
The use of an automatic sprinkler system or device shall not relieve the owner or occupant of the property
from the responsibility of using said system or device in conformity with the restrictions imposed under this
section, even when the owner or occupant is not present on the property at the time the system or device
is in operation on the property.
The Village further reserves the right to limit or suspend the use of water for sprinkling or irrigation of
lawns and gardens, air conditioning or for any other special purposes whenever the President and Board
of Trustees shall determine that the public exigencies require such action. If public exigencies so require,
the President may unilaterally take such action prior to the earliest opportunity available for consultation
with the Board of Trustees. The Village's well water system shall not be put into operation to augment the
supply of Lake Michigan water unless public exigencies require such action. If public exigencies so
require, the well water system shall not be put into operation until a total ban on sprinkling or irrigation of
lawns and gardens is first imposed. (Amended by A-439-2-96)
Whenever the President or President and Board of Trustees further limit or suspend the use of water for
sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens, or for any other specific purpose(s), it shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens or for any
other special purpose(s) designated, other than during the times allowed for such use(s) of water,
provided that said person, firm or corporation has received notice of said limitation on, or the suspension
of, the use of water, from the Village or otherwise by telephone, U.S. mail or personal service, news
media reports or other notification.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00
nor more than $500.00 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Any person, firm or corporation charged with said
violation may be issued a citation or "P" ticket.
In lieu of prosecution for any such violation and in consideration for the waiver of such prosecution, for
each violation the citation or ticket violators may settle and compromise the claim by paying to the Village
the respective amounts set forth in the following schedule and within the times set forth in the following
schedule:
58-2-3
1. Payment of $50.00 for each violation within 10 days of the date of the original violation.
2. A FINAL NOTICE, which stipulates the date on which collection of the $50.00 penalty shall be
turned over to a collection agency approved by the Village for collection will be issued after 10
days.
3. In the event that said payment is made after the FINAL NOTICE and prior to the collection
agency taking any action to collect the penalty, $100.00 shall be accepted as settlement.
4. If the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim or request a hearing in the Circuit
Court of DuPage County, he/she must request of the Chief of Police within 10 days of the date
of the notice of violation that an administrative hearing be held. Upon receipt of a hearing
request, the Chief of Police of the Village, or the designee of the Chief of Police, shall conduct
the hearing. The person requesting a hearing shall be notified of the time, date and place of the
administrative hearing. After the person accused of a violation has had an opportunity to
present his or her testimony, the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of Police shall
advise the person of his/her findings. If the Chief of Police or the designee of the Chief of
Police determines that the violation notice was valid and that an ordinance violation occurred,
the $50.00 penalty shall be due and payable within 10 days. If the offender fails to pay the fine,
the claim may be turned over to a collection agency as set forth above.
5. In the event that actions taken by the collection agency fail to result in payment of the penalty
due, a FINAL NOTICE, which stipulate the date on which filing of a complaint with the Clerk of
the Circuit Court of DuPage County will be commenced, will be issued. Payment of any fine
and costs shall be in such amounts as may be determined and established by the Court.
(Amended by A-439-1-02)
Sec. 58.16. Application for service; deposits.
No application for water service nor an application for extension of a Village water main or a connection to
the Village water system shall be filed with the Village unless the application shows that the applicant
either has constructed or will construct a water main from the nearest point of the Village's water
distribution system to and across the entire width of the applicant's property to the far side thereof to a
point approved by the Village Engineer in order to make the Village's system available to service adjoining
properties.
In the case of a corner lot where no water mains exist across either frontage, the Village Engineer shall
determine across which frontage the applicant shall be required to construct the water main, with no
further requirement to construct the water main across the other frontage until such time as the property is
divided or subdivided. If such water main extension is to be constructed, it shall be of the same diameter
as the existing Village water main unless otherwise required by the Village. (Amended by A-439-1-01)
The applicant must post a letter of credit in the amount of at least 125 percent of the estimated cost of
construction thereof, such escrow to be in the form and substance similar to the escrow required for the
completion of land improvements under the Subdivision Regulations Ordinance of the Village. An
improvement agreement must be entered into regarding such construction, which will include, among
other things, the provisions under which the Village has the right to draw upon the letter of credit, a
provision indicating that the applicant will provide all necessary maintenance and repairs to the water
main so constructed for a period of one year after its acceptance by the Village, and a provision that an
amount shall be retained by the Village equal to 10 percent of the original amount of the letter of credit to
pay for any costs during such one year maintenance period. The agreement must also provide for the
conveyance of the water main to the Village upon the Village's request.
Sec. 58.17. Return of Deposit.
58-2-4
Any person, firm or corporation making a deposit provided for in Section 58.16 shall be entitled to the
return of the same upon discontinuance of the use of water in or on the premises described in the
application, and upon full payment to the Village for all water use and service or repair charges incurred,
of any nature whatsoever.
58-3-1
Article III. Meters
Sec. 58.18. Approval of meters required.
All water supplied by the Village shall be measured by water meters approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works.
Sec. 58.19. Testing meters; repairs.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall from time to time cause to be inspected and test water meters
as a routine procedure. Between routine tests the Superintendent shall cause to be inspected and tested
such water meters as may appear to be out of order or indicate faulty registration. Any meters found
faulty on such test shall be repaired at Village expense unless such faulty meter shall have been
damaged by the negligence of the customer, in which case the Village shall charge the customer the cost
of such repairs.
Sec. 58.20. Meter failure; excess meter charges.
If at any time a meter fails to register the quantity of water passing through same, the quantity shall be
determined and the charge made, based on the quantity registered during the corresponding period of the
previous year. The customer shall be responsible for maintaining all pipes and fixtures on the owned
premises and no credit will be given on excess meter charges caused by leakage and waste on the
customer's premises, whether known or not.
Sec. 58.21. Purchase and Replacement of Meters.
All water meters used to meter water purchased or otherwise obtained from the water system of the
Village shall be purchased from the Village for the cost of the meter to the Village plus 10% and such shall
be paid to the Village before any water service is connected to the water mains. Where an old meter
becomes worn beyond repair and is no longer serviceable, it shall be replaced by the Village at no
expense to the customer. However, in those instances when a building is demolished and a new building
is constructed on the same site to take its place, the old meter shall be removed by the Village and the
applicant for water service for the new building shall be required to purchase a new meter. Where a
customer wishes to replace a serviceable meter with one of a different size the customer shall pay to the
Village, before said meter is installed, the difference between the salvage value of the meter to be
replaced, as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works, and the cost of the new meter.
(Amended by A-439-1-95)
Sec. 58.22. Tampering with Meters; Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, cause a malfunction of, remove, injure or destroy any
water meter. In addition to any penalty imposed in a quasi-criminal proceeding for violation of this section,
the person so injuring, removing or destroying any such water meter shall reimburse the Village in full for
any cost incurred by the Village in repairing or replacing the same. It shall be the duty of the owner or
occupant of the premises and the individual water user to prevent any such tampering, removing, injuring
or destruction of any such water meters. It shall further be the duty of the owner or occupant of the
premises and the individual water user to notify the Village of any such tampering, removing, injuring or
destruction of any such water meters immediately upon their acquiring knowledge thereof.
All new construction serviced by the Village of Burr Ridge water system which receives water from the
Village mains at a static pressure greater than 75 pounds per square inch, shall install a pressure
reducing valve of a type approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
58-3-2
Sec. 58.23. Connection fees; inspection of connections.
Connection fees for connecting to the water mains of the Village of Burr Ridge within its corporate limits
shall be according to the following schedule, except in the case of special connection fees for certain
water mains as provided by ordinance and except when a building is demolished and a new building is
constructed on the same site to take its place, in which case the fees set forth in Section 58.23.1 shall
apply: (Amended by A-439-1-95)
Single family detached residences $1,500.00 per building
(amended by A-439-01-03)
Single family attached residence $1,500.00 per dwelling unit
buildings (amended by A-439-01-03)
Multiple family residence buildings, $1,500.00 per dwelling unit
including town houses (amended by A-439-01-03)
Industrial, commercial and office buildings:
Connection size:
1" $ 1,500.00 (Amended by A-439-01-03)
1 1/2" $ 1,500.00
2" $ 2,830.00
3" $ 4,995.00
4" $ 6,660.00
6" $11,655.00
8" $15,540.00
10" $19,425.00
12" $23,310.00
Plus $350.00 for each additional unit (over 1) in any building where there are multiple users with only one
meter. For purposes of this Section, a unit shall be deemed to be that amount of space designed to be
used by or leased or sold to any one entity or person.
Any application made pursuant to this Section must be accompanied by the required fee(s) for the type of
connection being requested.
The connection fee includes as a part thereof the cost of the Village supervising and inspecting the
tapping of the main and the making of the connection, provided said connection is made during the
regular working hours of the Superintendent of Public Works and the Superintendent's employees. If any
connection is not made during regular working hours, an inspection fee of $50.00 shall be charged and
shall be payable at the time of the inspection. The actual tapping of the main and connection to the
system shall be done by the owner's contractor at the owner's expense. All materials such as corporation
cocks, wye fittings, curb stops and buffalo boxes shall be provided by the owner, or the owner's
contractor, according to Village specifications and at owner's expense.
The tapping of the main and connection to the system shall be completed within 60 days of the date of
application. Upon expiration of this 60 day period for connection, any application for connection shall no
longer be valid. No refund of any connection fee will be made if any applicant fails to have the connection
to the system completed within this 60 day period. If the applicant does fail to have such connection
completed within 60 days of application, a new application must be made for connection along with
another payment of the required fee(s). (Amended by A-439-3-88)
58-3-3
Sec. 58.23.1 Tear downs; Fees (Added by A-439-1-95)
The connection fees for connecting to the water mains of the Village of Burr Ridge shall not be required
when a building is demolished and a new building is constructed on the same site to take its place. There
shall be the following fees required:
Meter Removal by Village $50.00
Service Line Inspection $50.00
Meter Reconnection Inspection $50.00
All actual labor, except for the meter removal, and materials shall be provided by the owner's contractor at
owner's expense.
Sec. 58.24. Additional connection fees.
The connection fees for connecting to the water mains of this Village established by ordinance shall be
subject to additional, fair and reasonable charges established from time to time for connection to water
mains constructed or owned by the Village, pursuant to the provisions of Section 11-150-1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (Ch. 24, s11-150-1, Ill. Rev. Stat., as amended), and as added from time by ordinance.
Sec. 58.25. Building permit water charges; temporary meters.
Whenever a building permit is issued, a flat water service charge prior to May 1, 1992 of $50.00 and a flat
water service charge of $65.00 after May 1, 1992 for each residential building shall be paid, and a flat
water service charge prior to May 1, 1992 of $200.00 and a flat water service charge of $260.00 after May
1, 1992 for each commercial or industrial building shall be paid, in addition to the building permit fee, to
the Village for each three-month period while the building is under construction and before the permanent
water meter is installed and protected from freezing to cover the cost of unmetered water used during the
construction period and anticipated use in the building prior to said installation of the permanent meter. If,
in the opinion of the Superintendent of Public Works, the use of water during the construction period may
be excessive, the Superintendent may require the installation at the owner's expense of a temporary
outside meter to measure water used and to be paid for at the regular metered water rates. (Amend. by
A-439-1-92)
Sec. 58.26. Ownership of meters.
All water meters heretofore installed or that may hereafter be installed are hereby declared to be the
exclusive property of the Village regardless of the fact that a service charge to cover the cost thereof may
have been or will be collected from the customer.
Sec. 58.27. Turning on water supply.
No plumber or other person shall turn on the supply of water to any building or premises prior to the
installation of a meter on all service lines installed, or shall allow the same to be done, without a permit
from the Superintendent of Public Works; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to
prevent plumbers from turning on water to test the piping and fixtures and for providing water for
construction purposes, in which case the plumber shall turn off the water as soon as these needs are met.
58-4-1
Article IV. Construction Regulations
Sec. 58.28. Connection permits.
All applications to connect service pipes with the Village supply mains, for the installation of water meters,
or for such other use of the Village water supply as may now or hereafter be authorized, shall be filed with
the Superintendent of Public Works, who shall issue all permits therefor upon forms provided for that
purpose; provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued by the Superintendent of Public Works
until all fees for same, as provided in this ordinance, shall have been paid to the Village and a receipt
issued therefor. No permit will be issued to any plumber who has not fully complied with all regulations of
the Village concerning plumbing.
Sec. 58.29. Water service lines specifications.
Old building water service lines may be used in connection with new buildings taking the place of old
buildings which have been demolished only when they are found, on examination by the Superintendent
of Public Works, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance. Provided, however, all required inspection
fees set forth in Section 58.23.1 shall be paid. If the old building water service line is abandoned and a
new service line is connected to the water main, the old service line shall be disconnected from the main.
(Added by A-439-1-95)
Water service lines specifications:
1. Material and sizes. All water service lines connected to the Village supply mains up to and
including two (2") inches internal diameter shall be of cold drawn, soft annealed seamless
copper tubing known by the trade name of Type K. All such water services larger than two (2")
inches internal diameter shall be constructed of ductile iron cement lined pipe of a quality and
weight equivalent to Class 52 as specified by the American Water Works Association.
The minimum size for any service line shall be one inch internal diameter, except that for
premises where the potential use would, in the opinion of the Superintendent of Public Works,
require a larger service line to maintain adequate pressure, the Superintendent may require a
larger size service line than one (1") inch minimum.
All service taps for 2" water lines shall be supported by a service saddle.
For services larger than two (2") inches, special cast iron tees shall be used to make the
connection to the Village supply main after approval of the proposed method for connection by
the Superintendent of Public Works.
2. Method of installation. Taps in the Village supply main shall be made on the side of the
main low enough to keep the service pipe below the top of the main and no tap shall be made
closer than six (6") inches to any bell or hub.
Service pipe shall be laid in a straight line from the main to the curb box as near as possible at
right angles to the line of the street and shall have at least five and one-half (5 1/2') feet of earth
cover at all points.
The curb stop and buffalo box shall be installed in the parkway at a point eighteen (18") inches
from the outer edge of the sidewalk if a sidewalk is in place and if there is no sidewalk they shall
be installed seven and one-half (7 1/2') feet from the lot line, except that in commercial areas
where there are no parkways buffalo boxes may be located at such points as may be approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
58-4-2
All connections and joints on a service line shall remain uncovered until an inspection has been
made with water pressure on to determine if there are any leaks and that the line meets with
other requirements of the Village. Any leaks shall be repaired immediately before the line is
covered. Particular care shall be taken to see that the buffalo box is properly placed and
vertical.
Sec. 58.30. Records of location of system.
It shall be the responsibility of the Superintendent of Public Works to maintain permanent records of the
service lines installed showing location, sizes, number of taps and other pertinent information.
Sec. 58.31. Location and connection of meters.
All meters must be set inside the building which they are to serve at a point free from frost danger and
readily accessible to the meter reader. Inlet and outlet pipe shall be in a horizontal position parallel to the
floor, with the top of the meter register facing straight up. Upon request, the Superintendent of Public
Works may allow water meters to be located outside the building but, if so located, they shall be placed in
frost proof concrete pits approved by said Superintendent and readily accessible to the meter reader.
For larger size meters, said Superintendent may require said meters be placed on the floor or on a
concrete base to relieve the strain on service pipes.
All meter installations shall be subject to the approval of said Superintendent as to location and method of
installation.
Unless otherwise approved by said Superintendent, a remote meter must be connected to the meter and
securely fastened to the outside of the building at a point readily accessible to the meter reader and no
less than four (4') feet above the finished grade. Both the meter and remote reader must be installed at
the same time and must be inspected and sealed by said Superintendent before water customer water
use begins. Any corrections in installation ordered by said Superintendent must be accomplished within 5
working days following the inspection. If said corrections are not accomplished after notice has been
given, the corrections shall be made by the Superintendent and charged on a time and material basis.
The remote meter must be connected to the meter using two or three conductor plastic jacket thermostat
wire in one-half inch (1/2") EMT conduit, as approved by the Superintendent. The wire connecting the
remote meter to the meter must not exceed 500 feet in length. (Amended by A-439-2-92)
Sec. 58.32. Valves.
A stop and waste valve of the same size as the service pipe line shall be installed inside the building
between the meter and the supply main as low as possible permitting accessibility. Said valve shall be of
brass on all copper service lines, and cast iron on cast iron service lines. If it is not practicable to install a
stop and waste valve, then a full size gate valve may be installed at a similar location with a smaller drain
valve inserted between the gate valve and the meter.
Sec. 58.33. Installation of meters.
The plumber shall install pipe and fittings so that the water meter may be installed with a minimum of
effort. Actual installation of water meters and removal of same when required, shall be under the
supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works. Plumbers shall not set or remove meters without the
consent of said Superintendent.
Sec. 58.34. Customer maintenance of service line.
58-4-3
It shall be the responsibility of the customer to maintain the entire length of the customer's service line
from its connection with the Village supply main.
Sec. 58.35. Repair permits.
No water service line or connection shall be repaired or altered without first securing a permit from the
Superintendent of Public Works.
Sec. 58.36. Repairs requiring opening of street; permit required.
Before opening any street for the construction or repair of any supply main or any service line, a permit
therefor must first be obtained from said Superintendent of Public Works. Such permit requirement shall
be waived for such work done by contract with the Village or by authorized Village employees.
Sec. 58.37. Repair of street openings.
Any street opening made for installation or repair of Village supply lines or service lines shall be repaired
in accordance with the applicable provisions of all Village ordinances relating thereto. All user service
lines shall be augured if crossing pavements maintained by the Village of Burr Ridge.
Sec. 58.38. Maintenance of pipes and fixtures.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a building or premises to maintain all water piping and fixtures
on the owner's property in good repair and free from leakage of water. In case of leakage or faulty
plumbing resulting in unnecessary waste of water, the owner shall make necessary repairs promptly on
notice from the Superintendent of Public Works, and on failure to do so within the time specified, the water
supply will be discontinued until such repairs are made and approved after notice and an opportunity for a
hearing in the same manner as provided for in Sec. 58.02 hereof.
Sec. 58.39. Access to meter.
It shall be the responsibility of the person receiving water service to keep the area adjacent to a meter free
and clear for ready access by meter reader. Failure to do so after proper notice from the Superintendent
of Public Works shall be sufficient cause to discontinue water service until this requirement is fully
complied with. Any discontinuation of water service will occur only after notice and an opportunity for a
hearing in the same manner as provided for in Sec. 58.02 hereof.
Sec. 58.40. Service lines to separate property or premises.
A separate and complete service line shall hereafter be installed for each distinct property or premises
and in no event will a single service line be hereafter allowed to serve two properties under separate
ownership. Accessory buildings on a single property may be served from the service line to the main
building, but separate meters for the accessory buildings may be installed either at the request of the
person receiving water service or on order of the Superintendent of Public Works.
Sec. 58.41. Meters in multiple family or multiple occupancy buildings.
The owner of a multiple family or multiple occupancy building may request a single meter for the entire
building and said owner shall be responsible for the payment of water charges for the whole building.
Sec. 58.42. Access by Superintendent of Public Works.
The Superintendent of Public Works and said Superintendent's agents or representatives shall have free
58-4-4
access during all reasonable hours (in accordance with law) to all parts of any building or premises on or
in which Village water is delivered or consumed, in order to examine the pipes and fixtures to ascertain
whether there is any unnecessary water. If such access is refused, the supply of water may be shut off
after notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided in Sec. 58.02 hereof.
Sec. 58.43. Tapping ahead of meter; providing water to non-residents of serviced property.
Any owner or customer who shall allow his or her service line to be tapped ahead of his or her meter for
the purpose of using unmetered water for his or her own use or for the use of others shall, in addition to
having his or her water shut off after notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided in Sec. 58.02
hereof, be subject to the penalty provided in this chapter. No owner or customer shall furnish a supply of
water to persons not residing on his or her property or allow a connection of any kind from their own
supply of water to a supply of water or any device of any kind of those not residing on his or her property,
except in the case of a temporary emergency and with the consent of the Superintendent of Public Works.
Sec. 58.44. Conditions for obtaining water service.
Water services will be furnished to the owner or occupant of any premises with a service line connected to
the Village water system upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No water meter will be set
until all charges or deposits required by the Village shall have been paid and unless the service line to
which it is assigned is in good order and repair.
Sec. 58.45. Discontinuance of service to properties sharing a service line.
Whenever two or more properties are already supplied by one existing service line, the failure on the part
of any party owning, residing on, or otherwise occupying any of said properties to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, or if the single service line becomes unserviceable, shall be sufficient
authorization for the Superintendent of Public Works to discontinue the service after notice and an
opportunity for a hearing as provided in Sec. 58.02 hereof and without any liability whatsoever to any one
or all parties.
Sec. 58.46. Discontinuance of service generally.
The President and Board of Trustees reserve the right to discontinue the supply of water to any customer
for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter after notice and an opportunity for hearing thereon as
provided in Sec. 58.02 hereof, and not to restore such service until such violation has been corrected and
all back water charges and proper fees have been paid, including the $50.00 fee to cover the expense of
turning off the water and restoring service. (Amended by A-439-3-92)
Sec. 58.47. Liability for damage; temporary shutoff of water.
The Village shall not be liable for any damage caused by a leak or break in any service pipe, or for
damage caused by a failure to repair the same promptly or caused by a suspension or cessation of
service for any reason; nor shall the Village be liable for any damage caused by the repair or installation
of such pipes or resulting therefrom when such work is not done by the Village.
The President and Board of Trustees hereby reserve the right to temporarily cause the supply of water to
be shut off at any time due to emergencies, without incurring any liability or giving any customer or other
person any cause of action for damages of any kind, any permit granted or regulation to the contrary
notwithstanding.
Sec. 58.48. Regulations and specification for water main distribution system.
Regulations and specification for water main distribution system:
58-4-5
1. Water main sizes and materials: All water supply mains hereafter installed as part of
the distribution system of the Village shall have a minimum diameter of six (6") inches. All water
supply pipes hereafter installed that are a part of the Village distribution system shall consist of
ductile cast iron pipe, Class 52, conforming to American National Standards Institute
(hereinafter designated "A.N.S.I.") A-21.51 or American Water Works Association (hereinafter
designated "A.W.W.A.") C-151, except where unstable foundation conditions or aggressive soil
conditions indicate to the Village Engineer that pipe of another material would be more
satisfactory. Gaskets and cast iron fittings shall conform to A.N.S.I. A-21.10, A-21.11 or
A.W.W.A. C-110 or C-111. Water main shall be cement lined in conformance with A.N.S.I. A-
21.4 or A.W.W.A. C-104.
Water main sizes shall conform to the master water plan of the Village of Burr Ridge. This
master plan dictates that all mains on section lines shall be 12" in diameter; and on half section
lines, 8" in diameter. All water mains shall be looped unless otherwise directed by the Village
Engineer. All non-looped water mains shall be 8" minimum diameter. Water mains shall be
sized to provide the minimum fire flow requirements of the fire protection district within whose
jurisdiction the construction applies. However, the Village Engineer may waive this requirement
if it is deemed unfeasible to provide such level of service.
2. Installation methods for water mains: Water supply mains hereafter installed as part of the
distribution system of the Village shall be laid with not less than five and one-half (5 1/2') feet
cover over the top of the pipe, except where connections with existing mains which are
shallower require a shallower depth for a limited distance. All water mains will be subjected to a
pressure test upon completion and prior to acceptance. Installation of water mains shall
conform to A.W.W.A. C-600-77. Hydrostatic pressure test and leakage test shall be based on
150 psi for two hours. The procedure for water main disinfection shall conform to A.W.W.A. C-
601.
3. Cast iron gate valves: Gate valves shall be A.W.W.A. resilient cast iron body, bronze
mounted, double disc, parallel seat gates valves per A.W.W.A. C-509, rated for 200 psi working
pressure and shall be installed at such points in the system as may be designated by the
Village Engineer so as to sectionalize the mains into reasonable divisions. Gate valves shall be
installed on all mains 12" diameter or less.
4. Butterfly valves: Butterfly valves shall be A.W.W.A. cast iron body with bronze retainer rings
per A.W.W.A. specification C-504, Class 150B with hydrostatic test pressure of 300 psi and
shall be installed on all mains greater than 12" in diameter at such points in the system as may
be designated by the Village Engineer so as to sectionalize the mains into reasonable divisions.
5. Fire hydrants: Fire hydrants of a type specified by the Village Engineer with two 2 1/2 inch
outlet ports, and one 4 1/2 inch outlet port, shall be installed at such points as may be
designated by the Village Engineer, but in no event shall hydrants be more than 300 feet apart.
All hydrants shall open left (counter-clockwise). A gate valve with valve box shall be installed
immediately in front of each hydrant so as to permit shutting off the water to the hydrant without
disturbing the flow in the mains. All hydrants shall be furnished with a breakaway feature and
shall be of the type that is Village standard as designated by the Village Engineer.
6. Valve Vaults: All gate valves and butterfly valves shall be constructed within an I.D.O.T.
Type A valve vault with steps. Valve vaults on butterfly valves shall have offset cones. Frames
shall be heavy duty Type 1 and shall be embossed with the word "Water". The Village
Engineer may require the installation of a 1" corporation cock within certain valve vaults on the
water mains for purposes of future flow gauging.
58-4-6
Sec. 58.49. Approval of extension plans.
Before any extension to the existing water main supply system is installed other than extensions
constructed by the Village itself, detailed plans and specifications of the proposed work shall be submitted
to the Superintendent of Public Works and Village Engineer for their approval. When approved, the work
shall be carried on strictly in accordance with said plans and specifications under the general supervision
of said Superintendent. No change in the plans will be permitted without the express approval in advance
by said Superintendent. Anyone installing any such extension shall give prior written approval to the
provisions of Sec. 58.50 below.
Sec. 58.50. Ownership of extension.
All extensions to the Village water main supply system hereafter made shall become the property of the
Village immediately upon installation without regard to who may have paid for the cost of said installation.
Sec. 58.51. Private agreements for water main installation; connection of property not in Village.
Private agreements to contribute to the cost of water main installation by a subsequent customer are
permissible but the Village shall assume no responsibility for the enforcement of such agreements. No
property located outside the Village limits will be allowed to connect to a water supply main unless
otherwise agreed to by the President and Board of Trustees. The foregoing rules shall not apply to
contracts or agreements previously entered into by the Village which may be in conflict therewith, except
as such agreements may hereafter be modified, nor shall such rules or the succeeding sections of this
Chapter be construed to imply a grant or right to or in anyone outside the Village limits to connect to the
Village's water system.
Sec. 58.52. Mains outside the Village limits; surety bond.
Anyone who may hereafter construct water supply mains outside of the Village limits which become a part
of the water distribution system of the Village, shall maintain at their expense the mains so constructed to
keep them in good operating condition for a period of 5 years after installation. To guarantee said
maintenance, said person shall furnish a surety bond or other security acceptable to the Village, approved
by the Village, in the amount specified by the Village, but not less than $5,000.00 and conditioned upon
the Village being reimbursed for and/or the person paying all expenses incurred in maintenance of said
mains. After the 5 year period has expired, the Village will assume full maintenance of said mains, and
said bond or other security will be cancelled. Failure to keep such bond or other security in full force for
the period required shall be sufficient cause to shut off the water, after notice and an opportunity for a
hearing as provided in Sec. 58.02 hereof, and to keep the water shut off until the bond or other security is
reinstated.
Sec. 58.53. Water service outside the Village limits.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as giving any person, firm or corporation a vested right to
water service or to the continuance of water service to any property outside the Village limits. The
President and Board of Trustees reserve the right to deny, consistent with law, any application for an
extension of the Village water supply mains or for the furnishing of water to any property outside of the
Village from existing mains if it deems such denial for the public welfare, or if such extension or water
service creates an unreasonable demand upon the water system.
Sec. 58.54. Installing water mains; methods.
The cost of installing water supply main extensions, replacements or improvements shall be provided for
by one of the following methods:
58-4-7
1. For all new subdivisions or parts thereof located inside of the Village limits and not already
served by the Village water supply mains, the subdivider shall provide a complete system of
water supply mains connected to the Village water system, including any connecting mains
needed to bring water to the subdivision, at such subdivider's expense.
2. For extensions of all water supply mains inside or outside the Village limits on street or alleys
already platted which are not a part of a new subdivision, when such mains are intended solely
for providing a water supply to one or more abutting property owners, the cost of installing such
mains shall be provided for by one or more of the following methods:
- By regular special assessment procedure or by special service area as established
by Illinois law.
- By advance cash contributions to the Village by the property owners benefitted in the
amount of 110 percent of the Village Engineer’s Estimate of the cost of the work. 50
percent of the amount due from each benefitted property owner shall be paid as soon
as the Village Engineer has prepared a preliminary estimate, which shall be before
the preparation of construction plans, specifications and bid documents. The
remaining 50 percent of the amount due from each benefitted property owner shall
be paid prior to award of the contract for the project and before any construction work
shall commence. The Village Engineer’s Estimate shall include estimated
construction costs, engineering design and construction inspection (either the actual
cost if done by a consulting engineer retained by the Village or 10 percent of the
construction estimate if done by the Village Engineer), permit fees and miscellaneous
direct costs. The contract for the work shall be let by the Village with the
understanding that any excess of funds advanced over actual final costs shall be
refunded to the contributors, and any deficit in funds shall be paid by the contributors
to the Village upon receipt of notice from the Village regarding such deficit and in all
cases prior to the contributors being issued a connection permit.
- (Section Amended by A-439-2-02)
Any or all of the above methods shall first be approved by the Board of Trustees
before start of construction.
58-5-1
Article V. Connections
(Added by A-439-1-86)
Sec. 58.55. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
(A) AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest
opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and
the flood level rim of the receptacle.
(B) APPROVED. Accepted by the Burr Ridge Water Department as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use.
(C) AUXILIARY SUPPLY. Any water source or system other than the potable water supply that
may be available in the building or premises.
(D) BACKFLOW. The flow of any water, foreign liquids, gases or other substances back into the
distribution pipes of the potable water system.
(E) BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device or means to prevent backflow.
(F) BACK-SIPHONAGE. The flowing back of used, contaminated or polluted water due to a
negative gauge or subatmospheric pressure in that pipe.
(G) CONTAMINATION. See pollution.
(H) CROSS-CONNECTION. Any actual or potential connection between the potable water supply
and a source of possible contamination or pollution.
(I) DRAIN. Any pipe that carries water or waterborne wastes in a building drainage system.
(J) FIXTURE-PLUMBING. Installed receptacles, devices or appliances supplied with water or that
received or discharge liquids for liquid-borne wastes.
(K) FLOOD-LEVEL RIM. The edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
(L) HAZARD, HEALTH. Any condition or devices which, in the judgement of the Superintendent,
may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example of a
health hazard is a structural defect in the water supply system, whether of location, design or
construction, that regularly or occasionally may prevent satisfactory treatment of the water
supply or cause it to be polluted from extraneous sources.
(M) HAZARD, PLUMBING. Any arrangement of plumbing, including piping and fixtures, whereby a
cross-connection is created or is possible.
(N) HYDRO-PNEUMATIC TANK. A pressure vessel in which air pressure acts upon the surface of
the water contained within the vessel, pressurizing the water distribution piping connecting to
the vessel.
(O) OUTLET. The open end of the water supply pipe through which the water is discharged into
the plumbing fixture.
58-5-2
(P) PLUMBING SYSTEM. Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures,
traps, soil pipes, waste pipes, vent pipes, building drains and building sewers, including their
respective connections, devices and appurtenances, any of which are located within the
property lines of the premises; and water-treating or water-using equipment.
(Q) POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or
biological) in water that, either by itself or in combination with another substance in the water,
tends to, or has the potential to, degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the
usefulness of the water.
(R) REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An assembly of differential
valves and check valves, including an automatically opened spillage port to the atmosphere
designed to prevent backflow.
(S) SURGE TANK. The receiving, non-pressure vessel forming part of the air gap separation
between a potable and an auxiliary supply.
(T) VACUUM. Any pressure less than exerted by the atmosphere.
(U) WATER, POTABLE. Water free from contaminants in amounts sufficient to cause disease or
harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and chemical quality shall conform to the
requirements of the Federal and State drinking water regulations and to any regulations of the
applicable public health authority having local jurisdiction.
(V) WATER, NON-POTABLE. Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of
questionable potability.
(W) WATER METER. The water metering mechanism installed directly on the premises’ plumbing
system, through which water passes, providing direct reading of water consumption. (added by
A-439-02-14)
Sec. 58.56. Cross Connections Prohibited.
(A) Cross connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing
water or other substances are prohibited except when and where, as approved in writing by the
Water Department, suitable protective devices such as the reduced pressure zone backflow
preventer (non-residential) or double-check valve assemblies (residential) are installed, tested
and maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis.
(B) To protect the public water system from contamination due to contaminants through the water
service connection into the public water system, a program of inspection and regulation shall be
provided.
(C) The Superintendent of Public Works, or his designated agent (hereinafter referred to collectively
as Superintendent), shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises served by the
public water system as frequently as in his judgement may be necessary to ensure that such
plumbing has been installed and maintained in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of
pollution of the water supply of the Village. The Superintendent shall notify or cause to be
notified in writing the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises,
to correct, within a reasonable time set by the Superintendent, any plumbing installed or
existing contrary to or in violation of this Chapter or any other applicable law or ordinance, and
which, in his judgement, may therefore permit the pollution of the Village water supply, or
otherwise adversely affect the public health.
58-5-3
(D) Inspection. The Superintendent of Public Works, or his designated agent, shall have the right
of entry into any building, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspection of the
plumbing systems installed in such building or premises, provided that with respect to the
inspection of any single family dwelling, consent to such inspection shall first be obtained from a
person of suitable age and discretion therein or in control thereof. Consistent refusal to allow
inspection of a specific dwelling may be cause for requiring installation of suitable backflow
protection device approved by the Village, or discontinuation of potable water service in the
manner provided in this Chapter.
Sec. 58.57. Technical Requirements.
A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as to
prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids, or gases being introduced into the potable water
supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system.
(A) Connection to a potable water supply system is prohibited unless protected against backflow as
set out herein. Examples of fixtures and equipment from which the potable water supply
system must be protected include, but are not limited to:
(1) Bidets
(2) Operating, dissection, embalming, and mortuary tables or similar equipment. In such
installation, the hose used for water supply shall terminate at least 12 inches away
from any point of the table or attachments.
(3) Pumps for non-potable water, chemicals or other substances. Priming connections
may be made only through an air gap.
(4) Building drainage, sewer, or vent systems.
(B) Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an air gap or provided with a
Village approved backflow preventer.
(C) Refrigerating Unit Condensers and Cooling Jackets. Except where potable water provided for a
refrigerator condenser or cooling jacket is entirely outside the piping or tank containing a toxic
refrigerant, the inlet connection shall be provided with a Village approved check valve. Also
adjacent to and at the outlet side of the check valve, a Village approved pressure relief valve set
to relieve at 5 psi above the maximum water pressure at the point of installation shall be
provided if the refrigeration units contain more than 20 pounds of refrigerants.
(D) Protection Against Backflow and Back Siphonage
(1) Water Outlets. A potable water system shall be protected against backflow and
back-siphonage by providing and maintaining at each outlet, an air gap, as specified
below, between the potable water outlet and the flood level rim of the fixture it
supplies, or between the outlet and any other source of contamination, or an
approved device or means to prevent backflow.
(2) Minimum Required Air Gap
(a) How Measured. The minimum required air gap shall be measured
vertically from the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or
line of fixture or receptacle into which it discharges.
58-5-4
(b) Size. The minimum required air gap shall be twice the effective opening of
a potable water outlet unless the outlet is a distance less than three times
the effective opening away from a wall or similar vertical surface, in which
case the minimum required air gap shall be three times the effective
opening of the outlet. In no case shall the minimum required air gap be
less than one inch.
(E) Before any device for the prevention of backflow or back-siphonage is installed, it shall have
first been certified by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control Research of the University
of Southern California, and/or the National Sanitation Foundation. Devices, other than reduced
pressure zone backflow preventers, installed in a residential potable water supply distribution
system for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the
person or persons responsible for the maintenance of the system. Reduced pressure zone
backflow preventers installed in a non-residential building potable water supply distribution
system shall be tested and/or maintained by a State Certified Backflow Preventer
Maintenance/Tester in accordance with Section 653.802(d) of Subtitle F, Title 35 of the Illinois
Administrative Code as adopted by the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
including any subsequent amendments thereto. The Superintendent or his designee shall
inspect routinely such devices and if they are found to be defective or inoperative, the
Superintendent shall notify the owner of his obligation to have the device repaired within 72
hours of oral or written notice by the Superintendent. If the building owner does not perform the
necessary repairs within 72 hours, the Superintendent shall require the replacement thereof
and shall engage the service of a plumber to perform the required work, which cost shall be
invoiced to the building owner, plus a cost of 10% for processing costs, to be paid to the Village.
In the case of an emergency repair, the Superintendent may require the replacement of the
device and arrange with a plumber for the device to be removed. The cost of this work will be
invoiced to the building owner at actual cost.
(F) Installation of Devices
(1) A reduced pressure principle type backflow preventer may be installed subject to full
static pressure.
(2) Backflow and back-siphonage preventing devices containing backflows to separate
fixtures shall be accessibly located, preferably in the same room with the fixture they
serve. Installation in utility or service spaces, provided they are readily accessible, is
also permitted.
(G) Below Rim Supply
(1) Where a potable water outlet terminates below the rim of a tank or vat, and the tank
or vat has an overflow of diameter not less than two inches, the overflow pipe shall
be provided with an air gap as close to the tank as possible.
(2) The potable water outlet to the tank or vat shall terminate a distance not less than 1-
1/2 times the height to which water can rise in the tank above the top of the overflow.
This level shall be established at the maximum flow rate of the supply to the tank or
vat and with all outlets except the air gap overflow outlet closed. The distance from
the outlet to the high water level shall be measured from the critical point of the
potable water supply outlet.
(H) Village approved devices to protect against backflow and back-siphonage shall be installed at
all fixtures and equipment where backflow and/or back-siphonage may occur and where a
minimum air gap cannot be provided between the water outlet to the fixture or equipment and
58-5-5
its flood-level rim.
(1) Connections Subject to Back Pressure. Where a potable water connection is made
to a line, fixture, tank, vat, pump, or other equipment with a hazard of backflow or
back-siphonage where the water connection is subject to back pressure, and an air
gap cannot be installed, the Superintendent will require adequate protection which
will include the use of an approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.
(I) When a booster pump is used on a water pressure booster system, and the possibility exists
that a positive pressure of less than 20 PSI may occur on the suction side of the pump, there
shall be installed a low pressure cutoff on the booster pump to prevent the creation of a vacuum
or negative pressure on the suction side of the pump, thus cutting off water to other outlets.
Sec. 58.58. Backflow Prevention Devices Required.
All construction requiring permits by the Building Department which involve construction revisions or
additions to the potable water distribution system of the building or premises shall require the installation
of a backflow prevention device immediately downstream of the water meter. Backflow prevention
devices shall be required on certain existing buildings in accordance with Subsection B-10 of this Section.
(A) For residential construction permits, backflow preventers will be issued by the Water
Department upon receipt of payment. For non-residential construction, backflow preventers
(reduced principle) shall be furnished by the permittee.
(B) Backflow preventers shall be installed by a licensed plumber at the sole expense of the owner
of the premises being served. All devices shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations. Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be installed as
follows:
(1) Reduced principle backflow preventers shall be installed on fire lines and potable
water service lines separately. Fire lines shall be equipped with a detector check.
(2) Reduced principle backflow preventers shall be installed with two (2) resilient seat
gate valves, with a test cock on the No. 1 gate valve.
(3) Installation shall be in location where the unit is readily accessible for maintenance
and testing. Location should be immediately "downstream" of the water meter.
(4) Minimum clearances recommended by the manufacturer shall be observed.
(5) The unit shall be protected against flooding and freezing.
(6) Free draining of the relief port must be maintained under all conditions and provisions
to accomplish the same, such as floor drains, shall be provided.
(7) If installed at ceiling level, a collection system shall be installed with a fixed and
proper air gap under the drain port to protect areas below the unit from drainage, and
a proper air gap between the discharge of the collection system and structure
accepting the discharged water.
(8) There shall be no reduction made in the size of the relief port drain.
(9) Provision shall be made for easy and unrestricted removal of the unit.
58-5-6
(10) Reduced principle backflow preventers are expressly required on all existing and
proposed buildings where:
a) the fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other chemicals;
b) water is pumped into the fire safety system from another source; or
c) water flows into the fire safety system by gravity from a non-potable
source; or
d) there is a connection whereby water can be pumped into the fire safety
system from any other source.
(C) Testing of Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventers.
(1) Each year the Village will cause the testing of each reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer installed.
(2) Testing of units shall be the responsibility of the building owner and be performed in
accordance with manufacturer's recommendation. Minimal maintenance such as
internal cleaning, if needed, shall be provided. Costs for tests, parts and/or
replacement of units will be the responsibility of the building owner.
(3) Testing of initial installation before occupancy shall be required. Initial certification
test will be done at no charge. Residential construction shall require 3/4" double
check valve assembly on a 1" service line. All non-residential construction shall
require reduced principle backflow preventers.
(4) The Water Department shall perform random inspections and testing each year,
based on the anniversary date of the installation. Such tests shall be conducted,
where possible, within 60 days of said anniversary date.
(5) The building owner shall be responsible for authorizing a qualified licensed plumber
to perform all necessary tests and file all necessary reports with State and local
authorities, and will certify that owners' reduced pressure backflow preventers are
operating and being maintained in accordance with existing State code requirements
and manufacturers recommendations. These reports shall be submitted annually to
the Superintendent. A copy of the maintenance and inspection records shall be on
file at the plant facility and shall be made available to the inspector or backflow
maintainer on request.
(6) Cost of subsequent annual inspections and testing of units shall be the owners
responsibility. The charge for random inspection and test by the Village will be based
on $100.00 per unit.
(7) All parts necessary to rebuild a unit to meet factory and/or State Standards shall be
provided by the manufacturer of the backflow preventer, and shall be new parts.
(8) Any maintenance and/or inspections and testing requested of the Water Department
by owner between annual inspection will be performed by the Water Department and
invoiced at then current prices or rates.
(9) Tampering Prohibited. No persons other than the Superintendent or his designee, or
other State certified backflow preventer maintenance/tester shall remove, repair, test
58-5-7
or perform any maintenance on any reduced pressure principle backflow preventer.
(10) Owners of all reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall provide easy
access to units and/or necessary tools and equipment, and shall furnish the Water
Department with necessary ladders and/or scaffolding, and shall assign an employee
or employees to assist the Water Department in performing any necessary testing
and service according to this Code, as may be necessary, all at owners expense.
The owner of each device shall maintain in a neat and orderly manner, a
manufacturer's maintenance manual and manufacturer's testing instruction at the
point of installation of the device.
(D) Out of Service - Repair. When a unit is out of service, or otherwise is in need of service, the
Water Department shall be notified within 24 hours.
(E) By-Passes. If there is only one service line, and the water service cannot be interrupted, a
second backflow preventer may be installed in parallel with the first. Under no circumstance will
a backflow preventer be bypassed by unprotected piping. For buildings where water service
cannot be interrupted during normal Village working hours, a bypass will be required with a
backflow preventer.
(F) Specification. Reduced principle backflow preventers shall be Febco 825 or 835 series (as
applicable) or Cla-Val RP Series.
Sec. 58.59. Notification of Violation.
The Superintendent shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner of the building or premises in
which there is found a violation of this ordinance, of such violation. The Superintendent shall set a
reasonable time, based on the level or hazard to health, for the owner to have the violation removed or
corrected, and shall include in such notification a indication that water service may be terminated if the
owner fails to correct the defect in such time. Upon failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by
the end of the specified time interval, the Superintendent may, if in his judgment an imminent health
hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated, and/or recommend
such additional fine or penalties to be invoked as herein may be provided.
58-6-1
Article VI. Air Conditioners and Refrigeration Systems
(A-439-1-86 renumbers the following)
Sec. 58.60. Systems not permitted.
No person shall install, operate or use any equipment for air-conditioning or refrigeration which requires a
supply of water from the Village of Burr Ridge water system.
58-7-1
Article VII. Fluoride
Sec. 58.61. Use of Fluoride.
The President and Board of Trustees hereby find that it is the interests of public health that steps for the
introduction of fluoride to the water supply in a concentration adequate for safety be taken.
Sec. 58.62. Fluoride levels.
Fluoride shall be added to the Village water supply in quantities sufficient to maintain in the entire Village
an optimum fluoride level of 1.0 part per million parts of water. Said fluoride shall be added in accordance
with regulations prescribed by the Illinois Department of Health and the Department of Public Works of the
Village of Burr Ridge.
58-8-1
Article VIII. General Provisions, Penalties, Severability
Sec. 58.63. Authorization to act for Superintendent of Public Works.
When any action herein is to be taken by the Superintendent of Public Works, said action may also be
taken by said Superintendent's duly authorized agent or agents.
Sec. 58.64. Minimum requirements.
All requirements contained herein relating to water meters and construction regulations shall be construed
to be minimum requirements.
Sec. 58.65. Filing of ordinance as notice to property owners.
A copy of this ordinance, properly certified by the Village Clerk, shall be filed in the offices of the
Recorders of Deeds of Cook and DuPage Counties, and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real
estate of their liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the waterworks system of said
Village on their properties.
Sec. 58.66. Conflicting provisions.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed insofar as the conflicting
portions thereof are concerned.
Sec. 58.67. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$5.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Amended by A-439-1-96)
Sec. 58.68. Effect of prior ordinances.
This ordinance shall not be construed to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is
expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued, or claim arising under the
former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued, or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at
the time of such proceeding so far as practicable.
Sec. 58.69. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity of such
section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not affect any of the other provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 58.70. Effective date; publication.
That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as
required by law. This ordinance shall be published in pamphlet form.
Sec. 58.71. Other Ordinances.
58-8-2
There exist special ordinances relating to the waterworks system, including but not necessarily limited to
Ordinance No. 284, 311, 371 and 405, which affect only certain portions of the waterworks system and/or
are effective only for a limited period of time and which have not been codified herein but which shall
continue in full force and effect in accordance with the terms of each such ordinance.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 59
SEWER SYSTEMS
Article I. General
Article II. Sewer Systems
Sec. 59.2 Definitions
Article III.
Sec. 59.3.1 Building Sewers and Connections
Sec. 59.3.2 Use of Public Sewers
Sec. 59.3.3 Protection of Sewage Works from Damage
Sec. 59.3.4 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
Article IV. Rates and Collections
Sec. 59.4.1 Wastewater Service Charges
Article V. Penalty
Article VI. Miscellaneous Provisions
Last Revision Ordinance A-663-01-18 April 9, 2018
59-1-1
Article I - General
Sec. 59.1.1 That all property, real, personal, and mixed, comprising the now existing sanitary sewerage system,
except for trunk and interceptor sewers owned by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
Greater Chicago and the Hinsdale Sanitary District, located in the Cook County portion of this Village
be and the same are hereby found, determined and declared to constitute the properties of the
sewerage system of said Village.
Sec. 59.1.2 That from and after the effective date of this Ordinance said sanitary sewerage system shall be owned
and operated by this Village as a utility, known as the sewerage system of said Village, and all
improvements and extensions to said utility; and all properties, assets, obligations and liabilities, of all
kinds of said sanitary sewerage system, existing, outstanding and accruing or to accrue, shall be held,
used and acknowledged as the properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of said utility.
59-2-1
Article II - Sewer Systems
Sec. 59.2 Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this Ordinance
shall be as follows:
59.2.1 "Administrator" means the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
59.2.2 "Basic User Charge" shall mean the basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system.
59.2.3 "BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days of 20°C,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
59.2.4 "Building Drain" shall mean that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
59.2.5 "Building Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
59.2.6 "Capital Improvement Charge" shall mean a charge levied on users to improve, extend or reconstruct
the sewage treatment works.
59.2.7 "Combined Sewer" shall mean a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm,
surface and groundwater drainage.
59.2.8 "Commercial User" shall include transit lodging, congregate care lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services, located in the Cook
County portions of the Village.
59.2.9 "Commissioner" means the Village Water Commissioner.
59.2.10 "Control Manhole" shall mean a structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are
discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a "control
manhole" is to provide access for the Village representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
59.2.11 "Debt Service Charge" shall be the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest,
principal and coverage of any municipal obligation or security which is outstanding.
59.2.12 "Director" means the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
59.2.13 "Easement" shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
59.2.14 "Effluent Criteria" are defined in any applicable "NPDES Permit".
59.2.15 "Federal Act" means the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 446 et seq.) as amended, (Pub.L.95-
217).
59-2-2
59.2.16 "Federal Grant" shall mean the U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and
implementing regulations.
59.2.17 "Floatable Oil" is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free
of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
59.2.18 "Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
59.2.19 "Industrial Users" shall include establishments located in the Cook County portions of the Village
engaged in manufacturing activities including, but not limited to those involving the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials of substance into products.
59.2.20 "Industrial Waste" shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharge, permitted to flow or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process or from
the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
59.2.21 "Institutional/Governmental User" shall include schools, churches, penal institutions, and users
associated with federal, state and local governments.
59.2.22 "Local Capital Cost Charge" shall mean charges for costs other than the Operation, Maintenance and
Replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement costs.
59.2.23 "Major Contributing Industry" shall mean an industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that:
(a) has a flow of $50,000 gallons or more per average work day; or (b) has a flow greater than ten
percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or (c) has in its waste a toxic
pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
(d) is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the
publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality or effluent
from that treatment works.
59.2.24 "May" is permissible.
59.2.25 "MWRDGC" means the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago and its User
Charge Ordinance.
59.2.26 "Milligrams per Liter" shall mean a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is
0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts
per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
59.2.27 "Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
groundwater.
59.2.28 "Normal Domestic Sewage" shall mean wastewater with constituents within the limits of a BOD5
concentration of 200 mg/1 and a suspended solids concentration of 250 mg/1.
59-2-3
59.2.29 "NPDES Permit" means any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator, or, where appropriate by the Director, after enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act to
regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Act.
59.2.30 "Ordinance" means this chapter.
59.2.31 "Person" shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual, firm, company,
municipal, or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or
other entity.
59.2.32 "pH" shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the Hydrogen-ion concentration expressed
by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of Laboratory Methods.
59.2.33 "Population Equivalent" is a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a
treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing
0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids.
59.2.34 "ppm" shall mean parts per million by weight.
59.2.35 "Pretreatment" shall mean the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the
wastewater treatment works.
59.2.36 "Private Sewage Disposal System" shall mean any privy, privy vault, septic tank, septic field, cesspool
or other facility intended or used for the treatment or disposal of sewage which is not connected to a
public sanitary sewer.
59.2.37 "Properly Shredded Garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
59.2.38 "Public Sewer" shall mean a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the Village. It shall also
include sewers within or outside the Village boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately
discharge into the Village sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with Village funds.
59.2.39 "Replacement" shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or
appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the
capacity and performance of which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation
and maintenance" includes replacement.
59.2.40 "Residential User" shall mean all dwelling units such as homes, mobile homes, apartments, permanent
multifamily dwellings located in that portion of the Village located in Cook County.
59.2.41 "Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of
both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally
admitted.
59.2.42 "Sewage" is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
59.2.43 "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm,
59-2-4
surface and groundwater drainage.
59.2.44 "Sewerage" shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and
pumping of sewage.
59.2.45 "Sewerage Fund" is the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of
the sewerage system.
59.2.46 "Shall" is mandatory.
59.2.47 "Slug" shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15)
minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during
normal operation.
59.2.48 "State Act" means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
59.2.49 "State Grant" shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as
filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
59.2.50 "Storm Sewer" shall mean a sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage but excludes
sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
59.2.51 "Stormwater Runoff" shall mean that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
59.2.52 "Surcharge" shall mean the assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge
which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values
established in Article VII.
59.2.53 "Suspended Solids" (SS) shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in
water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device.
Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth
in the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
59.2.54 "Unpolluted Water" is water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that
would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
59.2.55 "Useful Life" shall mean the estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment
works will be operated.
59.2.56 "User Charge" shall mean a charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement.
59.2.57 "User Class" shall mean the type of user "residential, institutional/governmental, commercial" or
"industrial" as defined herein.
59.2.58 "Village" means the Village of Burr Ridge.
59.2.59 "Wastewater" shall mean the spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a
59-2-5
combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
59.2.60 "Wastewater Facilities" shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry
away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.
59.2.61 "Wastewater Service Charge" shall be the charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the
Wastewater Facilities as computed in Article IV.
59.2.62 "Wastewater Treatment Works" shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating
wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment
plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
59.2.63 "Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
59.2.64 "Water Quality Standards" are as defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois.
59-3-1
Article III
Sec. 59.3.1 Building sewers and connections
(a) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening into, use,
alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Commissioner. Applications for such permits shall be accompanied by a
statement as to the purpose of such connection, the premises to be served and the
specification of such pipe to be connected and the drain from house to sewer pipe. No such
permit shall be issued unless it is found that the ordinances of the Village would be complied
with by making of such connection.
(b) All connections to a service line shall remain uncovered until an inspection has been made
by an authorized agent of the Village. Request for such inspection must be made 24 hours
prior to the date when the work will be ready for inspection.
(c) All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in
compliance with Federal Standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more
stringent state and local standards.
(d) There shall be three (3) classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential wastewater
service; (2) for commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater service, and
(3) for existing building sewers being used in connection with building demolition and
construction of a new building or for a new service connection for a lot where the old building
has been demolished and a new building is being constructed to take its place.
There shall be and are hereby established fees for all connections (including inspection
thereof) to the sanitary sewer system of the Village:
(1) Residential - Such sanitary sewer system connection fee is hereby established at
an amount of $1,000.00 per single-family attached or detached dwelling unit (not
building) and $1,000.00 per multiple family dwelling unit (not building). Such fee
shall not apply to tear down and reconstruction on the same site [see Section
39.1.(d).(3)]
(2) Commercial, Institutional/Governmental or Industrial - Such sanitary sewer system
connection fee is hereby established at an amount of $2,000.00 per industrial,
commercial, office or business building.
(3) Tear Downs - The sanitary sewer system connection fee shall not be required
when a building is demolished and a new building is constructed on the same site
to take its place. There shall be the following inspection fees required for this
class of building sewer permit:
Disconnection Inspection Fee in regard to the demolition $50.00
Connection Inspection Fee for a new tap to the sewer $50.00
Service Line Inspection Fee to ensure that the old
service line being used for the new building conforms to
all requirements of this Chapter $50.00
59-3-2
Such connection fees shall apply only to connections within the jurisdiction of the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago (DuPage County and the
Hinsdale Sanitary District having jurisdiction of all sewers outside the jurisdiction of the
MWRDGC and having established their own connection fees). Anyone applying for a
connection to said sewer system of the Village shall make written application to the Village
on forms to be supplied by the Village, and shall deposit the amount of the connection fee
with the Village at the time of application. Such permit application shall be effective for only
a sixty (60) day period commencing on the date of the application. If physical connection to
the sanitary sewer system is not made within said sixty (60) day period, the amount
deposited shall be nonrefundable, and the applicants shall be required to file a new permit
application and shall be required to make a new deposit in the full amount required for the
connection fee under this Section.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Commissioner. The applicant, as a
condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. (Amended by A-663-1-95)
(e) A building sewer permit shall only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if
it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump
stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately
and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
The owner of any premises in the Village served by a connection with the Village sewer
system shall install, maintain, repair and when necessary replace the house sewer service
line from the property line to the building it serves, at his own expense. The provisions of
the ordinances relating to excavations in streets shall be complied with in making
excavations in streets or other public places for sewer connections.
(f) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that
where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building and the whole can be considered as one
building sewer.
(g) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings taking the place of old
buildings which have been demolished only when they are found, on examination and
testing by the Commissioner, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance. Provided,
however, all required inspection fees set forth in Section 59.3.1.(d).(3) shall be paid. If the
old building sewer service line is abandoned and a new service line is connected to the
sanitary sewer main, the abandoned service line shall be unearthed and capped as required
by the Commissioner. (Amended by A-663-1-95)
(h) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to
be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall
all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the Village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society
of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and
59-3-3
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply.
(i) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below
the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by and
approved by the Village means and discharged to the building sewer. Basement floor drains
shall be connected to sump pumps and discharged to the sanitary sewers. Garage floor
drains shall be discharged to the sanitary sewers.
(j) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building
drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, and it shall
be unlawful to construct or permit the construction of any stormwater drain which discharges
water onto any sidewalk, pathway, public street or alley of the Village.
(k) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements
of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules and regulations of the Village, or
the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing
Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall
be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved in writing by the Commissioner before installation.
(l) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Commissioner when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Commissioner.
(m) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades
and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory
to the Commissioner.
(n) The most recent revision of the "Manual of procedures for the Administration of the Sewer
Permit Ordinance," as adopted by the trustees of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago on September 3, 1970, is hereby adopted as an integral part of
the procedures of the administration for sanitary sewer permits. In addition, the provisions
of the latest revision of the "Technical Policy Statements," as adopted by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, shall also apply to all
sanitary sewer construction within 50 feet of a private well and to all other sources of
pollution as listed in Table 1 of the "Technical Policy Statements." However, in no case will
the use of a poly vinyl chloride (PVC) pipe of less strength than SDR 26 (Schedule 40) be
allowed for use within public rights of way.
(o) No building constructed subsequent to May 1, 1994, shall be connected to any sanitary
sewer within the Village under the jurisdiction of the DuPage County Department of Public
Works wherein the sewer mains to which such connection is sought were constructed with
Village funds or with funds made available by a special assessment unless a connection fee
has been paid which shall be calculated as follows:
Actual cost per building lot x Inflation Adjuster = Connection Fee
For purposes of this Section, "Inflation Adjuster" means a fraction, the numerator of which is the
59-3-4
Consumer Price Index published on the date closest to the date of calculation and the denominator of
which is the Consumer Price Index published on the date closest to January 1, 1994. For purposes of
this section, Consumer Price Index means the Consumer Price Index for the Chicago, Illinois,
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, All-Items for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, 1982-
1984 Base, published by the United States Department of Labor, or, if such Index is no longer
published or its method of computation is substantially modified, a substitute Index published by the
United States government or by a reputable publisher of financial or economic statistics that will fairly
and reasonably reflect the same or substantially the same information as the discontinued or modified
Index. Said connection fees shall be distributed to the general fund if construction costs were paid
with Village funds or to the special assessment fund for possible rebate to assesses if construction
costs were paid through special assessment funds.(Added by A-666-1-94)
Sec. 59.3.2. Use of Public Sewers
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property or in any area under its jurisdiction, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(b) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sewage or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this Ordinance.
(c) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(d) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the Commissioner. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the Commissioner, to a storm sewer, combined water, or natural
outlet.
(e) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters
or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid, or gas.
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and
personnel of the sewage works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of
the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage,
59-3-5
whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(f) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Commissioner that such
wastes can harm either the sewers sewage treatment process or equipment; have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property,
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Commissioner will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature
of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by
regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F), (0 and 65°C).
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32)
and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F), (0 and 65°C).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation
of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower
(0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Commissioner.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated
plating solution whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar
objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting and excessive chlorine
requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
Commissioner for such materials.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by
the Commissioner as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for
such discharge to the receiving waters.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the Commissioner in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
(8) Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(9) Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/1 as Hg at any time
except as permitted by the Commissioner in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations.
59-3-6
(10) Any cyanide in excess of 0.10 mg/1 at any time except as permitted by the
Commissioner in compliance with applicable MSD, state and federal regulations.
(11) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
(b) excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions);
(c) unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works;
(d) unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs"
as defined herein.
(12) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to treatment or
reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot
meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
The Commissioner shall not issue a permit for any allowable discharge under this
section without a prior permit having been issued by the MWRDGC for said
discharge. When a permit has been issued by the MWRDGC, the Commissioner
may waive the fee and adopt the MWRDGC permit.
(g) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substance or possess the characteristics enumerated in
the above section or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40
CFR 402, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the
Commissioner may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Commissioner may:
(1) reject the wastes;
(2) require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sewers;
(3) require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or
(4) require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not
covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
If the Commissioner permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Commissioner, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and
laws.
59-3-7
(h) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Commissioner, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Commissioner, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
(i) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(j) Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the
Commissioner, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Commissioner.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(k) The owner or any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate
compliance with this ordinance and any special conditions for discharge established by the
Village or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall
be as stipulated by the Village, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a
complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance
with the federal, state, and local standards are being met. The Owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the Village at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the Village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the Village. At such times as deemed
necessary, the Village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by
an outside laboratory service.
(l) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition
of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at
the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not
always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
(m) No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Village for
59-3-8
treatment, subject to payment therefore, in accordance with Article VII, hereof, by the
industrial concern provided such payments are in accordance with MWRDGC, federal and
state guidelines for User Charge System.
Sec. 59.3.3 Protection of Sewage Works from Damage
No person shall break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment
which is a part of the sewage works without a permit.
Sec. 59.3.4 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
(a) The Commissioner and other duly authorized employees of the Village, the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago (MWRDGC), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this Article, and not in violation of any constitutional provision.
The Commissioner or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers
or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
(b) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to above, the
Commissioner or duly authorized employees of the Village, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago
(MWRDGC), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the Village employees and the Village shall indemnify the
company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
conditions.
(c) The company and other duly authorized employees of the Village bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village
holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to
the private property involved.
59-4-1
Article IV - Rates and Collections
Sec. 59.4.1 Wastewater Service Charge
(a) The wastewater service charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water
meters.
(b) Measurement of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing wastewater service charges
shall be metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 100 gallons.
(1) If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all,
of his water from sources other than the Public Waterworks System, all or a part
of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall install and
maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the Commissioner
for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other
sources.
(2) Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the
Commissioner if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the
metered water consumption records.
(3) Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned,
and maintained by the person discharging wastes into the public sewers.
Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless
service is cancelled, without the consent of the Commissioner.
(c) Components of Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge shall be levied
to pay for the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, replacing, and constructing additions
to the sanitary sewer system. It shall be comprised of two elements, an operation,
maintenance and replacement (OM&R) charge and a debt service charge which together
shall equal the wastewater service charge. The OM&R charge shall be determined by
dividing the total cost for operating, maintaining and replacing the sanitary sewer system by
the total gallons billed in a year, and the debt service charge shall be determined by dividing
the total annual debt service by the total gallons billed in a year. The sum of those two
calculations shall equal the wastewater service charge which may be rounded off to a rate
per 1,000 gallons after taking into consideration minimum charges, late payment, discounts,
and non-payment. At least 30 days before the beginning of each fiscal year, the adequacy
of the wastewater charges shall be reviewed and the charges revised accordingly by
ordinance. After the beginning of each fiscal year, each user, in conjunction with a regular
bill for services, shall be notified of the rate for the wastewater service charge.
(d)) Wastewater Service Charges: For all users of the sanitary system operated by the Village of
Burr Ridge, there shall be and there is hereby established a user charge as
follows:(Amended by A-663-1-18)
59-4-2
Non-Residential Sewer Rates
May 1, 2017 to April 30, 2018 $40.00
or
$1.05
per 1,000 Gallons of
water used, whichever
is greater
May 1, 2018 to April 30, 2019 $40.00 $1.16
May 1, 2019 to April 30, 2020 $40.00 $1.25
May 1, 2020 to April 30, 2021 $40.00 $1.35
May 1, 2021 to April 30, 2022 $40.00 $1.45
May 1, 2022 $40.00 $1.57
Residential Sewer Rates: Fixed Rate Per 2 Months (no variable rate)
May 1, 2017 to April 30, 2018 $20.00
May 1, 2018 to April 30, 2019 $25.00
May 1, 2019 to April 30, 2020 $30.00
May 1, 2020 to April 30, 2021 $35.00
May 1, 2021 to April 30, 2022 $40.00
May 1, 2022 $40.00
(e) The amount due for the wastewater service charge shall be subject to a penalty of 10%
against the total as shown in the statement if not paid within 25 days of the billing date. The
Finance Director is authorized to waive a current penalty imposed on the water/sewer bill, at
the written request of the customer, once in every two year period. This waiver will be
automatically granted if the customer has a proven good payment history; i.e., the customer
must have made timely payments of all water/sewer charges during the prior two years.
(Amended by A-663-2-91)
(f) The charges set forth in this Article are Village charges and are in addition to any charges
made by the MWRDGC under its USER CHARGE ORDINANCE or any other governmental
agency.
(g) The penalties for late payment are the same as the penalties for late payment provided for
water rate charges.
(h) Appeals: The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
wastewater user charges in this Article shall be made available to a user within 20 days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the
computation thereof shall, if justified, be remedied by appeal to the Commissioner within 20
days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(i) Bills: Said rates or charges for service shall be payable bi-monthly. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by
the Village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the
59-4-3
services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. (Amended A-663-1-91)
Charges for sewer service shall be added on to the bill for water service and shall be sent
out at the same time water bills are sent and subject to the same late charge and penalties
for late payment of water bills. Charges to sewer service to new buildings shall commence
on the date when the building is occupied. In the event of a change in the ownership of the
premises receiving sewer service, the Village shall promptly be notified in writing of such
change.
(j) Delinquent Bills: If the charges for such services are not paid within 60 days of the due date,
such services shall be discontinued after notice and hearing and shall not be reinstated until
all claims are settled. Hearings shall be conducted under the same format provided for
water delinquencies.
(k) Lien-Notice of Delinquency: Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 30 days
after its due date, the Village may file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien
claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount
of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the Village claims a lien for that amount as well as for all
charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises the Village shall mail notice
of the delinquency to the taxpayer whose name appears on the tax bill for the parcel
involved as the owner of record as well as to the user and said notice shall include a
statement that a lien may be created against the real estate for the delinquent amounts.
Notice of the creation of the lien shall also be sent to the taxpayer whose name appears on
the tax bill for the parcel involved as the owner of record. The failure of the Village to record
such lien or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not effect the right to
foreclose unpaid bills as mentioned in the following section. (Amended A-663-1-93)
(l) Foreclosure of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure
shall be in chancery in the name of the Village. The Village attorney is hereby authorized
and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the Village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 60
days after due date.
(m) Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system
shall be deposited in the sewerage fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the
Village Treasurer separate and apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all
other funds of the Village and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at
such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the President and
Board of Trustees.
The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewage system and all other
funds and monies incident to the operation of such systems as the same may be delivered
to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the "Sewerage Fund."
(n) Accounts: The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of
59-4-4
all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall
cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.
In addition to the above, the annual audit report shall include the following:
1. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
2. Number of users connected to the system.
3. Number of non-metered users.
4. A list of users discharging non-domestic and industrial wastes and volume of
waste discharged.
(o) Access to Records: The IEPA and its authorized representatives shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the Village which are applicable to the Village
system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereto to insure compliance with the terms of any
Federal grant or State grant.
(p) Effective Date of Rates: The wastewater user charges in this Article shall be effective for all
bills issued hereinafter.
59-5-1
Article V - Penalty
Sec. 59.5.1 The penalty for violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be and are established as follows:
(a) Unless a separate fine or penalty is specifically provided for in any section of this Ordinance,
then any person, firm or corporation who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who
resists or opposes the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be fined not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense, and every such person or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for every day on which such violation, neglect or refusal shall continue and any builder or
contractor who shall construct any building in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, and any architect designing, drawing plans for or having charge of such building or
who shall permit it to be constructed, shall be liable to the penalties provided and imposed
by this section. (A-663-1-96)
(b) In addition to the penalty provided by subsection (a), the Village may file suit and proceed to
demolish, repair, enclose, recover cost or sue for an injunction to cause compliance as
provided for in Article 11, Division 31 and 31.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
59-6-1
Article VI - Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 59.6.1 If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Chapter shall be held invalid, the validity thereof
shall not affect any of the provisions of this Chapter.
BURR RIDGE VILLAGE CODE
CHAPTER 60
TAXATION
SECTION 60-1 Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
Sec. 60-1-1 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-1-2 Accounting
Sec. 60-1-3 Payment
SECTION 60-2 Municipal Automobile Renting Use Tax
Sec. 60-2-1 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-2-2 Collection
Sec. 60-2-3 Payment
SECTION 60-3 Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
Sec. 60-3-1 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-3-2 Certain Exemptions Declared Inapplicable
Sec. 60-3-3 Accounting
Sec. 60-3-4 Payment
SECTION 60-4 Municipal Service Occupation Tax
Sec. 60-4-1 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-4-2 Certain Exemptions Declared Inapplicable
Sec. 60-4-3 Accounting
Sec. 60-4-4 Payment
SECTION 60-5 Municipal Use Tax
Sec. 60-5-1 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-5-2 Certain Exemptions Declared Inapplicable
Sec. 60-5-3 Collection
Sec. 60-5-4 Payment
SECTION 60-6 Municipal Utilities Tax
Sec. 60-6-1 Definitions
Sec. 60-6-2 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-6-3 Interstate Commerce
Sec. 60-6-4 Tax in Addition to Other Payments
Sec. 60-6-5 Reports by Taxpayer
Sec. 60-6-6 Erroneous Payment
Sec. 60-6-7 Recovery Limited
Sec. 60-6-8 Penalty
Sec. 60-6-9 Replacement Tax
SECTION 60-7 Municipal Hotel and Motel Room Tax
Sec. 60-7-1 Definitions
Sec. 60-7-2 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-7-3 Payment and Collection of Tax
Sec. 60-7-4 Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 60-7-5 Suit for Collection; Revocation of License
Sec. 60-7-6 Interest and Penalties
Sec. 60-7-7 Disposition of Proceeds of Tax
Sec. 60-7-8 Penalty for Violation
SECTION 60-8 Municipal Telecommunications Tax
Sec. 60-8-1 Definitions
Sec. 60-8-2 Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-8-3 Collection of Tax by Retailers
Sec. 60-8-4 Filing Returns and Remittance by Retailers
Sec. 60-8-5 Registration
Sec. 60-8-6 Obligation of Taxpayers to File Returns and Pay Tax
Sec. 60-8-7 Resale Numbers
Sec. 60-8-8 Maintaining Book and Records
Sec. 60-8-9 Disposition of Collected Funds
Sec. 60-8-10 Severability
SECTION 60-9 Amusement Tax
Sec. 60-9-1 Definitions
Sec. 60-9-2 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-9-3 Payment and Collection of Tax
Sec. 60-9-4 Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 60-9-5 Suit for Collection; Revocation of License
Sec. 60-9-6 Interest and Penalties
Sec. 60-9-7 Disposition of Proceeds of Tax
Sec. 60-9-8 Penalty for Violation
Sec. 60-9-9 Untitled
SECTION 60-10 Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Section 60-10 Repealed by A-383-01-06
SECTION 60-11 Electric Utility Tax
Sec. 60-11-1 Definitions
Sec. 60-11-2 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-11-3 Exception
Sec. 60-11-4 Dates of Imposition
Sec. 60-11-5 Collection of Taxes
Sec. 60-11-6 Tax Remittance and Return
Sec. 60-11-7 Resales
Sec. 60-11-8 Books and Records
Sec. 60-11-9 Credits and Refunds
SECTION 60-12 Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights
Sec. 60-12-1 Scope; Application
Sec. 60-12-2 Definitions
Sec. 60-12-3 Notices
Sec. 60-12-4 Payment; Interest and Penalties
Sec. 60-12-5 Credits and Refunds
Sec. 60-12-6 Audit Procedures
Sec. 60-12-7 Determination of Tax Liability
Sec. 60-12-8 Appeal and Hearing
Sec. 60-12-9 Installment Contracts
Sec. 60-12-10 Voluntary Disclosure
Sec. 60-12-11 Publication of Tax Ordinances
Sec. 60-12-12 Liens
Sec. 60-12-13 Criminal Penalties
SECTION 60-13 9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System Surcharges
Sec. 60-13-1 Definitions
Sec. 60-13-2 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-13-3 Payment and Collection of Tax
Sec. 60-13-4 Administration and Enforcement
SECTION 60-14 Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation, Service Occupation and Use Taxes
Sec. 60-14-1 (A) Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-14-1 (B) Collection of Tax
Sec. 60-14-1 (C) Use of Taxes
Sec. 60-14-2 (A) Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-14-2 (B) Collection of Tax
Sec. 60-14-2 (C) Use of Taxes
Sec. 60-14-3 (A) Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-14-3 (B) Collection of Tax
Sec. 60-14-3 (C) Use of Taxes
SECTION 60-15 Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee
Sec. 60-15-1 Definitions
Sec. 60-15-2 Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
Sec. 60-15-3 PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
Sec. 60-15-4 Applicable Principles
Sec. 60-15-5 No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder
Sec. 60-15-6 Audits of Cable/Video Service Provider
Sec. 60-15-7 Late Fees/Payments
SECTION 60-16 Tax on the Gross Receipts of Places for Eating
Sec. 60-16-1 Definitions
Sec. 60-16-2 Tax Imposed
Sec. 60-16-3 Books and Records/Inspections/Contents
Sec. 60-16-4 Transmittal of Tax Revenue by Owner/Delinquency
Sec. 60-16-5 Transmittal of Excess Tax Collections
Sec. 60-16-6 Registration
Sec. 60-16-7 Collection
Sec. 60-16-8 Suspension of License
Sec. 60-16-9 Penalties
Sec. 60-16-10 Separability
Last Chapter Revision: Ordinance A-383-02-12, 05-29-12
60-1-1
SECTION 60-1
Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
Sec. 60-1-1 Tax Imposed
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in this
Village at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such
business while this Section 60-1 is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-7 of
the Illinois Municipal Code.
Sec. 60-1-2 Accounting
Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file on or before the last day of each
calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by Sections Two and Three
of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal
Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
Sec. 60-1-3 Payment
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of
tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month.
60-2-1
SECTION 60-2
Municipal Automobile Renting Use Tax
Sec. 60-2-1 Tax Imposed
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this Village an automobile which is rented from
a renter outside Illinois and which is titled or registered with an agency of this State's government in
this Village at the rate of one percent of the rental price of such automobile while this Section 60-2 is
in effect, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
Sec. 60-2-2 Collection
A tax provided for in this Ordinance shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for
titling or registration purposes is given as being in this Village.
Sec. 60-2-3 Payment
The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be paid to the Illinois Department of Revenue, or an
exemption determination must be obtained from said Department, before the title or certificate of
registration for the automobile may be issued.
60-3-1
SECTION 60-3
Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
Sec. 60-3-1 Tax Imposed
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail in this Village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
Sec. 60-3-2 Certain Exemptions Declared Inapplicable
The following exemptions provided by Section 441 of Chapter 120 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, as
amended, shall not apply to the Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax of the Village of Burr Ridge:
1. Exemption (a-1), new and used farm machinery and equipment costing $1,000 or more,
including that manufactured on special order and that purchased for lease, certified by the
purchaser to be used primarily for "production agriculture," as defined by said Section 441
of Chapter 120, and including any individual replacement part for such machinery and
equipment which part costs in excess of $1,000.
2. Exemption (a-2), the proceeds from the sale of distillation machinery and equipment, sold
as a unit or kit and assembled or installed by the retailer, which machinery and equipment
is certified by the user to be used only for the production of ethyl alcohol that will be used
for consumption as motor fuel or as a component of motor fuel for the personal use of such
user and not subject to sale or resale.
3. Exemption (a-3), new and used Graphic Arts machinery and equipment, including that
manufactured on special order or purchased for lease, certified by the purchaser to be
used primarily for "graphic arts production," as defined by said Section 441 of Chapter 120.
4. Exemption (d), the proceeds from the sale of machinery and equipment, including such
which replaces machinery and equipment, including such which replaces machinery and
equipment in an existing manufacturing facility as well as such which is for use in an
expanded or new manufacturing facility, which will be used by the purchaser, or a lessee of
the purchaser, primarily in the process of manufacturing or assembling tangible personal
property for wholesale or retail sale or lease, whether such sale or lease is made directly by
the manufacturer or by some other person, whether the materials used in the process are
owned by the manufacturer or by some other person, or whether such sale or lease is
made apart from or as an incident to the seller's engaging in the service occupation or
producing machines, tools, dies, jigs, patterns, gauges or other similar items of no
commercial value on special order for a particular purchaser. Also including the sale of
materials to a purchaser who produces exempted types of machinery or equipment or tools
to a manufacturer of tangible personal property and including the sale of materials to a
purchaser who manufactures such materials into an exempted type of machinery or
equipment or tools which such purchaser uses himself in the manufacturing of tangible
personal property. All terms used in this exemption (d) shall have the definitions provided
by said Section 441 of Chapter 120.
60-3-2
Sec. 60-3-3 Accounting
Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file on or before the last day of each
calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by Section Three of "An Act
in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to
Purchasers for Use or Consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
Sec. 60-3-4 Payment
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of
tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the
preceding calendar month.
60-4-1
SECTION 60-4
Municipal Service Occupation Tax
Sec. 60-4-1 Tax Imposed
A tax is hereby imposed on all persons engaged in the business of making sales of services in this
Village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by
said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-5 of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
Sec. 60-4-2 Certain Exemptions Declared Inapplicable
The following exemptions provided by Sections 439.102 and 439.103 of Chapter 120 of the Illinois
Revised Statutes, as amended, shall not apply to the Municipal Service Occupation Tax of the Village
of Burr Ridge:
1. Exemption (e) of said Section 439.102, for a sale or transfer of machinery and equipment
used primarily in the process of the manufacturing or assembling, either in an existing, an
expanded or a new manufacturing facility, of tangible personal property for wholesale or
retail sale or lease, whether such sale or lease is made directly by the manufacturer or by
some other person, whether the materials used in the process are owned by the
manufacturer or some other person, or whether such sale or lease is made apart from or
as an incident to the seller's engaging in the service occupation of producing machines,
tools, dies, jigs, patterns, gauges, or other similar items of no commercial value on special
order for a particular purchaser, when the machinery or equipment is produced by the
seller thereof for the manufacturer or the manufacturer's lessor on special order in such a
way as to have made the applicable tax a Service Occupation Tax or Service Use Tax,
rather than Retailers' Occupation Tax or Use Tax. All terms used in this exemption (e) shall
have definitions set forth in said Section 439.102.
2. The exemption provided in said Section 439.103 for new and used farm machinery and
equipment costing $1,000 or more, including that manufactured on special order and that
purchased for lease, certified by the purchaser to be used primarily for "production
agriculture," as defined by said Section 439.103, including any individual replacement part
for such machinery and equipment which part costs in excess of $1,000.
3. The exemption provided in said Section 439.103 of new and used graphic arts machinery
and equipment, including that manufactured on special order or purchased for lease,
certified by the purchaser to be used primarily for "graphic arts production," as defined by
said Section 439.103.
Sec. 60-4-3 Accounting
Every supplier and serviceman required to account for Municipal Service Occupation Tax for the
benefit of this Village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
State Department of Revenue required by Section 9 of the "Service Occupation Tax Act," as
amended.
60-4-2
Sec. 60-4-4 Payment
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of
tax hereby imposed during the preceding calendar month.
60-5-1
SECTION 60-5
Municipal Use Tax
Sec. 60-5-1 Tax Imposed
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal
Code upon the privilege of using in the Village of Burr Ridge any item of tangible personal property
which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an
agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of such tangible
property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act, approved July 14,
1955, as amended.
Sec. 60-5-2 Certain Exemptions Declared Inapplicable
The following exemptions provided by Section 439.3 of Chapter 120 of the Illinois Revised Statutes,
as amended, shall not apply to the Municipal Use Tax of The Village of Burr Ridge:
1. The exemption provided by said Section 439.3 of new and used farm machinery and
equipment costing $1,000 or more, including that manufactured on special order and that
purchased for lease, certified by the purchaser to be used primarily for "production
agriculture," as defined by said Section 439.3, and including any individual replacement
part for such machinery and equipment which parts costs in excess of $1,000.
2. The exemption provided by said Section 439.3 of the use of distillation machinery and
equipment, sold as a unit or kit and assembled or installed by the retailer, which machinery
and equipment is certified by the user to be used only for the production of ethyl alcohol
that will be used for consumption of motor fuel for the personal use of such user and not
subject to sale or resale.
Sec. 60-5-3 Collection
The tax provided for in this Ordinance shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for
filing or registration purposes is given as being in this Village.
Sec. 60-5-4 Payment
The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be paid to the Illinois Department of Revenue, or an
exemption determination must be obtained from said Department, before the title or certificate of
registration for the personal property may be issued.
60-6-1
SECTION 60-6
Municipal Utilities Tax
Sec. 60-6-1 Definitions
For the purpose of this Section the following definitions shall apply:
Gross Receipts means the consideration received for the transmission of messages, or for
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind
and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of transmitting said messages and without any deduction on account of the
cost of transmitting said messages and without any deduction on account of the cost of the service,
product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other
expense whatsoever. Gross Receipts shall not include consideration received from the Village of
Burr Ridge for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling any of the aforesaid utility products or
services to said Village.
Transmitting Messages in addition to the usual and popular meaning of person communications,
shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or
both, to persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in turn,
receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing of services or
facilities to persons for the transmission of messages to the extent that any such service or facilities
for the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to other
persons, for the transmission of messages.
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this State, or a
receiver, Trustee, Conservator or other representative appointed by order of any Court.
Taxpayer means a person engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity; a person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity
for use or consumption and not for resale; and/or a person engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale.
Treasurer means the Treasurer of the Village of Burr Ridge.
Sec. 60-6-2 Tax Imposed
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges and at the
following rates: (amended by A-383-2-95)
(1) Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for
use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village of Burr Ridge, and not for
resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.
(2) Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity
for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village of Burr Ridge, and not for
resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.
60-6-2
Sec. 60-6-3 Interstate Commerce
No tax is imposed by this Section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise
to the extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United
States, be made subject to taxation by this State or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, or
engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this
Section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the
"Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
Sec. 60-6-4 Tax in addition to other payments
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to
this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
Sec. 60-6-5 Reports by Taxpayer
Each taxpayer must make a report to the Village stating:
1. His name
2. His principal place of business
3. His gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed
4. Amount of tax
5. Such other reasonable and related information the corporate authorities may require.
Such report shall be made to the Village Treasurer by those persons described in Section 60-6-2
above on or before the last day of each month of each year for the corresponding month preceding
each of said report dates.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to
the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return
the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously
billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings
and the taxable gross receipts.
Sec. 60-6-6 Erroneous Payment
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this
Section, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the
filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
Sec. 60-6-7 Recovery Limited
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Section shall be commenced
more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
60-6-3
Sec. 60-6-8 Penalty
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates
any other provision of this Section 60-6 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750)
and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of the tax due. (Amended by A-383-1-96)
Sec. 60-6-9 Replacement of Tax.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary herein, the Municipal Utilities Tax imposed by
Chapter 60, Section 60-6-2(2) of this Code on the gross receipts of persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within
the corporate limits of the Village and not for resale shall be imposed only until such time as it
shall be replaced by a kilowatt hour tax on the privilege of using or consuming electricity within the
corporate limits of the Village of Burr Ridge. Upon imposition of a kilowatt-hour tax on both
residential and nonresidential uses of electricity, all references to the application of a tax on the
gross receipts of persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
electricity that are contained herein shall be deemed deleted from this Chapter.
(A-383-1-98)
60-7-1
SECTION 60-7
Municipal Hotel and Motel Room Tax
Sec. 60-7-1 Definitions:
The Board of Trustees intends that the tax required in this Section be applied fairly and equitably to
all hotels and motels in the Village. The Board of Trustees finds that the imposition of the tax
required in this Section does not apply to the extended stays of permanent residents, as set forth
below, but that stays of lesser duration should be taxed at a rate consistent with principles of equality
and fairness to the same extent as non-permanent residents and that the tax set forth in this Section
best serves the public health, safety, and welfare. (A-383-01-10)
In the interpretation and construction of this Section, the following definitions shall apply unless they
are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Board of Trustees or unless the context clearly
requires otherwise: (A-383-01-10)
Hotel and Motel Includes every building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public to be a place where lodging, or lodging and food, or apartments, suites, or other
accommodations are offered for consideration, in which four (4) or more rooms, apartments or suites,
or other accommodations are used for the lodging, or lodging and food, for such guests, or as
otherwise defined as a "hotel" in The Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax Act of the State of Illinois as
amended from time to time (35 ILCS 145/1,et seq.). (A-383-01-10)
Person Any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in
perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or
foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise. Whenever the term "person" is used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to partnerships shall mean the
partners thereof, as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part-owners thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
Permanent Resident Any natural person who has occupied or has the right to occupy any room or
rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel or motel for more than 30
consecutive days. (A-383-01-10)
Gross Room Rental Revenues All gross room sale (rental) revenues (exclusive of other taxes) from
such rental, leasing or letting, exclusive of revenues received from food, beveage and other sales.
Gross Room Rental Revenues shall include only the basic room charge exclusive of meals,
beverages and other “package” items. (A-383-01-10)
Sec. 60-7-2 Tax Imposed:
Effective May 1, 2003, the tax is levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of engaging in the
business of renting, leasing or letting of room(s) in a motel or hotel (as hotel is defined herein or in
The Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax Act of the State of Illinois) in the Village shall be imposed at the
rate of three percent (3%) of the Gross Room Rental Revenues. The tax herein levied shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes. (amended by A-383-01-10)
Effective May 1, 2010, the tax rate imposed herein shall be increased to three and one-half percent
(3.5%) of the Gross Room Rental Revenues. (added by A-383-02-10)
60-7-2
Effective November 1, 2010, the tax rate imposed herein shall be increased to four percent (4%) of
the Gross Room Rental Revenues. (added by A-383-02-10)
A tax shall not be levied pursuant to this Section and imposed upon any hotel or motel stay for any
period beyond 30 consecutive days’ stay in a hotel or motel. However, the tax levied pursuant to this
Section shall be imposed upon the Gross Room Rental Revenues accrued in the first 30 consecutive
days of the stay of any hotel or motel patron or resident. (A-383-01-10)
Persons engaged in such business and subject to the tax imposed pursuant to the authority granted
by this Section may reimburse themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such
tax as an additional charge on the bill to the individuals renting, leasing or letting any such rooms,
which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with the state tax imposed under
The Hotel Operators' Occupation Tax Act of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 60-7-3 Payment and Collection of Tax:
The owner, manager or operator of each hotel or motel shall bear, jointly and severally, the duty to
pay the tax and may collect the tax from each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel or motel.
Every person required to pay the tax levied by this Section who wishes to reimburse himself for the
tax may secure said tax from the user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time he collects the
price, charge or rent to which it applies. If reimbursement is sought, every user, lessee or tenant shall
be given a bill, invoice, receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge, or rent
payable upon which the tax herein imposed is computed, and the amount of the tax shall be stated,
charged and shown separately thereon (by itself or in combination with the state tax). The tax shall
be paid to the person collecting it as trustee for and on behalf of the Village.
Sec. 60-7-4 Administration and Enforcement:
The Village Treasurer is hereby designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax
hereby imposed on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village
Treasurer and/or his designee to collect all amounts due the Village from the owners, managers and
operators of motels and hotels in the Village. A sworn monthly hotel and motel occupancy tax return,
on a calendar month basis, shall be filed by each owner, manager, or operator of each hotel or motel
in the Village with the Village Treasurer, on forms prescribed by him, showing all receipts from each
renting, leasing or letting of rooms during the preceding month. Said returns are to be filed within ten
(10) days after the end of the month covered by said return, with the tax herein imposed due and
owning as of the first day of the month following the month covered by said return.
Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all taxes due and owing for the month
covered by the return.
During the normal business working hours of any such hotel or motel, the Village Treasurer, or any
person certified by him as his deputy or representative, may enter the premises of any hotel or motel
for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books and records for the proper administration
of this Section, and for the enforcement of the collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for
any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village Treasurer or his duly authorized deputy or
representative in the discharge of his duties hereunder. It shall be the duty of every owner, manager
or operator to keep accurate and complete books and records, containing all information necessary
for the computation and collection of the tax herein imposed, and which the Village Treasurer or his
duly authorized deputy or representative shall at all such times have full access, which records shall
include, but are not necessarily limited to, a daily sheet showing: (a) the number of hotel or motel
rooms rented during the twenty four (24) hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or
60-7-3
motel room when such occurs, and (b) the actual hotel or motel room tax receipts collected for the
date in question.
Sec. 60-7-5 Suit for Collection; Revocation of License:
When any owner, manager or operator of a hotel or motel in the Village shall fail to pay the tax
hereby imposed, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of the Village Administrator, bring or cause
to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any court of
competent jurisdiction. If the Village President, after a hearing held by or for the Village President,
shall find that any hotel or motel owner, manager or operator has willfully evaded his responsibility to
pay the tax imposed by this Section, the Village President may suspend or revoke all Village licenses,
included but not limited to any liquor license issued under this Code, held by such person. Said
person shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, to be held not less than five (5) days
after notice is given of the time and place thereof, addressed to him at his last known place of
business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any license of which such person may be possessed
may be temporarily suspended by the Village President, unless the law prohibits any such
suspension. Any suspension or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or discharge
any civil liability for nonpayment of the tax due.
Sec. 60-7-6 Interest and Penalties:
In the event of failure by any hotel or motel owner, manager or operator to pay to the Village
Treasurer the tax required hereunder within ten (10) days after the same shall be due, interest shall
accumulate and be due upon said tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per month commencing as of
the first day of the month following the month for which the tax was to have been paid. In addition, a
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any
hotel or motel owner, manager or operator who shall fail to pay and remit the tax imposed by this
Section.
Sec. 60-7-7 Disposition of Proceeds of Tax:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Section, including interest and
penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in a
special revenue fund of the Village entitled Hotel and Motel Tax Fund, and shall be expended by the
Village solely to promote tourism and conventions within the Village or otherwise to attract nonresident
overnight visitors to the Village. Moreover, no funds received pursuant to this Section shall
be used to advertise for or otherwise promote new competition in the hotel business. (A-383-1-91)
Sec. 60-7-8 Penalty for Violation:
In addition, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
provision of this Section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense, and not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each
subsequent offense. Each day any violation of any provision of this Section shall continue to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Added by A-383-1-90)
60-8-1
SECTION 60-8
Municipal Telecommunications Tax
Sec. 60-8-1 Definitions: (amended by A-383-02-06)
As used in Section 60-8, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
a. Amount Paid means the amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in the
Village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
b. Department means the Illinois Department of Revenue.
c. Gross Charge means the amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the Village and for all services and equipment provided in
connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications,
the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever.
In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid.
“Gross Charges” for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
termination point within the Village that has imposed a tax under Section 60-8 and
charges for the portion of the inter-office channels provided within the Village. Charges
for that portion of the inter-office channel connecting 2 or more channel termination
points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village,
shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for
the inter-office channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel
termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village and
the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points connected by
the inter-office channel. However, “gross charge” shall not include any of the following:
1. Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made pursuant
to:
i. The tax imposed by this Ordinance;
ii. The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
iii. The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
iv. 911 surcharges, or ;
v. Charges added to customers bills pursuant to the provisions of
Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or
any similar charges added to customers’ bills by retailers who are
not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission
for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act.
2. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the Village.
60-8-2
3. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or
information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not
limited to the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment,
tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of
computers under a time-sharing agreement.
4. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or
rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
5. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of
the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs.
6. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in
connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this Ordinance has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the
corporation rendering such service.
7. Bad debts “bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at
retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that
has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable
federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is
subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion
during the reporting period in which the payment is made.
8. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices.
9. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
10. Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if:
i. Those charges are aggregated with other charges for
telecommunications that are taxable.
ii. Those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice.
iii. The retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on the
retailer’s books and records kept in the regular course of business.
If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross
charge from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or
telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed to
the taxable services or telecommunications. The burden of proving
nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the
telecommunications.
60-8-3
d. Interstate telecommunications means all telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this State.
e. Intrastate telecommunications means all telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this State.
f. Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal
and State governments, including State universities created by statute, or any city, town,
county or other political subdivision of this State.
g. Purchase at retail means the acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
h. Retailer means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at
retail as defined in this Section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the
Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the tax.
Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so
authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in this State in the same manner and subject to the
same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The
permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion
i. Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State, or any like term, means and
includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary,
an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other
place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under
the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporality, or
whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
j. Sale at retail means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and
all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to
persons other than the Federal and State governments, and State universities created
by stature and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumptions and
not for resale.
k. Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are
received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case
of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the
customer’s place of primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing
Conformity Act. For air-to-ground systems and the like, “service address” shall mean
the location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are
sent.
60-8-4
l. Taxpayer means a person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications
in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by the Ordinance.
m. Telecommunications, in addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it,
includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local,
toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph
services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging
service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications,
or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite,
or similar facilities. As used in this Ordinance, “private line” means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or
priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more
specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of
“telecommunications” shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications” shall not
include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for
use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and
all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of,
or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales
for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered
“telecommunications” subject to the tax imposed under this Ordinance. For purposes of
this Section, “prepaid telephone calling arrangements” means that term as defined in
Section 2-27 of the Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act.
Sec. 60-8-2 Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Imposed. (amended by A-383-02-06)
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
a. The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village intrastate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multimunicipal
taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection,
any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that
event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by
this Section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the Village
that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax.
b. The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village interstate
telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of the gross charge for such
telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or
multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this
subsection, and taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state
or municipality in this State on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax
enacted pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of such
tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in a
municipality in this State which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
60-8-5
state or local tax in this State.
c. The tax imposed by this Ordinance is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent
such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States,
be made the subject of taxation by the Village.
Sec. 60-8-3 Collection of Tax by Retailers.
The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The Illinois Department of Revenue will in turn remit the
tax collected from the taxpayers to the Village.
Sec. 60-8-4 Filing Returns and Remittance by Retailers
On or before the last day of each calendar month, every retailer maintaining a place of business in
this state and every retailer authorized by the Illinois Department of Revenue to collect the tax
imposed by Subsection 60-8-2 shall file with the Illinois Department of Revenue a remittance
return and remit all applicable tax for the preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a
form prescribed by the Illinois Department of Revenue
Sec. 60-8-5 Registration
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state shall register with the Illinois
Department of Revenue within thirty (30) days after the effective date of Subsections 60-8-1
through 60-8-10 or the date of becoming such a retailer, whichever is later.
Sec. 60-8-6 Obligation of Taxpayers to File Returns and Pay Tax
A. If a retailer fails to collect the tax imposed by Subsection 60-8-2 from a taxpayer, as
required by Subsection 60-8-3, then the taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the Illinois
Department of Revenue.
B. On or before the last day of each calendar month, every taxpayer that has not paid the
tax imposed by Subsection 60-8-2 to a retailer shall file with the Illinois Department of
Revenue a tax return and pay the tax upon the gross charges the taxpayer paid to the
retailer during the preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form
prescribed by the State, containing such information as the Illinois Department of
Revenue may reasonably require.
Sec. 60-8-7 Resale Numbers
A. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in the Village claims to be a
reseller of telecommunications, that person shall apply to the Illinois Department of
Revenue for a resale number. .
B. Upon approval of the application, the Illinois Department of Revenue shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
C. The Illinois Department of Revenue may cancel the resale number of any person if the
number: (1) was obtained through misrepresentation, (2) is used to originate or receive
telecommunications tax-free when such telecommunications are not for resale or (3) is
60-8-6
no longer necessary or no longer applies because the person has discontinued making
resales.
D. The act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the Village shall
not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number issued by the Illinois Department of Revenue and furnishes that
number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to that
person is nontaxable as a sale for resale.
Sec. 60-8-8 Maintaining Books and Records
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state, every retailer authorized by the Illinois
Department of Revenue to collect the tax imposed by Subsection 60-8-2 and every taxpayer
required by Subsection 60-8-6 to pay the tax directly to the Illinois Department of Revenue shall
keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including original source documents
and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax
liability or exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in the English language and, at all
times during business hours of the day, shall be subject to and available for inspection by the
Village and the Illinois Department of Revenue.
Sec. 60-8-9 Disposition of Collected Funds
Any and all taxes collected pursuant to Subsections 60-8-1 through 60-8-10 are to be collected
and deposited into the Corporate Fund within the Village for general corporate purposes.
Sec. 60-8-10 Severability
If any provision of Subsections 60-8-1 through 60-8-9, or the application of any provision thereof,
is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of
said Subsections, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or
invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of
such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided. In particular, if Subsection (A) (2) of
Subsection 60-8-2 is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the tax imposed under
Subsection (A) (1) of Subsection 60-8-2 shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 60-8 Amended by A-383-01-06
60-9-1
SECTION 60-9
Amusement Tax
Sec. 60-9-1 As used in this Section 60-9 the following terms shall have the following meaning unless the
context clearly requires a different meaning:
a. “Amusement” means any of the following places of amusement, in the Village: 1)
theatrical, dramatic, musical, or other types of concerts, or spectacular performance or
show, or motion picture show, or game, sport or contest, or similar exhibition for public
entertainment, 2) various amusement, entertainment or recreational activities, in which a
person can participate, e.g. bowling, pool, billiards, video and electronic gaming,
amusement rides and games, athletic contest, sport or game, carnival,
nightclub/dancing and similar activities, including lessons or demonstrations of any of
the above, and 3) paid video programming. (amended by A-383-02-12)
b. “Person” means any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership, joint venture,
club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate,
society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual cooperative,
fraternal, or otherwise. Whenever the term “person” is used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or
part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
Sec. 60-9-2 Tax Imposed
a. A tax is hereby levied and imposed for amusements within the Village, at the rate of 5
percent (5%) of upon all gross receipts received for all amusement activities, including
the purchase price of a ticket of admission, or the charges or fees imposed, on or for
each person entering the premises of a place of amusement for the purpose of
witnessing, viewing or participating in the amusement. Gross receipts will include all
fees or charges imposed for participating in, witnessing or using any amusement or
entertainment, including admission fees, ticket prices, use charges, rent, rental, cover
charges or service charges. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes. (amended by A-383-02-12)
b. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the
owners of places which provide amusement activities, who can pass the tax along to the
participant or user of the entertainment or activity, or to the ticket user or purchaser.
(amended by A-383-02-12)
c. The tax hereby levied and imposed shall not apply to or be imposed upon the purchase
price of tickets for those persons witnessing, viewing or participating in any amusement,
the proceeds of which inure exclusively to the benefit of religious, charitable or
educational institutions or organizations, or not-for-profit entities duly qualified under the
laws of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 60-9-3 Payment and Collection of Tax.
The owner, manager, licensee or operator of each amusement shall bear, jointly and severally,
the duty to pay this tax based on the gross receipts for all amusement activities. Said owner,
60-9-2
manager, licensee or operator may collect the tax from each participant or user of the
entertainment or activity, or from each ticket user or purchaser. Every person required to collect
the tax levied by this Section 60-9 may secure said tax from the participant or user of the
entertainment or activity, or by the ticket user or purchaser at the time that he collects the price or
charge for the ticket of admission or for the privilege or right to participate in the entertainment or
activity, whether as a general admission fee or on a price per activity or “games played” basis.
Whenever suitable, the amount of the tax shall be shown separately on each ticket of admission,
or receipt paid per activity or game played, or the ticket or receipt shall indicate that the purchase
price, fee or charge includes local taxes; provided, however, in no event shall tickets of admission
printed prior to the effective date of this Section 60-9 be required to separately show the tax
hereby imposed. The tax shall be paid to the Village Treasurer under procedures prescribed by
the Village Treasurer and as otherwise provided by this Section 60-9. (amended by A-383-02-12)
Sec. 60-9-4 Administration and Enforcement.
The Village Treasurer or his or her designated agent is designated as the administration and
enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the Village. It shall be the
responsibility and duty of the Village Treasurer or his or her designated agent to collect all
amounts due the Village from the owners, managers, licensees and operators of amusements in
the Village. A sworn monthly admission, charges and/or fees tax return, on a calendar month
basis, shall be filed by each owner, manager, licensee or operator of each amusement in the
Village with the Village Treasurer or his or her designated agent, regardless of whether there is
any tax due for the month covered by the return, on forms prescribed by the Treasurer, showing
the gross receipts from the amusement and the number of admission tickets sold and issued, and
charges or fees imposed for participating in the activity or games played, the purchase price or
charges thereof and the tax imposed, if any. Said returns are to be filed by the last day of the
month following the month covered by said return. The tax herein imposed due and owing shall
accompany the return and shall likewise be due as of the last day of the month following the
month covered by said return.
(amended by A-383-02-12)
The Village Treasurer or his or her designated agent, may enter the premises of any amusement
for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books and records for the proper
administration of this Section 60-9, and for the enforcement of the collection of the tax hereby
imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the Village Treasurer or
his or her designated agent in the discharge of his duties hereunder. It shall be the duty of every
owner, manager, licensee or operator of any amusement to keep accurate and complete books
and records, containing all information necessary for the collection of the tax herein imposed, to
which the Village Treasurer or his or her designated agent shall at all times have full access,
which records shall include a daily sheet showing: (a) the number of tickets of admission issued
or fees or charges imposed, during the twenty four hour period, and (b) the actual amusement tax
receipts collected for the date in question, and (c) gross receipts for the place of amusement.
(amended by A-383-02-12)
Sec. 60-9-5 Suit for Collection; Revocation of License.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, or when any owner, manager,
licensee or operator of an amusement in the Village shall fail to collect the tax hereby imposed
from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the same, the Village Attorney shall,
upon request of the Village, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said
tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. If the Village President, after a
60-9-3
hearing held by or for him or her, shall find that any amusement owner, manager, licensee or
operator has willfully evaded his responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this Section 60-9, the
Village President may suspend or revoke all Village licenses, included but not limited to any liquor
license issued to and held by such person. Said person shall have an opportunity to be heard at
such hearing, to be held not less than five (5) days after notice is given of the time and place
thereof, addressed to him at his last known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and
finding, any license of which such person may be possessed may be temporarily suspended by
the Village President. Any suspension or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve
or discharge any civil liability for nonpayment of the tax due.
Sec. 60-9-6 Interest and Penalties.
In the event of failure by any amusement owner, manager, licensee or operator to collect and pay
to the Village Treasurer the tax required hereunder within ten (10) days after the same shall be
due, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax due shall be assessed. In addition, interest shall
accumulate and be due upon said tax and penalty amount at the rate of one percent (1%) per
month commencing as of the first day of the month following the month for which the tax was to
have been collected until the tax, penalty and interest are paid by any amusement owner,
manager, licensee or operator who failed to collect and remit the tax imposed by this Section 60-9
on a timely basis.
Sec. 60-9-7 Disposition of Proceeds of Tax.
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Section 60-9, including interest and
penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in
the general fund of the Village.
Sec. 60-9-8 Penalty for Violation.
In addition, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
provision of this Section 60-9, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense, and not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second
and each subsequent offense. Each day any violation of any provision of this Section 60-9 shall
continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 60-9-9 If any provision of this Section 60-9, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is
held invalid, the remainder of this Section 60-9 and the application of such provisions to other
persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Section 60-9 added by A-383-1-97)
60-10-1
SECTION 60-10
Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Tax
This Section was repealed by Ordinance A-383-01-06
60-11-1
SECTION 60-11
Electric Utility Tax
Sec. 60-11-1 Definitions.
For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
Village means the Village of Burr Ridge
Person means any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the State
or any of its political subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
Person maintaining a place of business in this State means any person having or maintaining
within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility,
distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee,
agent, or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or its
subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located in this State permanently or temporarily or whether such person,
subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
Purchase at retail means any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or
consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as
defined in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the
generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
Purchaser means any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the Village,
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
Tax collector means the person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
Sec. 60-11-2 Tax Imposed.
Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and any and all other
applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired
in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
(a) For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.536 cents
per kilowatt-hour;
(b) For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.419 cents
per kilowatt-hour;
(c) For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.311 cents
per kilowatt-hour;
60-11-2
(d) For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.309
cents per kilowatt-hour;
(e) For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.308
cents per kilowatt-hour;
(f) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.307
cents per kilowatt-hour;
(g) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.250
cents per kilowatt-hour;
(h) For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.200
cents per kilowatt-hour;
(i) For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.150
cents per kilowatt-hour;
(j) For all electricity consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month;
0.100 cents per kilowatt-hour;
This tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the
Village, the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision of the State.
Sec. 60-11-3 Exception.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section 60-11, the tax shall not be imposed if and to
the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or Statutes of the
United States or the Constitution or Statutes of the State of Illinois.
Sec. 60-11-4 Dates of Imposition.
The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential
customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after September 1, 1998; and with respect to
the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill
issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with Section 16-104 of the Public
Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1,
2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
Sec. 60-11-5 Collection of Taxes.
A. Subject to the provision of Section 60-11-7 regarding the delivery of electricity to
resellers, the tax imposed under this Section 60-11 shall be collected from purchasers
by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers electricity to
such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the
same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
B. Any tax required to be collected by this Section 60-11, and any tax in fact collected,
shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person delivering the electricity,
provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related
60-11-3
to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and
provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier
shall be obligated to remit such tax.
C. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax
to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also
be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the
tax they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing for filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the Village
upon request. For purposes of this Section 60-11, any partial payment of a billed
amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the
delivery of electricity.
Sec. 60-11-6 Tax Remittance And Return.
A. Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the
Village’s Director of Finance. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on
or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected.
B. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser herein, then
the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Village’s Director of Finance
and pay the tax directly to the Village on or before the last day of the month following
the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
Sec. 60-11-7 Resales.
A. Electricity that is delivered to a person in this Village shall be considered to be for use
and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the electricity has an active
resale number issued by the Village and furnishes that number to the person who
delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or
partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
B. If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an authorized reseller of
electricity, that person shall apply to Village for a resale number. The applicant shall
state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this Section 60-11 on any
purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Village may
reasonably require.
C. Upon approval of the application, Village shall assign a resale number to the applicant
and shall certify the number to the applicant.
D. The Village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any
tax payable under this Section 60-11 for electricity used or consumed by the person, or
if the number: (1) was obtained through misrepresentation; or (2) is no longer
necessary because the person has discontinued making resales.
E. (1) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for
resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this Section 60-11 directly to the Village
pursuant to Section 60-11-6 herein on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or
consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to 60-11-5 herein and remit the tax
60-11-4
pursuant to Section 60-11-6 herein on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller
to a purchaser.
(2) Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and
complying with all other conditions of this section shall be excused from collecting and
remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that
the person reports to the Village the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller,
and such other information that the Village may reasonably require.
Sec. 60-11-8 Books and Records.
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this Section 60-11
shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous
books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax
liability under this Section 60-11. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
Sec. 60-11-9 Credits and Refunds.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section 60-11, in order to permit sound fiscal planning
and budgeting by the Village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax
imposed under this Section 60-11 unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one (1)
year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted.
(Section 60-11 added by A-383-1-98)
60-12-1
SECTION 60-12
Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Ordinance
Sec. 60-12-1 Scope; Application
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the Village's procedures in connection with the
collection and administration of all of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes. This
ordinance shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the Village's tax
ordinances. To the extent that any Village tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this
ordinance, this ordinance shall be controlling.
Sec. 60-12-2 Definitions
The words or terms set forth below shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows:
Act The "Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act."
Code The Burr Ridge Village Code, as amended.
Corporate Authorities The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Burr Ridge.
Locally imposed and administered tax or tax. Any pecuniary burden imposed by the Village on
individuals or entities to support the Village’s municipal government operations that is not a permit
or other fee (excepting the Infrastructure Maintenance Fee), is not collected or administered by a
department or agency of the State of Illinois, or is not a tax on real property under the Illinois
Property Tax Code (35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.), including, but not limited to any of the following
taxes that may now, or in the future, be collected or administered by this Village:
(1) Gas Utility Tax (Section 60-6 of the Code)
(2) Electric Utility Tax (Section 60-11 of the Code)
(3) E-911Tax (Ordinances 615, A-615-1-89 and A-615-2-89))
(4) Infrastructure Maintenance Fee (Section 60-10 of the Code)
(5) Municipal Automobile Rental Occupation Tax (Section 60-1of the Code)
(6) Municipal Automobile Rental Use Tax (Section 60-2 of the Code)
(7) Telecommunications Tax (Section 60-8 of the Code)
Local tax administrator or Auditor. The Village Treasurer or the Village Treasurer’s
designee, who is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of
this ordinance to give full effect to this ordinance.
Village. The Village of Burr Ridge, Illinois.
Notice. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection
with each of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
Tax Ordinance. Each ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes any locally imposed and
administered tax.
60-12-2
Taxpayer. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally
includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to
consumer taxes, this term includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally
imposed and administered tax to the Village.
Sec. 60-12-3 Notices
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing
and mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days or delivered not less than five (5) calendar days
prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax
administrator. Any notice may be sent by the local tax administrator as follows:
(1) First Class United States mail or express mail or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons’ last known address; or
(2) Personal service or delivery.
Sec. 60-12-4 Payment; Interest and Penalties
Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, any payment or remittance designated
by a taxpayer as payment of a particular tax liability shall be applied to that taxpayer’s liabilities
pertaining to the particular tax as follows: (1) first to the interest accrued on outstanding tax
liabilities; (2) second to the outstanding tax liability; (3) third to any penalties due on the
outstanding tax liabilities; and (4) fourth to current tax liabilities.
(A) Late Payment: Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the Village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is physically
received by the Village on or before the due date.
(B) Interest on Overdue Payments: In the event a determination has been made that a tax
is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid
within the time frame otherwise indicated. Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to
the contrary, any tax not paid on the date due shall accrue interest at the rate of one
and one-half percent (1.5%) per month of the amount due for each month or part of a
month the tax remains unpaid.
(C) Late Filing and Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner
provided by the controlling tax ordinance, the following penalties shall apply:
1) A late filing penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax due shall be
charged against any taxpayer whose tax payment is not made on or before
the date the tax is due.
(2) A late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall be charged
against any taxpayer whose tax report or return is not filed on or before the
date said tax report or return is due.
(3) A failure to file penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of tax due
for the period in which a tax report or return is required to be filed shall be
charged against any taxpayer who fails to file, before the date that a
60-12-3
determination of tax deficiency or tax liability is issued, a report or return for
that period.
(4) The penalties set forth in subsections (1) and (2) above shall not apply in the
event the Village imposes the penalty set forth in subsection (3) above.
(5) Any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty may be
abated by the local tax administrator if reasonable case for nonpayment or
failure to file is shown.
Sec. 60-12-5 Credits and Refunds
Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, taxpayers may, in writing, claim a
credit or refund for the payment of taxes, interest or penalties paid in error for up to one (1) year
after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The Village shall not
grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a
person who has not paid the amounts directly to the Village. The Village shall not refund or credit
any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the
taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or
if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
(A) Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
(1) the taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator, in writing, a claim for
credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
(a) the name of tax at issue;
(b) the tax period at issue;
(c) the date of the tax payment at issue and a copy of the canceled
check or receipt for the payment; and
(d) the taxpayer’s calculation of the refund or credit, accompanied by an
amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim.
(2) Within forty-five (45) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any
claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
(a) grant the claim; or
(b) deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to
the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
(B) In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, any refund or credit,
the tax amounts paid in error shall be returned to the taxpayer plus interest at the
annual rate of five percent (5%); provided, however, that there shall be no refund and
60-12-4
only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the Village until such
obligation is fully satisfied.
Sec. 60-12-6 Audit Procedures
(A) A request for a proposed audit in regard to any tax shall comply with the notice
requirements of this ordinance. A notice of audit shall contain the following information:
(1) the tax at issue; (2) the time period of the audit; and (3) a brief description of the
books and records to be made available for the auditor.
(B) Audit: Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours on the date set
forth in the notice, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some
other convenient date and time. If the audit date and time are not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within forty-five (45)
days of the date of the initially designated audit date, as approved in writing by the local
tax administrator, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the auditor.
(C) Overpayments; Misdirected Payments: If an audit determines there has been an
overpayment of a tax, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the
taxpayer within forty-five (45) days of the Village's determination of the amount of
overpayment. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the taxpayer and the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(D) Record keeping; Duty of Taxpayer: Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and
records of the taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to
any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English language
and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. It is the duty and
responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for audit
inspections by the Village. If the taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for
audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination
and assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate of
the taxpayer’s tax liability.
Sec. 60-12-7 Determination of Tax Liability
The Village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely
manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five
(45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund, credit
or provide any tax still due and owing.
(A) Collection of Taxes: The local tax administrator shall send a notice of determination and
assessment of tax liability to a taxpayer by registered or certified mail no more than four
(4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the tax return for the applicable
period was filed or for the calendar year in which the tax return for the applicable period
was due, whichever occurs later. In the event any tax return is not filed or if during any
four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination and assessment may be
issued by the Village, the tax paid was less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the tax
due, a notice of determination or assessment of tax liability may be sent no more than
six (6) years after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period
60-12-5
was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was
filed. All notices of determination or assessment of tax liability shall include the following
information:
(1) the reason for and amount of the tax liability or assessment;
(2) the procedures for appeal; and
(3) information regarding the right of the Village to audit the taxpayer’s books and
records for a particular time period and the obligations of the Village during the
audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
(B) Fraud: There shall be no time limitation on the Village’s ability to collect a tax in the
event a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer.
Sec. 60-12-8 Appeal and Hearing
(A) Protest; Petition for Hearing: A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the
taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be
filed with the local tax administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written
notice of the tax determination and assessment. If a timely written notice and petition for
hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall select a date, time and place for hearing
that is within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing
and shall give written notice of the hearing to the taxpayer. If a written protest and
petition for hearing is not filed within the forty-five (45) day filing period, the tax
determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without
further notice.
(1) Extension of Time: Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer
and the full payment of the amount of contested tax liability plus accrued
interest due as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator shall
extend the forty-five (45) day period time for filing an appeal after a
determination of liability has been issued for up to an additional forty-five (45)
day period.
(B) Hearing: Whenever a taxpayer has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing
under this section, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal on the date scheduled by the local tax administrator, unless the taxpayer
requests and is granted by the local tax administrator an extension of the hearing to a
later date convenient to all parties. No continuances shall be granted except in cases
where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack
of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted by the
local tax administrator shall not extend the hearing date beyond forty-five (45) days after
the initial set hearing date. At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or
assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not
apply at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing.
The taxpayer shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.
60-12-6
Sec. 60-12-9 Installment Contracts
The Village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes
under the controlling tax ordinance. Any installment contract so entered shall not be cancelled
unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing and then fails to cure the delinquency
in the time period provided for below. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the
payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fifteen (15) days to cure any
delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fifteen (15) day period or fails
to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the
installment contract shall be cancelled without further notice to the taxpayer and any unpaid tax
shall be immediately due and owing.
Sec. 60-12-10 Voluntary Disclosure
A taxpayer who has not received a written notice of an audit, determination of tax liability or
assessment, may seek disclosure of tax liability by filing a written application with the local tax
administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the taxpayer's liability pertaining to a particular tax. A
taxpayer filing such an application must agree to pay, before the filing date of the application, the
amount of tax due plus one percent (1%) interest per month, for all periods prior to the filing of
the application, but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. Except
for the amount of tax and interest due under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary
disclosure request may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. If the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the
amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in
which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest
must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure
application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must
be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the
additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
Sec. 60-12-11 Publication of Tax Ordinances
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published in accordance with the publishing
requirements of State law (65 ILCS 5/1-2-4). The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall
satisfy the above publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available
to the public upon request at the Village Clerk's office.
Sec. 60-12-12 Liens
In the first month of each calendar year, the local tax administrator shall cause all liens filed
against taxpayers for unpaid taxes to be reviewed. Upon a determination by the local tax
administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is
determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:
(1) timely remove the lien at the Village's expense;
(2) correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
60-12-7
(3) correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
Sec. 60-12-13 Criminal Penalties
Criminal penalties shall not be imposed on any taxpayer for non-compliance with the provisions of
a Village tax unless the non-compliance is the result of willful or fraudulent disregard of the Village
tax ordinances.
(Section 60-12 added by A-383-1-01)
60-13-1
SECTION 60-13
9-1-1 Emergency Telephone System Surcharges
Sec. 60-13-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
Network Connection means the number of voice grade communication channels
directly between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier’s public switched
network without the intervention of any other telecommunications carriers switched
network which would be required to carry the subscriber’s inter-premises traffic.
Transmitting Messages shall have the meaning ascribed to the term in Section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
Telecommunications Carrier means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political
subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by
order of any court engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity.
Sec. 60-13-2 Tax Imposed.
A. A surcharge of 60 cents per network connection is hereby levied and imposed
on telecommunications carriers operating in the Village of Burr Ridge.
B. The surcharge shall be added to each monthly telephone or telecommunications bill.
Sec. 60-13-3 Payment and Collection of Tax.
A. The Village Clerk shall provide any telecommunications carriers subject to the
surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to the
Village of Burr Ridge to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge. The
certified list may be revised by the Village on 30 days prior written notice
provided to the telecommunications carriers.
B. The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the month following the expiration of
90 days from the date the Village Clerk certifies to any of the telecommunication carriers
who are subject to the surcharge that the referendum on imposition of the surcharge
has passed and the amount of the surcharge.
C. Every telecommunication carrier shall remit to the Village the amount of surcharge due
and owing for each calendar month within 30 days following expiration of each month to
which the surcharge applies, net of any network or other “9-1-1” or sophisticated “9-1-1”
system charge then due the particular telecommunication carrier as shown on an
itemized bill.
Sec. 60-13-4 Administration and Enforcement
60-13-2
A. Simultaneously with the remittance described above, each telecommunication
carrier shall make a written report to the Village Administrator for the period to
which the remittance applies stating as follows:
1. The name of the telecommunication carrier;
2. The telecommunication carrier’s principal place of business;
3. The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies;
4. The amount of surcharge due; and
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
B. If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this ordinance, whether as the result of a mistake
of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any
surcharge due, or to become due, under the ordinance from the
telecommunication carrier who made the erroneous payments; provided, that
no amounts erroneously paid more than one (1) year prior to the filing of a
written claim therefore shall be so credited. Ninety (90) days prior notice shall
be given to the Emergency Telephone System Board on any credit against a
surcharge due.
C. No action to recover any amount of surcharge due under the provisions of this
Section 60-13 shall be commenced more than one (1) year after the due date
of such amount.
60-14-1
SECTION 60-14
Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation,
Service Occupation and Use Taxes
(Section added by A-383-03-06)
Sec. 60-14-1 (A) Tax Imposed
Pursuant to the referendum approved on November 7, 2006, a tax is hereby imposed
upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other
than those items of tangible personal property which are exempt from said tax pursuant
to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.3, at retail in this Village at the rate of onequarter
of one percent (.25%) of the gross receipts from such business while this
Section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/8-11-1.3.
Sec. 60-14-1 (B) Collection of Tax
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in
accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.3.
Sec. 60-14-1 (C) Use of Taxes
Pursuant to the referendum referenced in Subsection (A) above, the taxes collected
pursuant to this Section shall be used solely for public infrastructure and property tax
relief as defined by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.2 (a).
Sec. 60-14-2 (A) Tax Imposed
Pursuant to the referendum approved on November 7, 2006, a tax is hereby imposed
upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service, in this Village at
the rate of one-quarter of one percent (.25%) of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by said servicemen, other than the sale/transfer of those items of
tangible personal property which are exempt from said tax pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.4, either in the form of tangible personal property or in the
form of real estate as an incident to the sale of service while this Section is in effect, in
accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.4.
Sec. 60-14-2 (B) Collection of Tax
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in
accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.4.
Sec. 60-14-2 (C) Use of Tax
Pursuant to the referendum referenced in Subsection (A) above, the taxes collected
pursuant to this Section shall be used solely for public infrastructure and property tax
relief as defined by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.2 (a).
60-14-2
Sec. 60-14-3 (A) Tax Imposed
Pursuant to the referendum approved on November 7, 2006, a tax is hereby imposed
upon the privilege of using any item of tangible personal property, in this Village, which
is purchased at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of
this State’s government, based on the selling price of such tangible personal property,
at the rate of one-quarter of one percent (.25%) of the selling price of such tangible
personal property purchased, as defined in the Act, in accordance with the provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statues 5/8-11-1.5.
Sec. 60-14-3 (B) Collection of Tax
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Village in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.5.
Sec. 60-14-3 (C) Use of Taxes
Pursuant to the referendum referenced in Subsection (A) above, the taxes collected
pursuant to this Section shall be used for public infrastructure and property tax relief as
defined by 65 Illinois Complied Statutes 5/8-11-1.2 (a).
60-15-1
SECTION 60-15
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee
(Section added by A-383-01-07)
Sec. 60-15-1 Definitions
As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Cable Service means the term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6)
Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission
Gross revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash,
credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or
video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or video
service area within the Village.
1. Gross revenues shall include the following:
i. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
ii Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not
limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
iii. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
iv Service charges related to the provisions of cable service or video service,
including but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges.
v. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including but not limited to service order and service termination
charges.
vi Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other
charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
vii. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant
to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of
any products or services derived from the operation of the holder’s network to
provide cable service or video service within the Village. The allocation shall
be based on the number of subscribers in the Village divided by the total
number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national
compensation arrangement.
viii. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the
holder’s network to provide cable service or video service with respect to
commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network, such as a
“home shopping” to similar channel, subject to subsection (ix).
60-15-2
ix. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated
functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the
holder’s revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications
shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably
identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that
are kept in the regular course of business.
x. The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
2. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
i. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debits, subject to
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
ii. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of
gross revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the
extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or
video service.
iii. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally
integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from
services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without
limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information
services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow
pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any
other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo
service in accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in
the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards, or orders.
iv. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser
is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser’s subscribers
to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service
within the Village and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with
respect to the service.
v. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the
transaction by a city, State, federal, or any other governmental entity and
collected by the holder of the State-issued authorization and required to be
remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
vi. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
vii. Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar vendors for
merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
3. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues
to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the
holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-
801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
60-15-3
Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video
service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
PEG means public, education and governmental.
PEG access support fee means the amount paid under this Section and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)
by the holder to the Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
Service means the provision of “cable service” or “video service” to subscribers and the
interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
Service provider fee means the amount paid under this Section and 220 ILCS 5/21-801 by the
holder to a Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for
the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline
facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology,
including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming
provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content,
information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet.
Sec. 60-15-2 Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in
the Village.
Amount of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder’s
gross revenues.
Notice to the Village. The holder shall notify the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on
which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the Village.
Holder’s Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the Village.
The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following
thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this Section by the holder. The ordinance
adopting this Section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder’s
application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the Village.
Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, fortyfive
(45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the
date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service
providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the Village in which a fee is paid.
Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that
60-15-4
agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under Section
60-15-2(b) above.
Sec. 60-15-3 PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
PEG Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the Village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to Section 60-15-2.
Amount of Fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent
(1%) of the holder’s gross revenue or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenue that incumbent
cable operators pay to the Village or its designee for PEG access support in the Village.
Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the Village or to the entity
designated by the Village to manage PEG access. The holder’s liability for the PEG access
support fee shall commence on the date set forth in Section 60-15-2(d) above.
Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis,
forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on
the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all
monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the
agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that
that operator owes under Section 60-15-3(b) above.
Sec. 60-15-4 Applicable Principles
All determinations and calculations under this Section shall be made pursuant to generally
accepted accounting principles.
Sec. 60-15-5 No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder
Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or
may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid
by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A State-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
Village’s simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government’s 911 or E911
fees, taxes, charges or surcharges.
Sec. 60-15-6 Audits of Cable/Video Service Provider
Audit Requirement. The Village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other
cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder
shall comply with the same requirements the Village imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to recompute any
amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the Village. If all local franchises
60-15-5
between the Village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted
by the Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are
correct.
Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30)
days from the Village’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
Sec. 60-15-7 Late Fees/Payments
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this
Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
60-16-1
SECTION 60-16
Tax on the Gross Receipts of Places for Eating
(Section added by A-383-01-12)
Sec. 60-16-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
(A) “Prepared Food” means and includes any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and non-alcoholic
liquid), powder or item used or intended to be used for human internal consumption, whether
simple, compound or mixed, and which has been prepared for immediate consumption.
(B) “Person” or “Persons” means any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability company, club, fraternal
organization, or a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by
order of any court.
(C) “Sold at Retail” means to sell for use or consumption in exchange for a consideration, whether in
the form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale, with said transaction
being subject to either the Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax (35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) or the Illinois
Service Occupation Tax (35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.)
(D) “Places for Eating” or “Place for Eating”
(1) “Places for Eating” or “Place for Eating” means all premises located within the corporate
limits of the Village of Burr Ridge where prepared food is sold at retail for immediate
consumption, with seating provided for consumption of said prepared food on the
premises, whether consumed on premises or not, and whether or not such places for
eating use is conducted along with any other use(s) in a common premise or business
establishment.
(2) “Places for Eating” or “Place for Eating” includes, but is not limited to, those
establishments commonly called a restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet,
bakery, banquet facility, cafeteria, café, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service,
coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor,
ice cream parlor, tea room, delicatessen, hotel, motel, or club, or any other
establishment which sells at retail prepared food for immediate consumption.
(E) “Gross Receipts” means the consideration received, valued in money, whether received in money
or otherwise, including cash, credits, property and services, at a place for eating for prepared food
furnished at the place for eating. Gross receipts do not include amounts paid for federal, state
and local taxes, including the tax levied by this Section, and do not include amounts paid as
gratuities for the employees of the place for eating.
(F) “Owner” means any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation of a place
for eating.
Sec. 60-16-2 Tax Imposed
60-16-2
(A) There is hereby levied and imposed upon owners of places for eating a tax at the rate of one
percent (1%) of gross receipts received for prepared food sold at retail by the owner on or after
May 1, 2012
(B) The owner of a place for eating may collect an amount from persons who purchase prepared food
at the place for eating which shall reimburse the owner for the tax imposed on the owner of this
Section.
(C) The tax levied by this Section shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
(D) In the event the prepared food is sold at retail on credit, an owner shall not be liable for payment
of the tax imposed by this Section on such a sale until he/she/they/it receives payment for the
sale.
Sec. 60-16-3 Books and Records/Inspections/Contents
The Finance Director, Village Treasurer or any person designated by either of them as deputy or
representatives, may enter the premises of any place for eating for inspection, examination, copying and
auditing of books and records including, but not limited to, Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Illinois
Service Occupation Tax returns filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue, in order to effectuate the
proper administration of this Section, and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed by
this Section. To the extent reasonably possible, said entry shall be done in a manner that is least disruptive
to the business of the place for eating. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with
the Finance Director, Village Treasurer or her/his deputies or representatives in the discharge of their duties
in the performance of this subsection. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete
books and records to which the Finance Director, Village Treasurer or her/his deputies or representatives
shall at all times have full access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing the amount of gross
receipts received during that day.
Sec. 60-16-4 Transmittal of Tax Revenue by Owner/Delinquency
(A) The owner or owners of each place for eating shall file tax returns showing the gross receipts
received during each calendar month period upon forms prescribed by the Finance Director.
Returns for each calendar month shall be due on or before the 20th day of the next calendar
month, (e.g. the return for January shall be due on or before the 20th day February; the return for
February shall be due on or before the 20th of Mach; etc.). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the
event that the owner of the place for eating is allowed to file Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax and
Illinois Service Occupation Tax returns with the Illinois Department of Revenue at intervals which
are greater than monthly, said owner shall be allowed to file tax returns relative to the tax imposed
by this Section with the Village at said greater intervals. At the time of the filing of said tax returns,
the owner shall pay to the Village all taxes due for the period to which the tax return applies.
(B) If, for any reason, any tax due pursuant to this Section is not paid when due, interest in the
amount of one and a half percent (1.5%) per month on the outstanding balance shall be paid to
the Village until the tax is paid in full.
(C) Owners filing tax returns pursuant to this Section shall, at the time of filing such return, pay to the
Village the amount of the tax imposed by this Section, less a commission of one percent (1%) of
the amount of the tax, which is allowed to reimburse the owners for the expense incurred in
keeping records, billing, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
Village upon request. No commission may be claimed by an owner for taxes not timely remitted
60-16-3
to the Village.
Sec. 60-16-5 Transmittal of Excess Tax Collections
If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby, but which amount is
purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the
amount of the tax so imposed herein and does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser who
paid the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred, said person shall account for
ane pay over those amounts to the Village along with the tax properly collected.
Sec. 60-16-6 Registration
Every owner maintaining a place for eating in the Village shall register with the Finance Department by May
1, 2012, or the date of becoming such an owner, whichever is later.
Sec. 60-16-7 Collection
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this Section, the Village Attorney or Prosecutor
shall, upon request of the Village Administrator, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the
payment of said tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 60-16-8 Suspension of License
If the Village Administrator, after a hearing held by her/him or for her/him by her/his designee, shall find that
any owner has willfully avoided the payment of any tax imposed by this Section, she/he may suspend or
revoke all Village licenses held by such tax evader. The owner shall have an opportunity to be heard at
such hearing to be held not less than ten (10) days after being mailed notice of the time when and the place
where the hearing is to be held, addressed to him at his last known place of business. Any suspension or
revocation of any license(s) shall not release or discharge the owner from his civil liability for the payment of
the tax nor from prosecution for such offense.
Sec. 60-16-9 Penalties
(A) Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with or
unlawfully resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Section, except
when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $200.00 nor more than $750.00 for the first offense, and not less than $500.00 nor more than
$750.00 for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day period.
(B) Each day upon which a person shall continue any violation of this Section, or permit any such
violation to exist after notification thereof, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(C) Any owner subjected to the penalties provided for by this subsection shall not be discharged or
released from the payment of any tax due.
Sec. 60-16-10 Separability
If any subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Section, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this Section, or the application of such portion to other persons or
60-16-4
circumstances.
I 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION I
PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION
A. Purpose
Because each new subdivision accepted by the Village becomes a permanent unit in the basic
physical structure of the future community, and to which the future community will, of
necessity, be forced to adhere, all subdivisions hereafter planned within the jurisdictional
boundaries established herein, shall, in all respects, be in full compliance with the regulations
hereinafter contained in this ordinance. These regulations are designed to provide for the
orderly and harmonious development of the Village, for the coordination of streets within
new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, to secure a uniform system of
utilities and services, to guide, regulate and control the design, construction, use and
maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or
otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the Village, and otherwise to
promote realization of the Comprehensive Plan. In particular, the Subdivision Ordinance of
the Village of Burr Ridge is for:
(a) implementation of the Village of Burr Ridge Comprehensive Plan;
(b) establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivision of
unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment;
(c) establishing reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing
of public streets, highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, street lights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, storm water drainage, water
supply and distribution, and sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment;
(d) establishing procedures for approval and recording of plats;
(e) imposition of costs, expenses, and fees of reviewing and processing plats; and
(f) providing for enforcement and for imposition of penalties for violations in accordance
with authority vested in the municipality under the provisions of the applicable Statutes
of the State of Illinois, be and hereby is adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan of the
Village of Burr Ridge as follows:
Section I
Purpose and Jurisdiction
2 I
B. Jurisdiction
1. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
The Subdivision Ordinance of the Village of Burr Ridge is applicable to lands situated
within the corporate limits and contiguous areas lying within one and one-half miles
beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality.
2. Exemptions for Certain Land Divisions
a. As per this Ordinance and the Illinois Plat Act, No. 765 ILCS 205/1 et. seq., the
following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Ordinance:
i. the division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of 5 acres or more
in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
ii. the division of lots or blocks of less than 1 acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
iii. the sale or exchange of parcels of land between separate owners of
adjoining and contiguous land, but not including adjoining and contiguous
lots or parcels under single ownership (the term "owners" and the term
"single ownership" shall include all situations where the ownership
interest, and/or any beneficial interest in a land trust, are held by the same
individual(s), including any situation where adjoining and contiguous lots
are held by either individual(s), and/or land trust(s) with the same
beneficial interest holders, and/or by a corporation where the owner(s) of
adjoining and contiguous land [either as an individual(s) and/or as the
holder of a beneficial interest in a land trust] have a majority stock interest
in said corporation)."
iv. the conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe
lines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
v. the conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which
does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
vi. the conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or
conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
vii. conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
Section IV
General Regulations
I 3
viii. the sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the division into
no more than 2 parts of a particular parcel or tract of land existing on July
17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or easements of access; and
ix. the sale of a single lot of less than 5 acres from a larger tract when a
survey is made by an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor; provided, that
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the
same larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and
configuration of the larger tract on October 1, 1973, and not involving any
new streets or easements of access. (Amended by Ord. A-894-01-03)
b. For purposes of determining the meaning of any of the exemptions provided for
herein, in order to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare such
exemptions shall be strictly construed in favor of requiring subdivision or
resubdivision under this Ordinance. Further, the term "lot" shall not be construed
to mean the same as "parcel" or "tract", it being the intention that if a lot is in
common ownership with adjoining and contiguous land (regardless of whether
such adjoining land is a recorded lot), that such lot and adjoining and contiguous
land shall constitute a single "parcel" or "tract" of land as those terms are used in
the above exemptions.
c. A property owner seeking an exemption under the terms herein described shall
submit a written opinion to the Community Development Director describing
which of the above exemptions apply to the proposed land division along with a
graphic depiction of the proposed land division, a Plat of Survey depicting
existing conditions of the property, and a tract search for the property. The
Community Development Director shall provide a written response indicating if
the land division is subject to the Subdivision Ordinance or is exempt.
C. Validity
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason
held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this ordinance.
D. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
All Ordinances or parts in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby
repealed.
II 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION II
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
A. RULES
The language set forth in the test of this ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with
the following rules of construction:
1. the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular;
2. the present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present;
3. the word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive;
4. the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter;
5. whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this ordinance, its
meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof, and any word
appearing in parenthesis directly after a word herein defined shall be construed in the
same sense as that word; and
6. the following words and terms, wherever they occur in this ordinance, shall be
construed as herein defined.
B. DEFINITIONS
1. ALLEY is a right-of-way that affords secondary means of access to properties
abutting upon a street.
2. BLOCK is a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, railroad rights-of-way, or other similar natural boundaries. A block may
be located in part beyond the boundary lines of the corporate limits of the Village.
3. BOARD OF TRUSTEES is the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Burr Ridge, Illinois.
4. BUILDING COMMISSIONER is the Building Commissioner of the Village of
Burr Ridge, Illinois, or a duly authorized representative of the Building
Commissioner.
Section II
Rules and Definitions
2 II
5. BUILDING PERMIT is a permit issued by the Village of Burr Ridge in accordance
with the Village of Burr Ridge Building Ordinance, No. 860 for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.
6. BUILDING SETBACK LINE is a line within a lot or other parcel of land, which
denotes the required setback for buildings on a lot as per the Village of Burr Ridge
Zoning Ordinance, No. 834.
7. CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION means formally attesting that the specific
inspections and tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply
with the applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
8. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR is the Community Development
Director of the Village of Burr Ridge hired and appointed by the Village of Burr
Ridge Board of Trustees.
9. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN refers to the composite of the functional and
geographic elements of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Burr Ridge
and Environs of any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text of
reports, implementing ordinances, and the Official Map.
10. CONSTRUCTION PERIOD, see Subdivision Improvement Period.
11. CUBIC YARDS means the amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by
the method of "average end areas."
12. CUL-DE-SAC is a minor street with a single outlet and having the other end for the
reversal of traffic (i.e. a turnaround).
13. DETENTION BASIN (OR POND) is a man-made or natural water collector facility
designed to collect surface and sub-surfaced water in order to impede its flow and to
release the same gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of
the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
14. DEVELOPER is any person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation,
public or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of any of them, or other legal
entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided or
divided to commence and maintain proceedings under the provisions of this
ordinance and that under the authority of the property owner intends to subdivide,
construct subdivision improvements, and subsequently to improve or sell individual
lots.
15. EASEMENT is a quantity of land set aside over or under which a liberty, privilege,
or advantage in land without profit is dedicated and is distinct from ownership of the
land or is granted either to the public, a particular person, or a combination of both.
Section II
Rules and Definitions
II 3
16. ENGINEERING PLAN(S) is a drawing or set of drawings, drawn to an engineer’s
scale and prepared by an Illinois Professional Engineer, that graphically depicts the
location, design, and construction of the improvements for a proposed subdivision
including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, utilities, stormwater management
facilities, and similar subdivision improvements.
17. EXCAVATION means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
18. EXISTING GRADE means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
19. FILL means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to
a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
20. FINAL GRADE means the vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after
the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
21. FINAL PLAT is a map or plan of all or a portion of a subdivision and any
accompanying material which is presented for final approval by the Village.
22. FRONTAGE ROAD is a minor street which is parallel to and either adjacent to or
within the right-of-way of a thoroughfare.
23. GRADING means excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
24. HALF STREET is a street or right-of-way of less than the total required width.
25. IMPROVEMENT is any man-made, immovable item that becomes part of, placed
upon, or is affixed to, real estate.
26. IMPROVEMENT PERIOD see Subdivision Improvement Period.
27. LAND IMPROVEMENT see Subdivision Improvement.
28. LANDSCAPING PLAN(S) is a drawing or set of drawings , drawn to an engineers
scale and prepared by a qualified landscape architect, professional engineer, or other
qualified person or firm, that graphically depicts the location, design, and
construction of common landscaping improvements for a proposed subdivision
including but not limited to trees, bushes, ground covers, flowers, entryway signs,
subdivision fences and walls, and similar landscape improvements.
29. LETTER OF CREDIT is a definite financial undertaking that complies with the
requirements of Article 5 of the Illinois Commercial Code, that guarantees that the
Section II
Rules and Definitions
4 II
improvements required as part of an application for subdivision are satisfactorily
completed.
30. LOT is a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat of subdivision
intended for transfer of ownership or for building development.
31. LOT AREA is the size of a lot measured within the lot lines and expressed in terms
of acres or square feet.
32. LOT, BUTT is a lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots.
33. LOT, CORNER is a lot that has at least two sides abutting for their full lengths upon
streets or as otherwise defined by the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, No. 834.
34. LOT FRONTAGE is that portion of a lot extending along a street line.
35. LOT, THROUGH is a lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two
substantially parallel streets.
36. MAINTENANCE PERIOD, see Subdivision Maintenance Period.
37. MINOR STREET, see Local Street
38. NATURAL DRAINAGE means channels formed in the existing surface topography
of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
39. RESTRICTED ACCESS STRIP is a land area located along a lot line abutting a
street within which no vehicular driveway shall be permitted.
40. OUTLOT is a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat of
subdivision intended for common use or ownership including but not limited to
stormwater detention and retention ponds.
41. OWNER, PROPERTY is the legal title holder of the property to be subdivided and
developed
42. PARCEL means all contiguous land in one ownership.
43. PARKWAY is the unpaved strip of land within a street right-of-way and parallel to
the roadway.
44. PATHWAY is a hardsurfaced path designated for pedestrian and bicycle use and
typically located in public parks, pathway easements, or similar publicly accessed
areas. A pathway is distinguished from a sidewalk in that pathways are typically not
located parallel to a public street.
Section II
Rules and Definitions
II 5
45. PEDESTRIAN WAY is a right-of-way across or within a block designated for
pedestrian use.
46. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE, see Letter of Credit.
47. PERMITTEE means any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
48. PERSON means any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America,
its agencies and instrumentality’s, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any
of the foregoing.
49. PLAN COMMISSION is the Burr Ridge Plan Commission.
50. PRELIMINARY PLAT is a tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as
described herein.
51. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT see Subdivision Improvement
52. REMOVAL means cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction,
or killing by spraying.
53. RETAINING WALL is a structure erected between lands of different elevation and
to protect structures and/or to prevent washing down or erosion of earth from the
upper slope level.
54. RETENTION BASIN is a pond or pool of water used for the permanent storage of
water run-off.
55. RIGHT-OF-WAY is a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
sidewalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, utility main, or
another special purpose.
56. ROADWAY is the actual road surface area between curb faces, which may include
lanes for travel, parking, deceleration, and acceleration. Where there are no curbs, the
roadway is that portion between the edges of the paved, or hardsurfaced, width.
57. SIDEWALK is a hardsurfaced path designated for pedestrian use and usually
located parallel and at the side of a roadway.
58. SIDE-STRIP see Parkway.
59. SITE means a lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
60. SITE DEVELOPMENT means altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
Section II
Rules and Definitions
6 II
61. SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA is any area located in Du Page County, which
consists of wetlands, floodplain, or riparian areas as defined in Article 2, Section 15-
17 of the Du Page County Stormwater Ordinance.
62. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES includes detention basins,
retention basins, storm sewer pipes, restrictors, swales, ditches, and all other related
improvements and grading intended for the control, storage, and release of
stormwater run-off.
63. STREET is a public or private right-of-way or easement, improved with a
hardsurfaced roadway suitable for two-directional vehicular traffic which affords
primary means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties, whether
designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, or however otherwise
designated.
64. STREET, ARTERIAL is a street designated as an arterial by the Burr Ridge
Comprehensive Plan and designed with the function of providing major traffic
movement between communities and which serves as a major traffic artery
connecting various sections of the Village of Burr Ridge.
65. STREET, COLLECTOR is a street designated as a collector by the Burr Ridge
Comprehensive Plan and that carries traffic from minor streets to arterial streets,
including the principal entrance streets of residential developments and the principal
streets for circulation within such a development.
66. STREET, LOCAL is a street of limited continuity. Its primary purpose is to serve
abutting properties.
67. STREET STUB is a street or portion of a street which has a single outlet (i.e. deadend
street) but which is intended for future extension.
68. STREET WIDTH is the shortest distance between the improved edges of a given
street.
69. STRIPPING means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover
including tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of top soil.
70. SUBDIVIDER see Developer.
71. SUBDIVISION is a described area of land that is to be, or has been divided into, two
or more parts and as described in the State of Illinois Plat Act. The term
"subdivision" includes resubdivision, Planned Unit Developments, and, where it is
appropriate to the context, the process of subdividing.
72. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS are the minimum standards set forth in this
ordinance, in conformance with which subdivision shall be designed and developed.
Section II
Rules and Definitions
II 7
73. SUBDIVISION ENTRYWAY MONUMENTS are structures including but not
limited to fence pillars or wall sections that are located at the entrances to a
subdivision and that delineate or highlight the subdivision entryway.
74. SUBDIVISION FENCES are fences within a subdivision fence easement,
commonly owned and maintained by property owners within a subdivision, and
generally located to separate side and rear yards of private lots from thoroughfares.
75. SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT is any improvement including any sanitary
sewerage system, storm sewer, stormwater retention or detention area, water supply
and distribution system, roadway, side-strip, sidewalk, pedestrian way, no-access
strip, off-street parking area, or other improvement which the Village of Burr Ridge
may require under this Ordinance. Further, any improvement that is required to be
installed under this Ordinance to service a particular subdivision shall be included in
the definition of "Subdivision Improvement(s)" regardless of whether the Village
may allow it to remain owned or controlled by someone other than the Village.
76. SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PERIOD is the time period (typically 2 years)
following the recording of a Plat of Subdivision and preceding the Subdivision
Maintenance Period which is allotted for construction of required subdivision
improvements.
77. SUBDIVISION MAINTENANCE PERIOD is the time period (typically 2 years)
following the acceptance of subdivision improvements by the Board of Trustees in
which the developer remains responsible for the maintenance of subdivision
improvements.
78. SUBDIVISION PLAN is a scaled drawing depicting the layout of a proposed
subdivision including streets, common space, and private lots. A subdivision plan
may be presented in the form of an informal sketch, a preliminary plat of subdivision,
or a final plat of subdivision.
79. THOROUGHFARE is a street designated by the Comprehensive Plan as a highway,
arterial, or collector street said street having a high degree of continuity and serving
as an arterial trafficway between the various districts of Burr Ridge and its environs.
80. TURNAROUND, TEMPORARY is a hardsurfaced portion of a street located at the
closed end of a street stub that provides an area for motor vehicles to turnaround
within the public right-of-way or within a temporary turnaround easement.
81. VACANT means land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
82. VILLAGE means the Village of Burr Ridge, Cook and DuPage Counties, Illinois.
83. VILLAGE CLERK is the Village Clerk of the Village of Burr Ridge, Illinois.
Section II
Rules and Definitions
8 II
84. VILLAGE ENGINEER is a professional engineer, registered in the State of Illinois,
who has been duly appointed as the Village Engineer by the Board of Trustees, or
who has been hired by the Village as its consulting engineer.
85. VILLAGE FORESTER is a person with expertise and experience in the field of
landscape architecture or forestry and who has been duly appointed as the Village
Forester by the Board of Trustees or who has been hired by the Village as its
consulting forester.
III 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION III
ADMINISTRATION
A. Administrative Bodies and Functions: The administration of this ordinance is hereby vested
in the following offices of the Village of Burr Ridge:
1. Board of Trustees
2. Plan Commission
3. Community Development Director
4. Village Engineer
5. Village Forester
6. Pathway Commission
B. Administrative Authorities and Duties
1. Village of Burr Ridge Board of Trustees
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Burr Ridge, hereinafter referred to as the "Village
Board" or "Board of Trustees", as established in accordance with the Revised Statutes of
the State of Illinois, shall have the following authority and duties with respect to this
ordinance.
a. Receive recommendations from the Plan Commission concerning preliminary plats of
subdivision; review final plats of subdivision; and to approve or disapprove all such
requests.
b. Review all variations from this Ordinance and to approve or disapprove all such
requests.
c. Review all text amendments to this Ordinance and approve or disapprove all such
requests.
2. Village of Burr Ridge Plan Commission
The Plan Commission of the Village of Burr Ridge has been created as per Chapter 3,
Article I of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code. Said Plan Commission has the following
authority and duties relative to this ordinance:
a. Review all applications for preliminary plats, hold public meetings thereon, and
report findings and recommendations to the Village Board.
Section III
Administration
2 III
b. Review all applications for companion variations made as part of an application for
preliminary plat approval and report findings and recommendations to the Village
Board.
c. Oversee the enforcement of this ordinance with the Official Comprehensive Plan and
its amendments.
3. Community Development Director
The Village of Burr Ridge has established the position of Community Development
Director and the authority and duties of the Community Development Director (or the
Director's duly authorized representative) relative to this ordinance shall be as
follows:
a. Review and process all matters going before the Plan Commission or Board of
Trustees relative to this ordinance;
b. Coordinate staff review of all plats and related documents relative to
compliance with this Ordinance;
c. Ensure compliance with all regulations of this ordinance and all plats and
related documents as approved by the various administrative bodies described in
this ordinance;
d. Issue notices and citations for violations of the terms of this ordinance and
require that construction work be stopped when such work is not in compliance
with this ordinance;
e. Maintain records of plats and other documents related to this ordinance;
f. Assist in providing public information relative to this ordinance;
g. Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this
ordinance, and make a report of recommendations to the Plan Commission and
Board of Trustees.
h. Perform all other duties as prescribed herein.
4. Village Engineer
The Village of Burr Ridge has established the position of Village Engineer and the
authority and duties of the Village Engineer (or the Village Engineer's duly
authorized representative) relative to this ordinance shall be as follows:
a. Review all preliminary plats, engineering plans, and final plats to ensure that all
subdivision improvements comply with the regulations of this Ordinance.
Section III
Administration
III 3
b. Upon determination of compliance, approve all final plat engineering plans to
ensure compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance.
c. Conduct inspections as needed during the construction of public improvements to
ensure compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance and provide inspection
reports to the Community Development Director as may be needed;
d. Assist in providing public information relative to this ordinance;
5. Village Forester
The Village of Burr Ridge has established the position of Village Forester and the
authority and duties of the Village Forester (or the Village Forester’s duly authorized
representative) relative to this ordinance shall be as follows:
a. Review all preliminary plats, landscaping plans, and final plats to ensure that
proposed landscaping complies with the regulations of this Ordinance.
b. Upon determination of compliance, approve all final landscaping plans to
ensure compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance.
e. Conduct inspections as needed during the construction of public improvements to
ensure compliance with the regulations of this Ordinance and provide inspection
reports to the Community Development Director as may be needed.
c. Assist in providing public information relative to this ordinance.
6. Pathway Commission
The Pathway Commission of the Village of Burr Ridge has been created as per
Chapter 3, Article IV of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code. Said Pathway Commission
has the following authority and duties relative to this ordinance:
a. Review all subdivisions for compliance with the Village’s hardsurfaced
pathway master plan and hold public meetings thereon.
b. Make recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees regarding
location of pathways and sidewalks within subdivisions and for waiver of
required sidewalks in lieu of pathway fund donations.
C. Variations
1. An application for a variation of the terms of this ordinance may be made by any person,
firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau, or commission
requesting or intending to request a Plat of Subdivision in accordance with this
Ordinance. Said application shall be submitted on forms approved by the Community
Section III
Administration
4 III
Development Director and shall be accompanied by supporting documentation as may be
required by the Community Development Director.
2. Any request for variation of this Ordinance shall be submitted to the Community
Development Director for processing and submittal to the Plan Commission. The
application for variation shall be submitted at least two weeks prior to a regularly
scheduled Plan Commission meeting unless otherwise stipulated by the Community
Development Director.
3. The Plan Commission may recommend variations from the requirements of this
ordinance in specific cases which, in its opinion, do not adversely affect the
Comprehensive Plan or intent of this ordinance. Such recommendations shall be
communicated to the Board of Trustees or governing county authorities in writing
substantiating the recommended variation. The Board of Trustees may approve variations
from the requirements of this ordinance when, in its opinion, such variations will not
adversely affect the Comprehensive Plan or the intent of this ordinance.
4. The Board of Trustees shall not approve variations that result in requirements less than
required by the DuPage or Cook County Subdivision Regulations Ordinance for
subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas under the extra-territorial jurisdiction of
this ordinance.
D. Enforcement
1. Subdivision Plats: No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the
Recorder's Office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in a manner
prescribed in this ordinance. The Community Development Director is hereby
appointed as the enforcing officer of this ordinance, and it shall be the Director’s
duty to enforce the provisions hereof. The Community Development Director may
call upon any department or official of the Village to furnish such information and
assistance as he may be deemed necessary for the observance or enforcement of this
ordinance, and it shall be the duty of such department or officer to furnish such
information and assistance whenever required.
2. Planned Unit Developments: All planned unit developments granted under the
provisions of the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance shall also be considered and
deemed to be subdivisions for all the purposes of this Subdivision Ordinance and
shall be under the jurisdiction of this Subdivision Ordinance, except where the
context clearly indicates otherwise, and all required subdivision improvements
provided for in this Ordinance shall be required in said planned unit developments
except as may otherwise be provided for in the Village ordinance granting the
special use for any such planned unit developments.
All planned unit developments in unincorporated Cook and DuPage Counties shall
also be considered and deemed to be subdivisions for all the purposes of this
Subdivision Ordinance and shall be under the jurisdiction of this Subdivision
Section III
Administration
III 5
Ordinance if any portion of any such planned unit development is within 1-1/2
miles of the Village's boundaries.
E. Record of Plats
All such plats of subdivision, after the same have been submitted and approved as provided in
this ordinance, shall be filed and kept by the Community Development Director among the
records of the Village.
F. Validity
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to
be invalid, such decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
G. Violation and Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be fined not less than One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
Every such person or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day on
which such violation, neglect or refusal shall continue.
IV 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION IV
PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PROPOSED
PLATS OF SUBDIVISION
A. General Procedures for Plats of Subdivisions
1. Request for Plat of Subdivision Required
Before subdividing any tract or parcels of land in the Village and the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles beyond the Village limits, an
owner or subdivider shall submit a request for subdivision to be acted upon by the
Village authorities in accordance with the procedures and requirements described
herein. Said request shall include the name, address, and other contact
information for the developer of the subdivision, the project engineer, project
landscape architect, and other professionals preparing plans for the subdivision.
The developer shall be the owner or duly authorized representative of the owner.
2. Informal Review by Plan Commission
The review process for a plat of subdivision shall begin with submittal of a sketch
plan for informal review by the Community Development Director and the Plan
Commission. The sketch plan shall depict the proposed arrangement and
dimensions of lots and streets within the subdivision, a tree survey and tree
preservation plan as per Section IX.F herein, a topographic survey of the area, the
surrounding street system, and the arrangement of lots and buildings adjacent to
the property being subdivided. The Community Development Director may
waive the informal review if the Plan Commission previously approved a
subdivision plan in conjunction with an annexation, rezoning petition, or similar
action.
3. Preliminary Plat Review
After the informal review by the Plan Commission, a preliminary plat may be
submitted. The preliminary plat shall follow the procedures outlined herein.
4. Waiver of Preliminary Plat
The preliminary plat requirements of this ordinance may be waived by the
Community Development Director if the Community Development Director
determines that the subdivision will not adversely impact the character of the
surrounding area and if the subdivision complies with any one of the following
circumstances:
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
2 IV
a. The proposed subdivision is a resubdivision of previously subdivided
property previously subdivided in compliance with the requirements of
this Ordinance; and the Village Engineer certifies that: 1) all subdivision
improvements required by this Ordinance have been installed; 2) such
improvements have been accepted by the Village and any other
governmental body with jurisdiction over the improvements; 3) no fault
exists with respect to maintenance of such improvements; and 4) adequate
provision has been made for storm water management in accordance with
this Ordinance and any other applicable law, regulation or ordinance.
b. The subdivision does not include any new streets or easements of access
and the proposed subdivision complies with the Village of Burr Ridge
Zoning Ordinance and Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
c. The subdivision is in substantial compliance with a subdivision plan
approved by the Board of Trustees as part of a Planned Unit Development,
Annexation Agreement, or similar approval.
5. Final Engineering and Landscaping Plan Review
Upon approval of the preliminary plat of subdivision, the developer may submit
final engineering and landscaping plans as per Section IV.D herein. Final
engineering plans shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village
Engineer. Final landscaping plans shall be subject to the review of the Village
Forester and approval by the Community Development Director. All final
engineering plans shall comply with the requirements of Section VIII of this
Ordinance and all landscaping plans shall comply with Section IX of this
Ordinance.
6. Waiver of Final Engineering and Landscaping Plan Approval
a. Upon certification from the Village Engineer that the proposed
subdivision does not include any subdivision improvements required by
this Ordinance or by any other requirement of the Village of Burr Ridge,
the requirement for final engineering plans shall be waived.
b. Upon certification from the Community Development Director that
required landscaping improvements do not constitute the need for a final
landscaping plan, the requirement for final landscaping plans shall be
waived. For example, if required landscaping is limited to a small number
of parkway trees, landscaping plans may not be necessary.
7. Final Plat Review
Upon approval of the final engineering and landscaping plans, the developer may
submit the final plat of subdivision for review and approval as per the procedures
described herein.
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
IV 3
8. Review and Revisions to Plats and Plans
a. The Community Development Director shall coordinate the review of all
preliminary plats, final engineering plans, final landscaping plans, and
final plats of subdivision including collection of written reports from said
persons and forwarding of reports to the developer.
b. Within 30 days after receipt of all required documentation for a
preliminary plat, final engineering plans, final landscaping plans, or final
plat, the Community Development Director shall either approve said plats
or plans or shall provide written comments listing required revisions to the
plats or plans.
c. Within 90 days after written request for revisions to a plat or plan by the
Community Development Director, the developer shall re-submit said plat
or plans. Failure to re-submit within 90 days shall result in an additional
fee as per Ordinance No. 339 as amended.
B. Procedures for Preliminary Plat Reviews
1. The developer shall file with the Community Development Director an application
for approval of the preliminary plat. Such application shall be in a form
determined from time to time by the Community Development Director and shall
include documents, information and material desirable to evidence compliance
with applicable ordinances and laws. The application shall include all
information as required by Section IV.C herein.
2 Only after receiving all required information as listed herein, the Community
Development Director, Village Engineer, Village Forester and Village Attorney
shall proceed with the review of the Preliminary Plat of Subdivision. The
developer shall make all changes necessary to make the plat conform to the
policies and ordinances of the Village of Burr Ridge.
3 Prior to consideration of the preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees, the
Community Development Director shall submit the preliminary plat to the
Pathway Commission. The Pathway Commission shall review the plat and make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees regarding location of sidewalks and
pathways within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
4 Upon determination by the Community Development Director that the
preliminary plat documentation is complete, the preliminary plat shall be
scheduled for review by the Plan Commission. The subdivider shall provide
additional documentation or copies of previously submitted documentation to be
distributed to the Plan Commission and the Board of Trustees by the Community
Development Director prior to the scheduled Plan Commission meeting.
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
4 IV
5 The Community Development Director shall notify the owner or subdivider as to
the time and place of the Plan Commission meeting at which time the subdivider
will be afforded an opportunity to be heard. The subdivider shall notify the
president of the school board of each school district, the Fire Protection District
Chief, and the Director of the Park District in which the land is located of the
time, date and place of the meeting of the Plan Commission at which approval of
the plat will be considered. The notice to the school, fire, and park districts shall
be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery and
the owner or subdivider shall submit to the Village evidence of service of said
notice at least three days in advance of the meeting.
6 The Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary
plat approval within 90 days from the date of filing the application or the filing by
the applicant of the last item of required supporting documents, whichever date is
later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent.
7 When the preliminary plat has been acted upon by the Plan Commission, it shall
be referred to the Board of Trustees. If the Plan Commission approves the plat, it
shall so indicate in a letter to the Board of Trustees, and if it disapproves such
plat, it shall furnish the Board of Trustees and the applicant a written statement
setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity the
aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this ordinance and Official
Map, and with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan. The Board of Trustees shall
accept or reject said plat within 30 days after its regular stated meeting following
the action of the Plan Commission unless additional time is agreed to by the
subdivider.
8 Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees, a Notice of
Approval shall be stamped upon four prints thereof, and required signatures
affixed. The Notice of Approval shall be in substantial compliance with
Appendix III-A of this Ordinance. A copy of the approved preliminary plat shall
be provided to the developer.
9 Approval of the preliminary plat by the Plan Commission and Board of Trustees
shall be conditioned upon compliance with all other requirements of this
Ordinance unless specifically waived or modified by action of the Board of
Trustees. Further, the developer/owner of any property being subdivided shall
remain fully responsible for compliance with all the requirements of the Village
Subdivision Ordinance, and the laws regulating subdivision in Illinois despite any
preliminary review and approval which may be granted by the Village or Village
staff during the review process.
C. Required Documentation for a Preliminary Plat of Subdivision
1. Application for a preliminary plat of subdivision shall not be considered complete
until all of the following information is received by the Community Development
Director:
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
IV 5
a. Preliminary Plat of Subdivision prepared by an Illinois Registered Land
Surveyor; and including all information as described in Section IV.C.2,
below
b. Payment of all required fees as per Ordinance No. 339 as amended.
c. Topographic and profile studies, drawn to same scale as, and as overlays
to, the Preliminary Plat of Subdivision showing source of data and
certification by a registered professional engineer and owner of the land or
his duly authorized attorney regarding the drainage of surface waters as
required by the Illinois Plat Act. Profile studies for subdivisions in Du
Page County of 3 acres or larger or for subdivisions of any size which
affect a Special Management Area as defined herein, shall be compiled
from a datum consisting of two independent benchmarks as established by
the Du Page County Department of Stormwater and Development.
Subdivisions of any size adjacent to F.I.R.M floodplain areas shall be tied
to two independent FEMA benchmarks.
d. Boundary line survey prepared and certified by a registered surveyor,
pursuant to Section IV.A.3 of this Ordinance.
e. Written authorization of agent, if any, to represent owner, expressly,
precisely and definitively stating the extent of the authority of any agent;
provided, however, that the Village shall not be required to honor such
agency and may require any principal to act for itself.
f. Disclosure of beneficial ownership of land trust, if any, and other matters
subject to Burr Ridge Ordinance No. 214, and any amendments thereto.
g. Proof of ownership in the form of a full and complete title opinion or title
insurance policy issued by a title insurance company licensed to do
business in Illinois. Said title opinion or policy shall disclose, among
other matters, the record owners and any liens and encumbrances affecting
the proposed subdivision and shall bear a date not more than seven (7)
days prior to the date of filing of the application for preliminary plat
approval. Evidence, satisfactory to the Village, of status of title at times
subsequent to filing the application may be required by the Village. In
addition, the applicant shall from time to time, subsequent to filing the
application and prior to approval or disapproval of the preliminary and
final plats as required by law, submit evidence in writing and satisfactory
to the President and the Village as to any and all changes of ownership of,
title or interests in, encumbrances of, and of any matter which may affect
ownership to title to, the real estate included in the proposed preliminary
or final plat.
h. Soil and Water Conservation District application pursuant to Ill. Rev. Stat.
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
6 IV
Ch. 5, Sec. 127.2a, evidencing that application has been made directly to
the District.
i. A vicinity map, in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the field of
the site for which plat approval is sought, and including the boundary line
and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning and a legend and
scale.
j. Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within approximately
100 feet of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than one-foot contour
intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage pattern of
the area, including rights-of-way. Parcels within Du Page County must
follow the Ordinance requirements of the Du Page County Stormwater
Ordinance.
k. The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, water bodies,
wetlands, riparian areas, flood plains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover,
paved areas and other significant natural or man-made features on the site
and adjacent land within approximately 100 feet of the boundary or as
required by the Du Page County Stormwater Ordinance for parcels located
within Du Page County.
l. The proposed phasing of development of the site, including stripping and
clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing
will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas and the
sequence of clearing, installation of temporary sediment control measures,
installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas and
establishment of permanent vegetative cover.
m. These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the standards and
requirements contained in "Procedures and Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control in Northeastern Illinois" prepared by the
Northeastern Illinois Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering
Committee and the Illinois Urban Manual, which standards and
requirements are hereby incorporated into this ordinance by reference.
n. The Community Development Director, upon recommendation of the
Village Engineer, may waive specific requirements for the content of
submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to
show that the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this
ordinance.
o. Documentation evidencing submittal of the preliminary plat to appropriate
state, county or township highway agency for its approval pursuant to
Illinois Revised Statutes, Chapter 109, Paragraph 2, as amended.
Documentation evidencing that notice and a copy of the proposed
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
IV 7
preliminary plat has been given to the president of the school board of
each school district in which any of the subdivided land is located stating
that the plat has been submitted to the Village for review and approval.
p. Documentation evidencing that notice and a copy of the preliminary plat
has been given to the chief executive officer of the Fire Protection District
and Park District in which any of the land to be subdivided is located
stating that the plat has been submitted to the Village for review and
approval.
q. Documentation evidencing compliance with stormwater management
review pursuant to Chapter 8 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
r. Documentation evidencing compliance with the State of Illinois
Endangered Species Act.
s. Any other items required by law from time to time.
2. The preliminary plat and required accompanying maps shall show the following:
(Identification and Description)
a. Proposed name of the subdivision -- not a duplication of a name of any
plat heretofore recorded in the Village or in DuPage County or Cook
County.
b. Location by section, town, and range, or by other approved legal
description.
c. Boundary line survey on an accompanying map which is prepared and
certified by a registered surveyor, and topographic survey data on an
accompanying map which indicates source of survey data.
d. Name and address of the owner or subdivider of the proposed subdivision
and designer of such subdivision.
e. Graphic scale equal to one inch equals 50 feet or larger unless otherwise
approved by the Community Development Director. North point
(designated as true north).
f. Date of preparation with number and date of all revisions.
(Existing Conditions)
g. Boundary lines of proposed subdivision in accordance with 2-c above.
h. Total acreage therein and a summary table of lot sizes as per Appendix IIIB
of this Ordinance.
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
8 IV
i. Existing zoning districts in proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
j. Location, widths, and names of all existing or previously platted streets or
other rights-of-way showing type of improvement (if any), railroad and
utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent
buildings and structures, easements, and section and corporate lines within
the tract and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract and the distance to
the nearest street if beyond 100 feet from the tract.
k. If required by the Community Development Director, the location and size
of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts, or other underground
facilities within the tract and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the
tract - also indicating such data as locations and surface and invert grade
elevations of catch-basins, manholes, and fire hydrants.
l. Location map, if required by the Community Development Director drawn
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing boundary
lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land within an area bounded
by nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries, but not less than
one-half mile beyond the subdivision boundaries in subdivisions located
beyond the Village limits, identifying type of use and ownership of
surrounding land and showing alignments of existing streets.
m. As required by the Community Development Director, topographic data as
required in Section IV.C.1.b herein. Soil boring data, wetland
reconnaissance reports, and seepage tests may be required at locations and
depths as determined by the Village Engineer.
n. Locations or references to locations of existing monuments or survey
markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation of each
monument and marker.
(Subdivision Design Features)
o. The preliminary plat shall be in substantial accord with the
Comprehensive Plan as amended from time to time.
p. Layout of streets showing right-of-way widths and street names (not
duplicating or similar to the name of any streets heretofore used in the
Village or its environs unless such street is an extension of or in line with
an already named street in which event that name shall be used) and
showing proposed through streets extended to boundaries of subdivision.
The detailed requirements related to designation of streets and addresses is
set forth herein at Section VII.K.
q. Locations and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways, drainage easements,
conservation easements, natural area easements, and utility easements.
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
IV 9
r. Layout, total number of lots, and scaled dimensions on the lot containing
the minimum width and depth and on the lot containing the maximum
width and depth. Additional lot dimensions may be required to determine
compliance with the minimum lot size requirements of the Burr Ridge
Zoning Ordinance.
s. Minimum front, corner side, interior side, and rear yard building setback
lines for each lot indicating dimensions.
t. The Village of Burr Ridge zoning districts proposed for the subdivision.
u. Areas (other than those listed in 2.q and 2.r above), if any, intended to be
dedicated or reserved for common purposes such as stormwater
management indicating in each the approximate acreage. Such areas shall
be identified as outlots and designated by letter (e.g. “Outlot A”).
v. Proposed location of sewer lines and storm water drains and proposed
methods of sewage and waste disposal and surface water drainage,
including the required topographic and profile studies having on their face
the certification regarding the drainage of surface waters required under
Section 2 of the Illinois Plat Act (Chapter 109, Section 2, III, Rev. Stats.).
w. When required by the Village Engineer, the subdivider shall submit
proposed detailing grading plans of blocks and lots. No land will be
approved for subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which
contains inadequate drainage facilities or other topographic conditions
which may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion
or flood hazard unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which
will, in the opinion of the Village Engineer and Plan Commission, make
such land safe for development and occupancy.
x. If the land being subdivided or any part thereof is zoned for a planned
development, areas which are allocated as open space shall be designated
as an outlot with a letter of the alphabet and shall be legally described.
D. Procedures for Final Engineering and Landscaping Plan Review
After the approval of the preliminary plat and prior to filing an application for approval
of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the Community Development Director three
complete copies of all final engineering plans and specifications. The final engineering
plans shall be prepared under the direction of and shall bear a seal from an Illinois
Registered Professional Engineer. The Community Development Director shall forward
two complete sets of such plans to the Village Engineer. Final engineering plans are
required for all subdivisions that include any subdivision improvements and shall comply
with the following requirements:
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
10 IV
1. The final engineering plans shall include information and supplemental
documentation to show compliance with Section VIII herein and as may be
required by the Village Engineer to show compliance with other Village, County,
State, or Federal regulations.
2. The final engineering plans shall include a detailed, line item cost estimate for all
required subdivision improvements. Said cost estimate shall be prepared by an
Illinois Registered Professional Engineer. This cost estimate shall include all
required landscaping as described in Section IX of this Ordinance.
3. The final engineering plans shall conform to the preliminary plat approved by the
Plan Commission and all other policies and ordinances of the Village of Burr
Ridge. The developer shall make all necessary changes to make the final
engineering plans conform to the requirements herein.
4. The Village Engineer has the responsibility for the final review of engineering
plans and for recommending the approval of such plans to the Board of Trustees
when the Village Engineer has confirmed that the plans comply with the
requirements herein.
5. The final engineering plans shall not be approved by the Village Engineer until
such time that all required permits and approvals from other public agencies have
been obtained. Said public agencies may include but are not limited to the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Army Corps of Engineers, Du Page County
Department of Stormwater and Development, Du Page County Public Works
Department, Cook or DuPage County Highway Department, Hinsdale Sanitary
District and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
6. The Final Plat of Subdivision shall not be submitted until such time that the
Village Engineer has approved the final engineering plans or that the Village
Engineer has determined that the final engineering plans are substantially
complete and will be approved prior to approval of the final plat by the Board of
Trustees.
E. Procedures for Final Landscaping Plan Review
At the same time that the final engineering plans are submitted, the subdivider shall
submit to the Community Development Director three complete copies of all final
landscaping plans and specifications. The Community Development Director shall
forward one complete set of such plans to the Village Forester and Village Engineer for
review in conjunction with the final engineering plans. The final landscaping plans shall
comply with the following:
1. The final landscaping plans shall include all information and supplemental
documentation as may be required to show compliance with the requirements of
Section IX herein as may be determined by the Community Development
Director.
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
IV 11
2. The final landscaping plans shall include a detailed, line item cost estimate for all
required landscaping improvements prepared by an Illinois Registered
Professional Engineer. This cost estimate shall be incorporated into the cost
estimate for the final engineering plans.
3. The final landscaping plans shall conform to the preliminary plat approved by the
Plan Commission and all other policies and ordinances of the Village of Burr
Ridge. The developer shall make all reasonable changes requested by the
Community Development Director to make the final landscaping plans conform
to the requirements herein.
4. The Community Development Director has the responsibility for the final review
of landscaping plans and for recommending the approval of such plans to the
Board of Trustees when the Community Development Director has confirmed that
the plans comply with the requirements herein.
5. The Final Plat of Subdivision shall not be submitted until such time that the
Community Development Director has approved the final landscaping plans or
has determined that the final landscaping plans are substantially complete and will
be approved prior to approval of the final plat by the Board of Trustees.
F. Procedures for Final Plat of Subdivision Review
Upon approval of the preliminary plat of subdivision, approval or waiver of the final
engineering plans, and the approval or waiver of final landscaping plans, a final plat of
subdivision may be submitted for review and approval. The final plat of subdivision
shall comply with the following:
1. Within one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees,
the subdivider shall file an application for approval of the final plat. In case
application for approval of a final plat is made for a part or parts of an approved
preliminary plat, the Board of Trustees may extend the time for application of
approval of final plats for other parts of the approved preliminary plat until a later
date or dates beyond the foregoing one-year period.
2. The application for final plat approval shall be in a form as specified by the
Community Development Director. Simultaneously with the filing of said
application, all required fees shall be paid and the following supporting
documents shall be filed, together with any other documents required by law:
a. Six copies of the final subdivision plat, containing all required certificates
in conformance with Appendix 2 of this ordinance. The original plat shall
not be submitted until requested by the Community Development
Director. The original final plat shall be submitted with all duly executed
certificates and shall be drawn with black waterproof drawing ink on
transparent linen tracing cloth or equal.
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
12 IV
b. One 11x 17 inch reduced copy of the of the subdivision plat.
c. Duly certified topographic and profile studies as required by and in
conformance with the Plat Act, Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 109, Sec. 1, et seq., as
amended, with three copies.
d. Disclosure of beneficial ownership of land trust, if any, and other matters
required by Burr Ridge Ordinance No. 214, as amended, with three copies.
e. Proof of ownership, in the form of a full and complete title opinion, a title
insurance policy, or a commitment for title insurance, issued by a title
insurance company licensed to do business in Illinois, with three copies.
Said title opinion, policy or commitment shall disclose, among other
matters, the record owners and any liens and encumbrances affecting the
proposed subdivision and shall bear a date not more than seven (7) days
prior to the date of filing of the application for final plat approval and shall
be accompanied by the Owner's Affidavit in substance to the effect that
prior to the Village's recording of the subdivision plat or the withdrawal
by the Owner of the application for final plat approval, whichever event is
first to occur, the Owner: (a) will not take any action or make any
agreement altering the status of title to the property as shown in said title
opinion, policy or commitment without first personally serving written
notice on Village of any such action or agreement; and (b) will inform the
Village immediately in writing by personal service of any involuntarily
suffered change in the status of title to the property as shown in said title
opinion, policy or commitment.
f. Soil and Water Conservation District application pursuant to Ill. Rev.
Stat., Ch. 5, Sec. 127.2a, evidencing that application has been made
directly to the District, with three copies.
g. The Subdivision Completion Agreement required by Section VI.A of this
ordinance, fully completed and executed by all necessary parties except
the Village, with three copies.
h. Written authorization of agent, if any, to represent owner, expressly,
precisely and definitively stating the extent of the authority of any agent,
with three copies; provided, however, that the Village shall not be required
to honor such agency and may require any principal to act for itself.
i. Any declarations, restrictions or protective covenants applicable to the
subdivision but not appearing on the subdivision plat, with three copies.
j. Certification by the proper collector or court as required by Ill.Rev.Stat.,
Ch. 120, Sec. 516, as amended, with respect to special assessments or a
written statement from the Owner or subdivider setting forth in detail the
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
IV 13
reason why said certification is not applicable to the subdivision, with
three copies. Said statement shall not be binding upon the Village and the
Village may, as a condition of approval of the final plat, require said
certification.
k. A statement that the Owner or subdivider intends to submit a letter of
credit as required by Section VII.B of this ordinance, including in such
statement the name of the bank issuing the letter of credit.
l. Written authorization in the form of a letter from the Registered Land
Surveyor who prepared the Plat authorizing the Village to record the Plat.
3. When the Owner or subdivider has submitted an application for final plat
approval, together with all documents required to be furnished in support thereof,
the Community Development Director shall review said plat to determine
compliance with the approved preliminary plat, final engineering plans, final
landscaping plans, the terms and conditions of this Ordinance, and all other
requirements of the Village of Burr Ridge. The developer shall make all changes
necessary to make the final plat conform to the requirements herein.
4. Upon approval of the final plat, the Community Development Director shall
immediately forward such application and supporting documents to the President
and Board of Trustees who shall, if all such material meets all Village requirements,
approve the proposed plat within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the
last required document or within sixty (60) days from the date of filing of the
application for final approval of the plat, whichever date is later. The developer
and the President and Board of Trustees may mutually agree to extend the sixty
(60) day period.
5. If the final plat is approved, the Village Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the
order or resolution of approval to a copy of the plat. If the proposed plat is
disapproved, the order or resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval,
specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat and/or any
supporting documents fail to conform to the official map or other Village
requirements. A copy of the order or resolution disapproving the plat shall be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
6. Upon approval of a final plat of subdivision, the Community Development
Director shall retain at least one copy of the final plat and all supporting documents
for the Village records. The Community Development Director shall also
immediately record the final plat and other necessary supporting documents,
including but not limited to the Agreement required by Section VI of this
Ordinance, with the appropriate recorder of deeds and bill the Owner or
subdivider for the cost of such recording. The Owner or subdivider shall
promptly reimburse the Village for such recording fees.
7. The subdivider shall submit the fully executed final plat of subdivision to the
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
14 IV
Community Development Director within 60 days after approval of a Resolution
Approving the Final Plat by the Board of Trustees. The subdivider shall comply
with all conditions of said Resolution within 60 days after the Resolution is
approved unless the Resolution specifically states otherwise. Upon determination
that the conditions for approval of the final plat have not changed, the Community
Development Director may grant one, 60-day extension of this deadline subject to
payment of an extension fee as per Ordinance 339 as amended and subject to
preparation of a current title opinion or title insurance policy as per Section
IV.C.1.f herein.
G. Documentation and Content of the Final Plat of Subdivision
The following information shall accompany or be included on all final plats of
subdivision:
1. The final plat shall retain the design characteristics of the approved preliminary
plat, except that the Community Development Director or Board of Trustees may
require such changes or revisions in the plat or the supporting documents as are
deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community and in keeping
with the provisions of the laws and ordinances relating to subdivisions.
2. All information required on the preliminary plat as herein set forth in Section
IV.C.2, except that information required by paragraphs j, k, l, m, n, o, s, u, w, and
x therein, shall be provided on the final plat of subdivision.
3. Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles, and curvatures, with
functions used to describe all boundaries including perimeter survey of tract,
streets, alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public use, and other important
features. Error of closure of boundary-line surveys shall not exceed one in ten
thousand (one foot for each 10,000 feet of perimeter survey). Angular error shall
not exceed plus or minus 20 seconds. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and
hundredths, and when an angle occurs in any lot line between lot corners, the
measurement of the angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes, and seconds. The
final plat shall show accurately the location of all permanent subdivision corner
markers as actually installed.
4. An identification system for all blocks and lots using consecutive numbers of lots
within a block.
5. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines and official
monuments (not less than three), which shall be accurately described in the plat
by location, size, and elevation.
6. Municipal, township or section lines accurately correlated to the lines of the
subdivision by distances and angles.
7. Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all block corners,
Section IV
Procedures for Review of Proposed Plats of Subdivision
IV 15
angle points, and at intermediate points as shall be required by the Village
Engineer, and installed in such a manner that they may be located by a licensed
surveyor. All U.S.G.S., State, County, Village, or other official bench marks,
monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be
preserved in precise position.
8. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved
for public use or for the exclusive use of property owners within the subdivision.
9. The Board of Trustees may require a declaration of covenants creating and
establishing scope of activities for a Homeowners Association for the purpose of
maintenance of common areas
10. For subdivisions containing 20 acres or more in area, the Board of Trustees may
require a declaration creating and establishing scope of activities for an architectural
control committee.
11. The location of any special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the Du Page County Department of
Stormwater and Development as delegated by FEMA shall be identified on the
final plat.
12. The application for approval of the final plat shall not be deemed complete until
the certificates identified in Appendix IV, other than the Village Clerk's
Certificate, have been duly executed. The certificates identified as Appendices
IV-E, G, H, K, M, N, and O are not required upon determination that the entity
required to execute the certificate has no authority to do so or lacks jurisdiction
over the subdivision or that the certificate is not applicable to the subdivision.
V 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION V
SUBDIVISION COMPLETION AGREEMENT AND
LETTER OF CREDIT
A. Authorization to Begin Construction of the Approved Subdivision Improvements
All subdivision improvements shall comply with the Subdivision Ordinance, the Subdivision
Improvement Agreement, and all sections of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code. The developer
shall be authorized to begin construction of the approved subdivision improvements upon
completion of the following. (Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
1. Provision of Letter of Credit and Recording of Final Plat
After approval by the Board of Trustees, the letter of credit and the signed final plat of
subdivision shall be submitted to the Community Development Director. The
Community Development Director shall proceed with recording of the final plat and the
signed Subdivision Completion Agreement.
2. Installation of Soil Erosion Control and Tree Protection Fencing
Upon recording of the final plat of subdivision the developer shall proceed with
installation of soil erosion control and tree protection fencing. Prior to proceeding with
other subdivision improvements, the developer shall request an inspection of the soil
erosion control and tree protection fencing. Upon written approval of the soil erosion
control and tree protection by the Village Engineer and Village Forester, the developer
shall be authorized to begin construction of the subdivision improvements.
B. Two-Year Subdivision Improvement Period
1. Compliance with Subdivision Design Standards: As a condition subsequent to the
Village's approval of the final plat of subdivision, the developer shall, within two (2)
years from the date of approval of the final plat of subdivision, construct and pay for the
subdivision improvements required herein.
2. Inspection of Subdivision Improvements: During construction of the subdivision
improvements, the Village Engineer shall conduct inspections of the subdivision
improvements at the following prescribed stages of construction and all other such times
as may be determined appropriate. At any time that the Village Engineer determines
that construction is not in compliance with the standards and procedures established
herein, the Village Engineer shall have the authority to order all work to be stopped until
such time that the work is brought into compliance with this Ordinance.
a. Tree Preservation, Safety and Erosion Control: Prior to beginning any grading or
other construction, the developer shall install and complete all tree preservation,
safety and erosion control improvements and shall request an inspection of said
improvements. These improvements shall be maintained throughout the
construction process as determined appropriate by the Village Engineer and will
be checked at every additional inspection. Construction work may not proceed
unless the work completed is found to be satisfactory by the Village Engineer.
These inspections shall verify compliance with approved plans and compliance
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
2 V
with standards set forth herein including but not limited to the following:
i. Review all operating procedures to assure that activities are performed in a
safe manner. (Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
ii. When work is conducted in the presence of traffic, review traffic control
and impacts to the traveling public, both vehicular and pedestrian.
(Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
iii. Review erosion control to ensure all erosion control measures are
functioning properly.
iv. Ensure tree protection is in place and functioning properly.
v. Erosion control shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance, including,
but not limited to those in Section VIII, M. hereof and shall be installed
and properly maintained continuously during the development of the
subdivision. If in the judgment of the Village Engineer the Owner or
Subdivider has failed to meet any of the erosion and sedimentation control
requirements of this Ordinance, the Village Engineer shall give notice in
writing to the Owner or Subdivider of such failure with a directive to
correct the failure. If the Owner or Subdivider does not correct the
deficiency within 5 days of such notice, the Mayor and Village Engineer
are authorized to complete a draw on the letter of credit for the costs of
such work as may be deemed necessary by the Village Engineer to ensure
proper erosion and sedimentation control under this Ordinance.
(Added by Ordinance (A-894-03-08)
b. Utility Installation (water, sanitary, storm): Prior to installation of any utility
pipes and prior to chlorinating and pressure testing, inspections are required to
verify compliance with approved plans and compliance with standards set forth
herein including but not limited to the following:
i. Verify size, type, length, and location of pipe and structures.
ii. Inspect all material for any damage or defects.
iii. Check trench for proper width and sheeting. (Amended by Ordinance
A-894-03-08)
iv. Ensure that joints and lift holes are sealed in accordance with
specifications.
v. Ensure backfill is free of large rocks and debris and that backfill is placed
in accordance with specifications. If required, enlist water and special
compacting equipment.
vi. Check for proper installation of tracer wire and thrust blocking where
required.
vii. Chlorinate and pressure test as required by IEPA for water mains. Village
to supervise delivery of all samples to Village approved lab. Chlorination
report to be delivered to the Village.
c. Grading and Roadway Base Preparation: Prior to commencement of any
roadway grading operation, prior to proof rolling of the roadway subgrade, and
prior to installation of the granular base, inspections are required to verify
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
V 3
compliance with approved plans and compliance with standards set forth herein
including but not limited to the following:
i. Inspect clearing and grubbing limits and check requirements for disposal
of debris.
ii. Monitor salvaging of topsoil to ensure proper drainage and erosion
control.
iii. Verify roadway grade is true to cross-section and alignment.
iv. Check that roadway subgrade is free of ruts, large stones, and excess dust.
v. Proof roll roadway subgrade with a fully loaded six wheel vehicle and
remove all unstable material.
vi. Check depth of granular base and observe for proper size, makeup, and
compaction.
vii. Prior to commencing work, Owner or Subdivider shall provide a
construction schedule detailing the timelines and phases of the grading and
roadway work, subject to the review and approval of the Village Engineer.
(Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
viii. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the Village Engineer, once the
construction schedule is approved in writing by the Village Engineer and
work on the approved plans is commenced, the Owner or Subdivider shall
give the work the regular attention needed to make continuous progress
and meet the construction schedule, until completion. If, in the judgment
of the Village Engineer, work on the approved plans and under
construction schedule has ceased for an undue period (not due to reasons
beyond Owner/Subdivider control), the Village Engineer shall give notice
in writing to the Owner or Subdivider of such failure with a directive to
correct the failure. If the Owner or Subdivider does not comply with the
directive within 10 days of such notice, the Mayor and Village Engineer
are authorized to complete a draw on the letter of credit for the costs of
such work as may be deemed necessary by the Village Engineer to ensure
completion of the same in compliance with the approved grading and
roadway plans. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
d. Concrete Curb, Gutter, Sidewalk, and Paving: After setting sting line or form
boards but prior to paving and prior to placement of concrete, an inspection is
required to verify compliance with approved plans and compliance with
standards set forth herein including but not limited to the following:
i. Review contractor’s equipment and forms for contract compliance and to
assure plan dimensions.
ii. Check vertical and horizontal alignment.
iii. Inspect base for grade, compaction, and moisture.
iv. Check requirements for reinforcing steel, tie bars, expansion, contraction
and control joints.
v. Ensure that proper drainage conditions are met.
vi. Supervise tests for compliance with specified slump and air content.
Oversee preparation of test cylinders as required.
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
4 V
(Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
vii. Collect concrete delivery tickets and check batch time.
viii. Inspect curing operations and if required, cold weather protection.
ix. Review finishing and backfilling procedures.
x. Prior to commencing work, Owner or Subdivider shall provide a
construction schedule detailing the timelines and phases of the curb,
gutter, sidewalk and paving work, subject to the review and approval of
the Village Engineer. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
xi. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the Village Engineer, once the
construction schedule is approved by the Village Engineer and work on
the approved plans is commenced, the Owner or Subdivider shall give the
work the regular attention needed to make continuous progress and meet
the construction schedule, until completion. If, in the judgment of the
Village Engineer, work on the approved plans and under the construction
schedule has ceased for an undue period (not due to reasons beyond
Owner/Subdivider’s control), the Village Engineer shall give notice in
writing to the Owner or Subdivider of such failure with a directive to
correct the failure. If the Owner or Subdivider does not comply with the
directive within 10 days of such notice, the Mayor and Village Engineer
are authorized to complete a draw on the letter of credit for the costs of
such work as may be deemed necessary by the Village Engineer to ensure
completion of the same in compliance with the approved curb, gutter,
sidewalk and paving plans. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
e. Plant Mix Bituminous Paving: Prior to placement of bituminous material, an
inspection is required to verify compliance with approved plans and compliance
with standards set forth herein including but not limited to the following:
i. Check equipment for specification compliance and monitor paving and
rolling sequence.
ii. Check that existing surface is smooth, firmly compacted and correct to
cross section, grade, and alignment. Existing bituminous and concrete
bases are to be clean and free of loose material and tack coated.
iii. Check bituminous material temperature frequently and observe for proper
size, coating, and segregation.
iv. Collect bituminous material delivery tickets.
v. Check that paver maintains correct line, grade, and cross slope for proper
mat width and thickness.
vi. Check that construction joints are tight and flush with adjacent surfaces.
Insure mat has a uniform appearance and is free of longitudinal seams.
vii. Check that rolling is as continuous as possible and at proper speed. Cease
vibratory rolling when checking or cracking occurs, or at specified
minimum temperature. Enlist cold roll to remove marks.
viii. Monitor density tests to ensure adequate compaction.
ix. Core pavement prior to placement of surface lift as required to check
pavement thickness.
x. If requested by the Village Engineer, the developer or contractor must
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
V 5
provide a qualified materials specialist to test the density of the
bituminous pavement and to review the rolling patterns. A field report
will be issued to the Village Engineer following the testing activities. This
work will be performed at the expense of the contractor or developer.
(Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
f. Landscaping and Restoration: Prior to placement of topsoil and landscaping
materials, an inspection is required to verify compliance with approved plans
and compliance with standards set forth herein including but not limited to the
following:
i. Check that topsoil is free of clumps, rocks, roots, etc. and is suitably
prepared.
ii. Check that landscape material including fertilizer, seed, plants, and trees
meet plan requirements.
iii. Monitor final finishing including: removal of all litter and debris, repair of
damaged areas, and cleaning of all drainage structures
g. Site Maintenance: Owner or Subdivider are hereby required to maintain the
subdivision property in a clean and workmanlike manner, consistent with the
obligations under this Ordinance, and as detailed below, on an ongoing basis.
Ongoing inspection of the subdivision site and area can include, but is not limited to
the following:
i. Check that no construction debris, rubbish or garbage shall be left or
stored in the open on the site, outside of a proper trash container or
approved enclosure.
ii. Check that no spoils or soil from any other off-site location shall be
brought to and stored on the subdivision property, unless approved by the
Village Engineer. A location map delineating the proposed spoils area for
soil, use area and/or waste area shall be submitted to the Village Engineer
prior to any grading or excavation on the subdivision site. Any soil or
excavation piles created from the subdivision site shall be allowed only for
that time needed to facilitate the subdivision improvements and then shall
be regraded or removed from the site.
iii. Check that vegetation is regularly mowed and maintained in a proper
fashion during the subdivision improvement and maintenance periods.
iv. Check that all dirt or debris from any equipment or vehicles working on
the site which is dropped or left on pavement or roadways adjacent to the
subdivision site shall be cleaned at the end of each day’s work on the
subdivision site.
v. Prior to acceptance of the completed subdivision improvements, Owner or
Subdivider shall clean the subdivision site of all rubbish, excess materials,
temporary structures, equipment and all parts of the subdivision site shall
be left in a neat and presentable condition. Owner or subdivider shall also
clean all cement streaks or drippings, paint smears or drippings, rust
stains, oil, grease, bituminous materials, dirt or any other foreign materials
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
6 V
deposited, left or which have accumulated on any roadway, sidewalk,
curb, gutter, common area or lots or ground owned or controlled by owner
or Subdivider.
vi. If, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, the owner or Subdivider fail to
comply with these requirements, the Village Engineer shall give notice in
writing to the Owner or Subdivider of such failure with a directive to
correct the failure. If the Owner or Subdivider does not comply with the
directive within 10 days of such notice, the Mayor and Village Engineer
are authorized to complete a draw on the letter of credit for the costs of
such work as may be deemed necessary by the Village Engineer to ensure
completion of the work in compliance with these requirements.
(Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
C. Acceptance of Subdivision Improvements
1. Final Inspection of Subdivision Improvements: Upon completion of the subdivision
improvements and at least 30 days prior to expiration of the two-year improvement
period, unless extended as described herein, the subdivider shall request final
inspections of all subdivision improvements. The Community Development Director,
Village Engineer and Village Forester shall inspect the subdivision improvements and
provide the developer with written concurrence that the improvements have been
completed or a list of work to be completed prior to acceptance of the improvements
by the Board of Trustees. The developer shall cause all such work to be completed
prior to the expiration of the improvement period or shall request an extension of the
improvement period as per Section V.D, herein. Failure to act accordingly shall be
cause for the Board of Trustees to draw on the letter of credit to complete said
improvements as per Section VI of this Ordinance.
2. Dedication of Subdivision Improvements
a. All land improvements to be constructed and installed as required hereunder, as
specified in the final engineering drawings, or as required by the Village Board
shall be dedicated to the Village, unless the Village Board specifically
authorized otherwise at the time that it approves the final plat.
b. Title to the improvements to be dedicated to the Village shall be transferred by
bill of sale, with proof of ownership in the grantor and evidence that said
improvements are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances, which
shall be in a form acceptable to the Community Development Director and
which may include lien waivers from all major subcontractors and material
providers.
3. Reduction of Letter of Credit: Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by
the Board of Trustees, the developer may request a reduction of the letter of credit as
per Section VI of this Ordinance.
4. Record Drawings of Subdivision Improvements. Prior to acceptance of the
subdivision improvements by the Board of Trustees, the subdivider shall submit a full
set of mylar record drawings (a.k.a. as-builts), as well as an electronic copy of the
record drawings (in ArcView or AutoCAD format) of all subdivision improvements
for review and approval by the Village Engineer. The record drawings must include
the following:
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
V 7
a. Pavement centerline and curb elevations at 50’ intervals.
b. Indication of whether surface course has been constructed at the survey date.
c. Pipe diameter, slope, upstream and downstream invert elevation. Cross out
approved conditions and add as-builts conditions.
d. Manhole, and Valve diameters, vault rim and invert elevations (t/p for
watermain). Cross out approved conditions and add as-built conditions.
e. Provide as-built topography for stormwater management basins, including 1’
contours and a volume calculation table. Provide as-built overflow elevation
survey data.
f. Verify overflow swales and major drainage routes by comparing approved and
existing spot evaluations.
g. Denote locations of stubs for sewer service and b-boxes, including horizontal
ties to at least two permanent features.
h. The record drawing mylars must be signed and sealed by a Professional
Engineer.
i. The record drawings must be signed by a Professional Surveyor.
j. Privately owned utility mains (sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water) connected to
public utility mains must be clearly labeled at the connection on the Record
Drawings together with a note stating: “Private utility mains shall not be
maintained by the Village of Burr Ridge”.
k. The record drawings must include a signed Surface Water Drainage certificate.
(Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
D. Expiration and Extension of Subdivision Improvement Period
1. Request for Extension Prior to Expiration:, If the subdivision improvements are not
accepted by the Board of Trustees within the two (2) year improvement period the
subdivider may apply for an extension of time to complete the subdivision
improvements If the subdivider fails to file such an application for extension of time
prior to the expiration of the two (2) year improvement period, the Village shall be
entitled to then draw the full amount of the letter of credit, and the Village may contract
for completion of the improvements and payment of such costs.
2. Information Provided with Request for Extension: With the request for extension of
the improvement period, the subdivider shall provide a list of all work that remains to
be done, a description of the causes for failure to complete the work, a schedule for
completing the work, a line item cost estimate for completing the work, and
certification that all other subdivision improvements have been completed.
3. Fee for Extension of Improvement Period: As per Ordinance No. 339 of the Village
of Burr Ridge, a fee for an extension of the improvement period shall be provided by
the subdivider at the time of application for the extension.
4. Authority to Grant Extensions: The Board of Trustees shall have sole authority to grant
extensions of the Subdivision Improvement Period.
5. Extension of Letter of Credit; The letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the
subdivision improvements shall be extended for a length of time equal to the extension
of the subdivision improvement period.
6. Extension of Subdivision Improvement Period: The Subdivision Improvement
Agreement shall be extended for a length of time equal to the extension of the
subdivision improvement period.
7. Standards for Approval of Extensions: The Board of Trustees may grant extensions of
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
8 V
the improvement period only for the minimum time needed to complete such
improvements. Extensions shall not be granted if in the sole judgement of the Board of
Trustees the subdivider has demonstrated a lack of ability or willingness to complete
such improvements within a reasonable time period.
8. Failure to Request Extension or Denial of Extension: If the developer fails to properly
request an extension or if an extension is denied as described herein, the Board of
Trustees shall direct the Community Development Director and the Village Engineer to
draw on the letter of credit in an amount sufficient to complete the outstanding work.
The amount to be drawn shall be equal to 125% of the Village Engineer’s estimate of
the cost to complete the subdivision plus the amount required to guarantee maintenance
of the subdivision improvements for the duration of the maintenance period.
E. Extension of Maintenance Period Equal to Extension of Improvement Period
Once the Owner or subdivider has applied for and received an extension of time to complete
the land improvements, the two (2) year maintenance period shall be extended for an
amount of time equal to the time needed to complete the subdivision improvements in
addition to the time the actual date for the ending of the maintenance period is extended by
virtue of the extension of time (e.g., if a subdivider or owner required a six month extension
from December 1, 1991 to June 1, 1992, the maintenance period (not including the time to
complete the subdivision improvements) would be extended to a two and one half (2 1/2)
year period, with the result being that the maintenance period would be extended to
December 1, 1994 by virtue of the six month extension of time and the six month increase in
the term of the maintenance period).
F Extension of Subdivision Improvement Period for Completion of Street Paving, Parkway
Paving and Sidewalks
1. Request for Extension: The Board of Trustees may, in its sole discretion and when
recommended by the Village Engineer, determine that it is in the best interest of the
Village to direct the Owner or subdivider to delay for a period of not more than two (2)
years from acceptance by the Village of all other required subdivision improvements,
the completion of the final bituminous surface course on those streets which may be
adversely affected by construction traffic and the completion of sidewalks and parkway
landscaping in front of private lots for which principal buildings have not yet been
constructed. In the event that the Village grants or requires such extensions, all other
subdivision improvements shall nevertheless be completed as required by this Section.
There shall be no additional fee required for such required extensions and a separate
maintenance period shall be established for such improvements as described below.
2. Extension of Letter of Credit: The subdivision letter of credit shall be extended for the
length of the extended improvement period in an amount equal to 125% of the Village
Engineer’s approved estimate of cost for the final street paving, sidewalks, or parkway
landscaping.
3. Separate Two-Year Maintenance Period: Upon completion of the final bituminous
surface course, at the time directed by the Village, there shall be a separate two (2) year
maintenance period; first, for the street paving, including the entire pavement, curb and
gutter, and all drainage structures within the curb and gutter and the street, and second,
for the parkway landscaping and sidewalks. Such subdivision improvements shall be
constructed in substantial conformance with the plans and specifications approved by
the Village at the time of approval of the final plat of subdivision. The separate
maintenance period for the street paving, parkway landscaping, and sidewalks shall not
begin until all required work associated with these improvements have been completed
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
V 9
and accepted by the Board of Trustees.
4. Completion of Final Street Paving, Parkway Landscaping, and Sidewalks: Under any
circumstances, the final street paving, parkway landscaping, and sidewalks shall be
completed prior to expiration of the maintenance period for the other subdivision
improvements.
G. Acceptance of Streets
The approval of any plat of subdivision by the Board of Trustees and recording of such
plat shall be a conveyance in fee simple of the public streets or thoroughfares of the
premises platted as are marked or noted on such plat as donated or granted to the public.
If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are dedicated as
such, whether located within the corporate limits of the Village or all or in part outside
thereof, or contains existing streets located outside of said corporate limits, the approval
and recording of the plat by the Board of Trustees or the subsequent annexation of the
property to the Village shall not constitute an acceptance of any subdivision improvement
thereon or therein, irrespective of any act or acts by an officer, agent or employee of the
Village with respect to such streets or subdivision improvements. The acceptance of such
subdivision improvements shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the
Board of Trustees, after the Village Engineer has certified that all subdivision
improvements required to be constructed or installed in or upon such streets or
thoroughfares, in connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision by the Board of
Trustees, have been fully completed and the construction or installation thereof has been
approved by the Village Engineer.
H. Two-Year Maintenance Period
1. Developer’s Responsibility: For a minimum two-year period beginning upon
acceptance of subdivision improvements by the Board of Trustees, the developer shall
be responsible for all maintenance and repairs of all subdivision improvements.
2. Village Responsibility: If the subdivision improvements are not completed by the
developer and the Board of Trustees directs the Community Development Director
and Village Engineer to draw on the letter of credit and complete the subdivision
improvements, the Board of Trustees may also direct the Community Development
Director and Village Engineer to draw sufficient funds for maintenance of the
improvements for the duration of the maintenance period. In any such circumstance,
the amount of the letter of credit drawn for the maintenance period shall be equal to
the amount that would otherwise be required herein.
3. Prompt Completion of Repairs and Maintenance: At any such time that the
Community Development Director notifies the developer of needed repairs or
maintenance, the developer shall complete such repairs in a timely manner, as
determined by the Village Engineer or Community Development Director. In the
event of an emergency situation or failure of the developer to respond in a timely
manner, as determined by the Community Development Director, the Village shall
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
10 V
have the right, but not the duty, to proceed with the repairs or maintenance without
further notice to the developer. In such event, the Community Development Director
may draw on the letter of credit to cover the costs of the maintenance or repair work.
The developer shall immediately amend the letter of credit to maintain the minimum
security required for the duration of the maintenance period.
(Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
4. Start of Two-Year Maintenance Period: A minimum two-year maintenance period
shall begin on the date of acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the Board
of Trustees.
5. Maintenance Letter of Credit: Acceptance of the subdivision improvements shall
include authorization to reduce the letter of credit commensurate with the
improvements that have been accepted. If only some of the subdivision improvements
are accepted, the letter of credit shall be reduced only to the extent that is equal to the
accepted improvements. Under any circumstances, the amount of the letter of credit
shall be maintained equal to 125% of the subdivision improvements not yet accepted
plus 10% of the subdivision improvements that have been accepted. Upon
acceptance of subdivision improvements, the letter of credit shall be extended for the
full length of the maintenance period.
6. Final Inspections for Maintenance Period: The Village Engineer and Village Forester
shall conduct final inspections of all subdivision improvements prior to expiration of
the maintenance period and provide to the subdivider a detailed list of repairs
required. The maintenance letter of credit shall be retained and extended as needed
until such time that the subdivider shall conduct all such repairs.
I. Issuance of Building Permits Upon Substantial Completion of Improvements: Except for
model units described herein, no building permits shall be issued for any buildings on
private lots in a subdivision until such time that the Village Engineer certifies that the
subdivision improvements are substantially complete. Substantial completion shall mean
completion and testing of all utilities, completion of all stormwater management
facilities, rough grading and the stabilization of soil, and completion of all streets except
the final bituminous surface course. (Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
J. Issuance of Building Permits for Model Homes: Upon recording of the final plat of
subdivision, building permits for a maximum of two model homes may be issued subject
to the following conditions:
1. The number of model homes shall not exceed two for any subdivision.
2. Model homes shall be located on lots with frontage and access to an existing street
and with access to existing public sanitary sewer and water mains.
3. Off-street parking shall be provided in a manner that will maximize the convenience
and safety of visitors to the model homes without creating congestion or related
problems on adjacent streets.
Section V
Construction and Maintenance of Subdivision Improvements
V 11
4. Authorization to construct model homes shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Board of Trustees. The subdivider should make such a request at the time of
final plat approval.
5. A Building Certificate of Occupancy for a model home may be issued upon
compliance with the Village of Burr Ridge Building Ordinance, No. 860; upon
completion of all required parking and access facilities; and upon connection to
public sanitary sewer and water mains.
K. Occupancy Upon Completion of Subdivision Improvements: Except for model homes as
regulated above, no occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the
use of any building or structure within a subdivision subject to this ordinance until the
subdivision improvements have been accepted by Resolution of the Board of Trustees or
all of the following conditions exist:
1. All subdivision improvements required by this ordinance, except for the final street
surface, parkway landscaping and sidewalks adjacent to unimproved lots, have been
completed according to the approved final engineering plans and specifications.
Street lighting and signs shall be erected and operational prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
2. All fees and expenses in connection with the subdivision, and all fees due at the time
of application for the occupancy permit, have been paid.
3. The security required by this ordinance for completion and maintenance of the
subdivision improvements remains in force and in a sufficient amount.
4. The Board of Trustees has by motion or resolution determined the foregoing
conditions to be satisfied and authorized the issuance of occupancy permits for the
subdivision. The approval by the Trustees under this section or the issuance of any
occupancy permits shall not constitute acceptance of the improvements by the
Village.
L. Recapture of Costs for Oversized Subdivision Improvements: Where installation of
subdivision improvements of larger capacity than required to serve only the subdivision
as delineated in the preliminary plat is required by the Board of Trustees to serve future
growth in the vicinity of the subdivision, the subdivider may be required by the Board of
Trustees to pay for such oversizing subject to such methods of proportionate
reimbursement as provided by law, ordinance, or agreement. Any agreement by the
Village to collect such costs from other property owners shall be established within 180
days after the acceptance of said improvements by the Board of Trustees. Failure by a
developer to provide necessary documentation certifying costs and enabling the
establishment of a recapture agreement within 180 days after the acceptance of said
improvements by the Board of Trustees shall be considered a waiver of the right to
recapture said costs. (Added by Ord. A-894-02-03)
VI 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION VI
SUBDIVISION COMPLETION AGREEMENT AND
LETTER OF CREDIT
A. Subdivision Completion Agreement
The owner or subdivider shall submit to the Village Clerk, together with the application for
approval of the final plat, an agreement, fully completed and executed by all necessary
parties except the Village, a Subdivision Completion Agreement. This Agreement shall be
in substantially the same form as Appendix VI of this Ordinance or in such other form as
may be approved from time to time by the Village.
B. Irrevocable Letter of Credit
After approval of the final plat in all other respects and notification of the Owner or
subdivider thereof, and as a condition to final approval of said plat, the Owner or
subdivider shall post an irrevocable letter of credit with the Community Development
Director. Such irrevocable letter of credit shall comply with the following:
1. The dollar value of the letter of credit shall be equal to 125% of the Village
Engineer's estimated cost of the subdivision improvements.
2. The letter of credit shall be issued by a banking/lending institution, subject to the
approval of such institution as the issuer y the Village Board of Trustees.
3. The letter of credit shall serve as security for the Village to ensure the full cost of the
construction, proper completion of the subdivision improvements, maintenance of the
site during construction, and maintenance of erosion control until such time as
vegetative cover has been established, in compliance with the requirements of this
Ordinance, including those specific provisions related to the installation and
completion of the subdivision improvements, and with the plans and specifications
approved by the Village Engineer. (Amended by Ordinance A-894-3-08)
4. The letter of credit shall secure the payment of the cost of maintaining and repairing
the subdivision improvements provided for in the plans and specifications approved
by the Village Engineer for a minimum period of two (2) years from the date of
acceptance of said improvements by the Village. Upon acceptance of said
improvements by the Village, the security may be reduced to 10% of its original
amount to secure the payment of said maintenance and repair costs.
5. The letter of credit shall secure the payment of any other customary expenses of the
Owner or subdivider in meeting any requirements of the Village pertaining to the
subdivision.
Section VI
Subdivision Completion Agreement and Letter of Credit
2 VI
6. The letter of credit shall secure the payment of any expenses, including but not
limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Village in enforcing the
irrevocable letter of credit.
7. The form of the irrevocable letter of credit shall be substantially the same as
Appendix VII of this Ordinance or in such other form as the Village may approve
from time to time.
8. The final plat shall be approved and executed by the appropriate Village officials
upon posting of the security, completed and fully executed in the required form,
provided that all other requirements of the Village and other applicable law pertaining
to subdivisions have been satisfied.
9. In the event of any failure by the owner or subdivider to properly complete the
subdivision improvements required hereunder, within the approved construction
schedule or two-year subdivision improvement period, whichever is earlier, or failure
to properly maintain those improvements thereafter, or failure to timely and properly
prosecute the work related thereto within the subdivision improvement or
maintenance schedules or periods, or failure to maintain on-site and off-site
construction areas in a clean and workmanlike fashion, or failure to maintain erosion
control, in compliance with this Ordinance, the letter of credit can be drawn on by the
Village, in whole or in part, to ensure payment of any costs incurred by the Village to
complete, or cause to be completed, any or all remaining unfinished, improper or
incomplete subdivision improvements. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
10. In the event that the Village draws on the letter of credit under this Ordinance, the
Village shall have the discretion at all times to determine whether to restore the
subdivision property to a natural state, to clean or clear the property, or to restore,
repair, or re-establish erosion control, or to dedicate the funds from the letter of credit
to the completion of some or all of the subdivision improvements. (Added by
Ordinance A-894-03-08)
11. As a condition subsequent to the Village’s approval of the final plat of subdivision, in
the event the Village draws on the letter of credit to cause the completion of any
subdivision improvement, or work related thereto, prior to the expiration of the twoyear
subdivision improvement period, the Owner or Subdivider shall promptly restore
the letter of credit to its amount prior to the draw on the letter of credit by the Village
for such improvement or work related thereto. Any failure to restore the letter of
credit amount shall entitle the Village to order any portion of or all work to be
stopped and to deny any permits related to the subdivision development. (Added by
Ordinance A-894-03-08)
C. Subdivider’s Obligation for Construction and Maintenance
1. Nothing in this ordinance, nor in the letter of credit or agreements herein provided
for, shall relieve the Owner or subdivider of bearing the full cost of the subdivision
Section VI
Subdivision Completion Agreement and Letter of Credit
VI 3
improvements and other expenses required by Village to be paid by the Owner or
subdivider.
2. The Owner's or subdivider's obligations for maintenance of improvements required
under this agreement shall remain the developer’s obligation for a minimum of two
(2) years after the acceptance of such subdivision improvements by the Board of
Trustees. The Village's requirements for retention of the letter of credit shall be met
by the developer during that minimum two (2) year period despite any terms
pertaining to maintenance of such improvements which are included in any other
agreement.
3. The developer’s obligation to maintain and repair the improvements includes both
public and private land improvements that are constructed, installed, modified or
purchased by the developer.
4. The developer’s obligation to maintain and repair the subdivision improvements shall
render the developer responsible for repair, replacement and the continued proper
condition, operation, functioning and efficiency of all subdivision improvements,
irrespective of the basis or cause of the need for maintenance or repair.
5. Subdivision improvements required to be maintained under the terms of this
Ordinance shall include, but not be limited to, streets, water management, stormwater
and sewer lines, bridges, walks, paths, street lights, lakes, trees, entryway and water
features, drainage ways, erosion and sedimentation control and retention/detention
facilities.
D. Reduction of Letter of Credit Upon Substantial Completion of Improvements
The Community Development Director upon recommendation of the Village Engineer
may, in their discretion, reduce the amount of the letter of credit to an amount less than
125% of the estimated cost of the subdivision improvements required by Section XI,
hereof, upon substantial completion of the subdivision improvements. Substantial
completion shall mean completion of all streets except the final course of asphalt,
completion of all utilities, and completion of stormwater management facilities. In no
circumstances shall the amount of the letter of credit be reduced below 125% of the
approved estimate of cost for all outstanding subdivision improvements or below the
required amount for the maintenance period. A completed Letter of Credit Payout Form
attached hereto as Exhibit VII-B shall accompany any such request for reduction.
E. Failure to Provide Proper Letter of Credit
In the event a subdivision plat is mistakenly or wrongfully executed and/or recorded by the
Village before all conditions are satisfied with respect to the letter of credit as provided
hereunder, then no building, sewer, water, occupancy or other permits shall be issued until
all such conditions are satisfied. (Amended by A-41-3-91) (Amended by A-41-3-98)
VII 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION VII
SUBDIVISION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
A. Submittal of Preliminary and Final Plats
Anyone subdividing property subject to this Ordinance shall submit a preliminary plat of
subdivision and a final plat of subdivision. All subdivision plats, subdivision
improvements, lots, blocks, easements, rights-of-way and other subdivision features shall
comply with the standards as described herein and as shown on the preliminary and final
plats approved by the Board of Trustees.
B. Purpose and Intent
The design specifications provided in this Section are intended to provide guidelines and
standards for the conceptual and final design of all subdivisions. Where specific guidelines
are not provided and where discretion is required, such discretion shall reside with the
Board of Trustees and the Community Development Director. The Board of Trustees shall
have sole authority to approve modifications to this Section except where such authority is
specifically delegated by the terms of this Ordinance.
C. Street and Right-of-Way Plan
1. Design of Street System
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets and
rights-of-way, hereinafter referred to as the Street Plan, shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan and the design standards herein. For the purposes of this
Section VII.C, use of the word “street” shall also refer to rights-of-way for streets.
Approval of a street plan shall be considered on the basis of its relation to: existing
and planned streets; reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and
adjoining lands; topographic conditions; runoff of storm water; public convenience
and safety; and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
2. Dedication of Right-of-Way and Other Public Property
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, any areas dedicated thereon
to the Village or for public use shall be free of all mortgages, liens, judgments, other
encumbrances, or any other matter that may cloud the title to said areas. The Village
may require such evidence, including, but not limited to, duly recorded releases or a
title insurance policy issued for the benefit of the Village by a title insurance
company licensed to do business in Illinois, as it deems appropriate to show or insure
clear title to any such areas.
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
2 VII
3. Access to Right-of-Way Required
All lots, including outlots, must have frontage and access to a street or right-of-way.
The Board of Trustees may approve a subdivision utilizing private streets with limited
public access easements as may be determined appropriate. All private streets and
limited public access easements shall substantially comply with the public street and
right-of-way standards described herein. The Village of Burr Ridge shall not consider
any lot created without such frontage and access a lot of record.
4. Collector Streets
A Collector street may be required by the Board of Trustees when recommended by
the Plan Commission: (1) in a residential subdivision containing 20 acres or more in
area; (2) in any subdivision as an extension of an existing or planned collector street
in an adjacent subdivision; and (3) in any manufacturing or business subdivision.
5. Local Streets
Local streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
6. Street Intersections
a. Street or right-of-way jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be
prohibited.
b. It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences encourage safe
and efficient traffic flow and, in general, be at or near right angles avoiding
acute angles. An intersection of more than two streets shall be avoided unless
specific conditions of design indicate otherwise.
7. Alleys
Alleys are not permitted in residential subdivisions unless deemed necessary by the
Plan Commission and required by the Board of Trustees. Alleys may be provided in
business subdivisions.
8. Cul de Sac Streets
a. A cul-de-sac street, in single-family residential districts, shall be not more than
500 feet in length, measured along its center line from the center line of the
street of origin to the end of its right-of-way or may be longer than 500 lineal
feet provided not more than 15 lots front upon its right-of-way lines. In
multiple-family residential areas, cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 400 feet in
length.
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
VII 3
b. Each cul-de-sac street shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a
minimum diameter of 120 feet, except a temporary cul-de-sac street may have a
terminus of the "T" type or other variation of the circular shape as
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees.
9. Half Streets
a. Permitted Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited except, when
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees
and under the following circumstances:
i. There is an existing street adjacent to only one side of a subdivision and a
half street is being dedicated or improved along the adjacent side of the
subdivision.
ii. The proposed right-of-way and street are on the periphery of the
subdivision and it will be practicable to require the dedication and
improvement of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided.
iii. Wherever an existing dedicated half street abuts a tract to be subdivided,
the other half of the street shall be platted and improved within such
subdivision.
b. Requirements for Half Streets:
i. A half street shall be graded in accordance with cross-section design
standards and profile grades applicable to the entire street width, as
established by the Village Engineer and approved by the Board of
Trustees. When the other half of an existing half street is developed, it
shall conform with such established cross-section design and profile
grades of the entire street width.
ii. The right-of-way width of a half street shall be not less than one-half the
required right-of-way width of the street. A roadway pavement not less
than 20 feet in width and a curb along one edge of the pavement, with
suitable gravel or crushed stone shoulder and drainage ditch along the
opposite edge, shall be installed in accordance with standards herein set
forth.
10. Lots Abutting Thoroughfares
Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property
abutting a thoroughfare whether by: (a) providing frontage road or (b) by backing
lots to the thoroughfare and providing access by a local street one lot depth removed
and with a restricted access easement along the rear lot line. These standards are
established for the purpose of providing protection for the residential properties and
to provide for traffic safety and the efficient use of the thoroughfare for its intended
function of accommodating through traffic.
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
4 VII
11. Dedication of Contiguous Rights-of-Way
The owner or subdivider of property subject to the requirements for subdivision
improvements under this Ordinance, shall be required to dedicate its portion of the
right-of-way width required under this Ordinance for the type of street which such
property abuts, or has frontage upon. Such owner or subdivider is required to make
those improvements thereon necessary to meet the street width, design and all other
requirements for streets as set forth in this Ordinance as a condition of such
subdivision.
12. Street Stubs
Street plans shall be designed with consideration of adjacent properties and the
potential for future subdivision of adjacent properties. If determined appropriate by
the Board of Trustees upon recommendation by the Plan Commission, subdivisions
shall be designed with street stubs for future extension onto adjacent properties. Such
street stubs shall be extended onto adjacent properties at such time that the adjacent
properties are subdivided. If a street stub is provided, a temporary turnaround shall
be provided and signs shall be placed at the terminus of the stub indicating that the
street will be extended at a future date.
D. Specifications and Dimensions of Rights-of-Way
1. All right-of-way widths shall conform to the minimum dimensions as described in
Table VII-A.
2. Where there is a deflection in horizontal center lines within a given block at any
given point in excess of ten degrees, a curve shall be inserted with a radius of not less
than 300 feet for collector streets and 100 feet for local streets.
3. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves.
Minimum length in feet of these curves shall provide a stopping sight distance of not
less than 300 feet, measured from an eye level four feet high, with a clear view of an
obstacle not over two feet high.
4. Gradients of streets shall be at least 0.5 percent and not exceed 7% on collector streets
and 10% on local streets. (Amended by A-894-03-08)
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
VII 5
Table VII-A
Required Right-of-Way Width
Type of Street Residential Subdivision Non-Residential Subdivision
Collector Streets 80 feet 80 feet
Local Streets 60 (66) feet * 66 feet
Cul de Sac
Turnarounds
120 feet Diameter 120 feet Diameter
Alleys 30 feet 30 feet
Pedestrian Ways 12 feet 12 feet
Half Streets
½ the total required right-of-way or as required by the Board
of Trustees
Thoroughfaresincluding
highways
and arterials
80/100 feet - Thoroughfares shall be in accordance with
those standards designated by the Comprehensive Plan or by
Federal, State, or County authorities having jurisdiction.
* The Village Board may require a 66 foot right-of-way if it is determined
appropriate based on the width of contiguous rights-of-way or for the
accommodation of utilities or sidewalks.
E. Easements
Easements shall be provided as described herein. Descriptions of easements shall be
provided for each and every easement depicted on a plat. Easements must contain
language similar to the samples attached hereto as Appendix V unless otherwise required
by the Community Development Director. Unless otherwise noted, all such easements
shall require maintenance of the easement by the property owners within a subdivision and
shall grant authority to the Village of Burr Ridge to provide maintenance as needed and
collect costs for such maintenance from the property owners.
1. Public Utility and Drainage Easements
Utility distribution or transmission installations serving the subdivision, and, when
required, storm water drainage ways, shall be located in easements as designated on
the subdivision plat of record. Such easements shall be located along the rear lot lines
or side lot lines at locations of extensions of utility installation between blocks, or
continuity of drainage ways. They shall occupy not less than the rear ten feet of lot
depth or ten feet of lot width adjoining the applicable side lot lines, or may be of a
greater width if recommended by the Village Engineer and approved by the Board of
Trustees. Additional easements at other locations may be recommended for specific
conditions by the Village Engineer and required by the Board of Trustees.
2. Drainage and Floodway Easement
Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainage way, channel, or stream, there
shall be provided a drainage easement, conforming substantially with the areas
bordering such water course that are subject to flooding, unless said water course is
improved by deepening or dredging to provide the same cross-sectional area or flow
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
6 VII
capacity, in which case the drainage easement may be narrowed to accommodate the
improved water course. The boundaries of such areas subject to flooding shall be as
designated by the Village Engineer.
3. Easements for Wetlands, Floodplains, and Similar Sensitive Land Areas
Wetlands, floodplains, and similar sensitive land areas should be located within
outlots as required by Section VII.J herein. At any such time that such areas are not
located within an outlot, they shall be located in an easement that ensures continuous
protection and maintenance of the area.
4. Stormwater Detention and Drainage Easement
Stormwater detention and retention basins should be located within outlots as
required by Section VII.I herein. At any such time that stormwater management
facilities are not located within an outlot, said facilities shall be located in a
stormwater detention and drainage easement. Said easement shall include all
detention areas, retaining walls, and significant slopes created to accommodate the
stormwater management facility.
5. Restricted Access Easement
At any such time that access from a public right-of-way onto private property is
restricted, a minimum one-foot wide restricted access easement shall be provided.
For example, through lots or corner lots where access to one of the streets is to be
restricted shall provide a restricted access easement along the affected lot line.
6. Sign, Fence, and Landscaping Easements
All subdivision signs, fences, and landscaping shall be located within dedicated
subdivision sign, subdivision fence, or subdivision landscaping easements. Said
easements shall be sized to provide sufficient area to accommodate the planned
improvements as well as sufficient area for future maintenance of such
improvements. Maintenance of such easement areas shall be the responsibility of the
property owners within the subdivision. The easement language on the final plat shall
substantially comply with Appendices V-F, V-G, and V-H of this Ordinance.
F. Block Standards
1. In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks containing lots less than
150 feet in width shall be 1,800 lineal feet, and the maximum length of blocks
containing lots 150 feet and over in width shall be 2,000 lineal feet. No blocks shall
be less than 900 lineal feet in length unless recommended by the Plan Commission
and approved by the Board of Trustees. Pedestrian ways leading to schools, parks,
and other common destinations may be required by the Board of Trustees when
recommended by the Plan Commission.
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
VII 7
2. In manufacturing and business subdivisions, maximum length of blocks shall be as
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees.
3. The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical features, the basic street
system and traffic pattern, lot depths, and areas designated for public and other
non-residential land use.
4. Where a subdivision borders upon or is traversed by a railroad or thoroughfare
right-of-way, the Board of Trustees may require, when recommended by the Plan
Commission, a street (on one or both sides of such right-of-way), approximately
parallel to and at a distance removed suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land, i.e. park purposes, deep residential lot fronts on it with a no-access
strip along the rear lot lines, or off-street parking, business, or other uses as permitted
by zoning ordinance regulations.
G. Lot Standards
1. Width and area of lots shall conform with lot width and area requirements set forth in
the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Burr Ridge or that of Cook or DuPage
counties in the unincorporated areas beyond the Village limits.
2. Depth of lots shall be not less than 130 feet for interior lots, and not less than 120 feet
for corner lots, provided the width is increased to give equivalent area.
3. Width, area, and depth of lots in a manufacturing or business subdivision shall be as
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees.
4. All lots shall have a lot line which abuts a street for a distance of greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the minimum required lot width, such width to be determined in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Burr Ridge. All streets,
which lots are hereby required to abut, shall meet the street width, design and all
other requirements for streets as set forth in this ordinance.
5. Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, or substantially so.
6. Through lots are not permitted, except where such lots back upon a thoroughfare, upon
a body of water in separate or undivided ownership, or in manufacturing and business
subdivisions when specifically recommended by the Plan Commission and approved
by the Board of Trustees.
7. Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream shall have an
additional depth or width as recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by
the Board of Trustees in order to provide acceptable building sites.
8. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural
features, such as trees, water courses, historical landmarks, and similar community
assets, which, if preserved, would add to the attractiveness and value of the
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
8 VII
subdivision, neighborhood or the community as a whole. The Plan Commission shall
include in its report its conclusions as to compliance herewith.
9. Outlots for stormwater detention and other purposes shall be provided with public
street frontage as required by the Zoning Ordinance for private lots. Outlots shall be
designated on the Plat of Subdivision with an alphabetical designation (for example,
Outlot A).
10. Private lots created for sale or development shall be numbered sequentially on the plat
of subdivision beginning with the number 1 unless the subdivision is one of two or
more phases in which case the lot number shall begin in sequence with the previous
phase of the subdivision.
H. Regulations for the Location of Stormwater Management Facilities
Stormwater detention areas, including stormwater detention and retention ponds, shall be
located in outlots and shall not be on individual lots or behind the rear yards of individual
lots unless specifically approved by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation from the
Plan Commission based on the following considerations and conditions:
1. Stormwater detention areas may be located within easements on individual lots only if
the Village Engineer determines that best engineering practices dictate such a location
and if approved by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation from the Plan
Commission.
2. Stormwater detention easements located on individual lots shall be excluded from the
lot area for purposes of calculating floor area ratio (FAR). Subdivisions that include
lots with stormwater detention easements shall provide a note on the final plat
document describing the regulations contained herein and indicating the lot area to be
included and excluded from the FAR calculation.
I. Wetlands, Floodplains and Similar Sensitive Land Areas
Wetlands, floodplains, and similar sensitive land areas shall be located in outlots and shall
not be on individual lots unless specifically approved by the Board of Trustees upon
recommendation from the Plan Commission based on the following considerations and
conditions:
1. Wetlands, floodplains, and similar sensitive land areas may be located within
easements on individual lots only if it is determined that placing such areas within an
outlot would create a substantial and negative impact on the design of he subdivision
relative to the configuration of streets and lots.
2. If approved by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation from the Plan
Commission, wetlands, floodplains, and similar sensitive land areas located on
individual lots shall be within easements that ensure the conservation of such areas.
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
VII 9
3. Wetlands, floodplains, and similar sensitive land areas located on individual lots shall
be excluded from the lot area for purposes of calculating floor area ratio (FAR).
Subdivisions that include private lots with easements for wetlands, floodplains, and
similar sensitive land areas shall provide a note on the final plat document describing
the regulations contained herein and indicating the lot area to be included and excluded
from the FAR calculation.
J. Subdivision Names
The preliminary and final plat of subdivision shall include the name of the proposed
subdivision. Subdivision names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees
based on consideration of the following:
1. Subdivision names shall not duplicate an existing subdivision or street name that is
located within or adjacent to the Village of Burr Ridge unless it is an extension of the
existing subdivision or adjacent to the subject street.
2. The name of a subdivision shall not use the name of another municipality or local
government district within Burr Ridge or its surrounding communities.
3. A subdivision name shall not be misleading in terms of location of the subdivision.
For example, it shall not use another Burr Ridge street name or location that is not
within or contiguous to the subdivision.
4. The use of contiguous street names, parks, or institutions; the use of local historical
names; the use of other locally known landmarks or names; and the use of “Burr
Ridge” or “…of Burr Ridge” in the subdivision name is encouraged.
K. Street Names
The preliminary and final plat of subdivision shall include the name of all proposed streets.
All proposed street names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees based
on consideration of the following:
1. Proposed street names shall not duplicate or be similar to any existing street name in
the Village of Burr Ridge or within the same area code as the subdivision street nor
shall it duplicate any prominently known street name in a surrounding community.
2. Streets and street names shall be described as and include Road, Street, Court, or other
commonly accepted descriptive name.
3. Cul de sac streets shall be referred to as Courts and may use the same street name as
another street within or contiguous to the subdivision (for example, Devon Drive and
Devon Court) provided that the streets intersect and it is determined that the use of
the same name will not create confusion for emergency and service delivery.
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
10 VII
4. If a street is an extension of an existing street, then the name of the existing street shall
be used for the proposed street.
L. Street Addresses
Upon submittal of the final plat of subdivision and prior to approval of the final plat by the
Board of Trustees, the Community Development Director will assign street addresses for
all lots (except for detention outlots and other such open space). The Community
Development Director shall consult with the Village of Burr Ridge Police Chief, the fire
district having jurisdiction over the land being subdivided, and other government agencies
as determined appropriate. The Community Development Director shall maintain a street
address grid map of the Village and shall assign street addresses based on the grid map and
the following standards:
1. North-south block numbers shall follow the numbered streets that lie east-to-west in
the Village (for example, 55th Street, 79th Street, 91st Street, etc.).
2. East-west blocks shall follow the existing patterns of street addresses with numbers
ranging from 11200 to 11900 from Wolf Road to County Line Road and ranging from
00 to 1100 from County Line Road to Kingery Highway (IL 83) with the exception
noted in Section VII.L.3, below.
3. East-west highways (including frontage roads), collector and arterial streets in Du Page
County (55th, 79th, 83rd, and 91st Streets and North Frontage and South Frontage
Roads) shall utilize the Du Page County addressing system. Said addresses shall
include the designation of 15W for the block east of Madison Street and 16W for the
block west of Madison Street.
4. Addresses within each address block shall progress from north to south and from east
to west.
5. All lots located on the east and south sides of a street shall have odd numbers. All lots
located on the west and north sides of a street shall have even numbers.
6. Addresses shall be dispersed evenly throughout a block and in a manner to
accommodate any possible future resubdivision of lots.
7. Corner lots shall be assigned two alternate addresses and the final address shall be
assigned at such time that a building permit is requested. The assigned number shall
correspond to the architectural front of the building.
M. Public Use Areas
When an area of land for public use (in addition to streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and
utility easements) shall be recommended by the Plan Commission and required by the
Board of Trustees to be located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the subdivider shall
designate on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat that such land is reserved for public use. If
Section VII
Subdivision Design Requirements
VII 11
such land is not acquired or arrangements made for acquisition by the Village, a school
board, or other governmental body within one year after the date or recordation of the Final
Plat, such land may thereafter be used by the subdivider for a use permitted at its location
by zoning regulations or, if applicable, in accordance with more restrictive protective
covenant requirements.
N. Building within Proposed Major Street Rights-of-Way
After the effective date of this ordinance, no permanent building or structure shall be
erected within the rights-of-way of thoroughfares as shown on the Comprehensive Plan of
Official Map of the Village.
VIII 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION VIII
ENGINEERING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
A. Submittal of Preliminary and Final Engineering Plans
Anyone subdividing property subject to this Ordinance shall submit a preliminary and final
engineering plan. The preliminary engineering plan shall accompany the preliminary plat
of subdivision. It may be on a separate plan sheet but generally should be combined with
the preliminary plat of subdivision. Final engineering plans shall be provided separately
and submitted for review by the Village after approval of the preliminary plat of
subdivision and before submittal of the final plat of subdivision. All engineering plans
shall be certified by a Professional civil engineer registered with the State of Illinois and
shall comply with the requirements contained herein. All improvements shown on the
engineering plan and required herein shall be constructed as provided by this Ordinance.
(Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
B. Purpose and Intent
The design specifications provided in this Section are intended to provide guidelines for the
conceptual and final engineering design of all subdivision improvements. Where specific
guidelines are not provided and where discretion is required, such discretion shall reside
with the Board of Trustees, Village Engineer, and the Community Development Director.
The Board of Trustees shall have sole authority to approve modifications to this Section
except where such authority is specifically delegated by the terms of this Section.
C. Standards and Specifications for Required Land Improvements
In those instances where specific items and work are not referenced herein, the following
standards and specifications shall govern:
1. All road and bridge work shall comply with the Illinois Department of Transportation
(IDOT) “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in Illinois”, latest
edition, the IDOT “Highway Standards Manual”, and the IDOT “Bureau of Design and
Environment Manual”. Traffic control and protection shall conform to the applicable
portions of the “Illinois Supplement to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices” and the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices”.
2. For public sanitary sewer system and/or sewerage treatment works, the "Recommended
Standards for Wastewater Facilities" adopted by the Great Lakes - Upper Mississippi
River Board of State and Provincial Public Health and Environmental Managers (Ten
State Standards); and other regulations as may be imposed by the Sanitary Districts or
Health Department of the County(s) having jurisdiction therein for public sanitary sewer
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
2 VII
systems;
3. All water distribution systems shall comply with the standards approved by AWWA, the
State of Illinois, and the County Health Department having jurisdiction.
D. Street Design Standards
1. Grading of Rights-of-Way
a. All stumps, brush, trees that cannot be saved, boulders, and similar items shall be
removed prior to street construction. (Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
b. Before any paving work is commenced, all street grading shall be properly
completed as shown on the Grading Plan and approved by the Village Engineer.
c. After grading of streets is completed, proof rolled, and approved by the Village
Engineer, and before any curbs or base course of the roadway pavement is laid, all
of the underground work, such as water, sewer, and gas mains, house service
connections therewith, and all underground conduits for electric and telephone
lines, shall be completely installed in place and approved.
d. When considered necessary by the Village Engineer, settlement of the utility trench
backfill shall be accelerated by means of water introduced through holes jetted into
backfilled trenches to a point approximately two (2) feet above the top of the
sewer pipe. The holes shall be jetted not greater than six (6) feet apart unless
otherwise directed by the Village Engineer. Any depressions which develop due to
settlement of backfilling material shall be repaired at the subdivider's expense, in a
manner acceptable to the Village Engineer.
e. The final bituminous surface course of the roadway pavement shall not be installed
until backfilling of all trenches dug across the roadway has completely settled or
compacted to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer. All trenches across any
roadway and within six (6) feet of the roadway shall be backfilled with , IDOT
CA-11 or CA-13 and compacted in lifts not to exceed twelve (12) inches or
backfilled with ¾ inch clean crushed limestone placed in un-compacted 12 inch
lifts and brought to the required grade. As provided in this Section, the Village
may, in its sole discretion and when recommended by the Village Engineer,
determine that it is in the best interest of the Village to direct the Owner or
subdivider to delay for a period of not more than two (2) years from acceptance by
the Village of all other required land improvements the completion of the final
bituminous surface course on those streets which may be adversely affected by
construction traffic. (Amended by Ordinance A894-03-08)
f. Pavement corings, at the request of Village Engineer for cause, shall be taken
under Village supervision after the paving has been completed and after the
subdivider has requested acceptance of the street.
2. Roadway Pavement
a. Street Composition minimum requirements shall be as noted in Table VIII-A
herein. Note that bituminous concrete surface course shall be made with virgin
materials; thus, no recycled materials shall be used. The minimum asphalt content
of Class I, Mixture CL, Type 3 surface bituminous concrete shall be 5.8%.
(Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
VIII 3
b. Street composition standards in excess of the minimums may be required when in
the judgment of the Village Engineer, they are so warranted by subbase conditions,
potential traffic volumes, loads and/or other relevant factors. Soil borings with
Illinois Bearing Ratio data shall be furnished to the Village Engineer, upon
request.
c. Roadway pavements shall have an overall width in accordance with the minimum
dimensions as indicated in Table VIII-B.
d. Pavement widths shall be measured between backs of curbs. For rural cross
section streets, pavement width shall be measured from the outer edge of the
roadway pavement.
f. All streets in R-2A, R-2B, R-3 and R-5 zoning districts and arterial streets in R-1
and R-2 zoning districts shall be constructed with IDOT type B6.12 curbs and
gutters.
g. Rural cross section streets may be permitted in the R-1 and R-2 District subject
to the approval of the Board of Trustees upon recommendation from the Plan
Commission. A rural cross section street shall include pavement edge markings
and drainage swales.
h. All cul-de-sac turnarounds shall be provided within a center landscape island that
is 22 feet in diameter.
i. The Board of Trustees upon recommendation from the Plan Commission may
require greater roadway pavement widths as determined appropriate.
3. Access Driveways
A paved access from the property line to the street pavement shall be provided. The access
driveway shall comply with Appendix VI of the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance
No. 834, as amended and attached hereto as Appendix XIII.
4. Alleys and Pedestrianways
a. Alleys, when permitted in subdivisions as herein regulated, shall be not less than
30 feet wide as measured from edge to edge of pavement.
b. Pedestrian ways, when recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by
the Board of Trustees, shall be not less than 12 feet wide.
E. Sanitary Sewerage System
1. Public or community sanitary sewerage systems, including sewer stub terminals to six
feet beyond the outside of curb line or to the property line, whichever is furthest, shall be
installed to serve all lots in a subdivision or lot divisions. Subdivisions or lot divisions
containing no lots less than one acre or more in area and located in the unincorporated
areas within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the Village or subdivisions
or lot divisions containing no lots less than one acre in area which are annexed to the
Village after the effective date of this ordinance may be served with individual sewerage
disposal systems, provided, in either case, there is conformance with standards approved
by the County Health Department and other applicable governmental authorities, except
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
4 VII
that individual sewerage disposal systems shall be permitted in such subdivisions
annexed to the Village after the effective date of this ordinance only after the Board of
Trustees shall find that connection with a public or community system is not practicable,
or there is an agreement between the subdivider and the Village and a guarantee by the
subdivider that all lots in the subdivision will be served with a public or community
sewerage system within a specified period of time.
2. All sewer plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for
approval. Each lot platted for the subdivision shall be served by the sanitary sewer
system. All sanitary sewer manholes shall be pre-cast concrete and must be sealed with
chimney seals to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer. All sanitary sewer manhole
covers shall be gasket sealed or water tight heavy duty ductile iron with the words
“BURR RIDGE – SANITARY SEWER” cast into the cover. At the direction of the
Village Engineer, the sanitary sewer must be extended to the far side of the subdivision
in order to provide future service for adjacent properties. (Amended by Ordinance A-
894-03-08)
3. All sanitary sewer must be PVC SDR 26 or Ductile Iron CL 52. (Added by Ordinance
A-894-03-08)
4. Exterior drop connections will be permitted only where site conditions are not
conducive for an elevation drop of less than two (2) feet. Interior drop connections will
not be permitted. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
5. All sanitary sewer must be 8” or larger and must provide a minimum flow velocity of 2
fps. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
6. Manholes must have a minimum inside diameter of 48”, and must be spaced at
minimum 300’ intervals. Manholes must have chimney seals. No manhole shall have
more than 8” of adjusting rings. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
7. All sanitary sewer must have a minimum cover depth of 4’. (Added by Ordinance A-
894-03-08)
F. Storm Sewer System
1. An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be constructed and installed,
consisting of natural water courses, storm sewers and other necessary facilities which
will drain the subdivision and protect roadway pavements. The stormwater drainage
system shall be in compliance with the Stormwater Section of the Burr Ridge Municipal
Code as amended.
2. Storm Sewer may be 10” for the first “run” of pipe, all other pipe must be 12” or larger
and must be designed to convey the 10-year storm without surcharge above rim level.
(Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
3. All storm sewer under paved surfaces must be RCP CL IV Ductile Iron CL 52. RCP CL
III or PVC SDR 26 pipe may be used elsewhere. Gasketed pipe must be used in side
and rear-yard applications. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
4. Storm sewer inlets may be used for collection of stormwater for the first structure of a
storm sewer segment, or for curb inlets. All other structures shall be catch basin type
structures, 4’ minimum diameter and with a 18” minimum sump. (Added by Ordinance
A-894-03-08)
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
VIII 5
5. The storm sewer system shall include a stormwater restrictor which shall be comprised
of a shear gate with a bored orifice of the proper size, and a standpipe overflow set at the
calculated 100 year HWL. The restrictor structure must be 48” minimum diameter and
must be placed in a location where it can be easily accessed.
6. The storm sewer system shall include a manufactured BMP, hydrodynamic separator, or
approved equal, placed in a location which can be easily accessed by vactor truck. The
BMP device must meet all design criteria of the Village of Burr Ridge Stormwater
Ordinance. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
7. Storm draining inlets shall be placed in street gutters (IDOT Type 11) at intersections
and elsewhere as required by the terrain, but shall not be spaced more than 500 feet
along the gutter. All storm sewer manholes, catch basins, and inlets shall be pre-cast
concrete and damproofed with one heavy coat of coal tar paint. Coal tar paint shall
terminate six (6) inches below the finish grade. All storm sewer manhole covers shall be
heavy duty ductile iron with the following inscription cast on the cover:
DUMP NO WASTE (top edge)
STORM DRAIN (middle)
DRAINS TO RIVERS (bottom edge)
8. Any outfall storm sewer that drains into an existing open ditch or natural water course
shall have a flared end section and a permanent turf reinforcement matting a minimum
of ten feet in radius from the center point of the flared end section.
9. Storm water shall not be directed into the sanitary sewer system and no connections
between the storm and sanitary sewer systems will be permitted at any time Storm
sewers in public rights-of-way shall be RCCP. Storm sewers outside of public rights-ofway
shall be IDOT Class B material.
G. Water Supply System
1. Public or community water supply and distribution systems, including water stub
terminals to each lot, shall be installed to serve each lot in a subdivision or lot divisions.
Such water supply and distribution systems shall be installed to the far side of said
subdivision or lot division at such location as determined by the Village Engineer in
order to provide for extension of such systems to serve neighboring properties.
Subdivisions containing no lots less than one acre in area and located in the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the Village
or subdivisions containing no lots less than one acre in area and which are annexed to
the Village after the effective date of this ordinance, may be served with water supply
from individual wells conforming with standards approved by the County Health
Department and other applicable governmental authorities, except individual wells shall
be permitted in such subdivisions located within the Village only after being specifically
approved by the Board of Trustees when it is determined that connection with a public
or community water supply system is not practicable, or there is an agreement between
the subdivider and the Village and a guarantee by the subdivider that all lots in the
subdivision will be served with a public or community water system within a specified
period of time. (Amended by A-41-3-86) (Amended by A-894-03-08)
2. There shall be no physical connection between a potable and non-potable water supply.
3. Consideration shall be given to water reclamation and reuse in commercial and
industrial tracts for the purpose of conservation and relief of demands on existing
residential supply; backflow devices must be included if water re-use is proposed.
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
6 VII
(Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
4. Evidence shall be presented by the subdivider that an adequate water supply is available,
or will be, in advance of occupancy for development of individual lots and that the local
utilities can satisfactorily serve the area by the utility easements shown.
5. Dead-end watermain will not be permitted. All watermain must be constructed in a
looped system. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
6. Water Main size shall conform to the Master Village water main plan as directed by the
Village Engineer. Mains on Section line roads shall be 12" diameter.. Water
transmission mains shall be a minimum of eight (8)) inches in diameter, and shall
include installation of shutoff valves and fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed at
maximum intervals of 350 feet in a direct line in the parkway. The hydrants shall have a
minimum of a seven (7") inch barrel and two, two and one-half (2½") inch hose
connections and one (1) four and one-half (4½") inch steamer connection and an
individual auxiliary valve of the size required by the appropriate Fire Protection District.
7. Thrust blocking must be proposed at all changes in direction 22 ½ degrees or greater.
Thrust blocking shall be P.C.C., poured in place. Mega-lug restraint joint glands may be
required in addition to P.C.C. thrust blocking. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
8. Valves shall be resilient wedge with non-rising stem gate valves, counter-clockwise
opening, AWWA-C-509, Mueller or approved equal. Valves shall be located as
directed by the Village Engineer in order to provide for effective operation of the larger
water distribution system. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
9. Valve Vaults must be 5’ in diameter, with the valve centered below the manhole
opening. The valve vault rim shall read: “VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE – WATER”.
(Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
10. Tracer wire and warning tape will be required to assist with watermain locating.
Warning tape shall be 2” wide blue plastic warning tape. Tracer wire shall be #8 solid
gauge tracer wire with blue insulation. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
11. Fittings shall be A-304 stainless steel ASTM F 593 and F 594 bolts, nuts, washers, and
tie rods. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
12. Fire hydrants shall be installed at maximum intervals of 350 feet in a direct line in the
parkway. The hydrants shall have a minimum of a seven (7”) inch barrel and two, two
and one-half (2 ½”) inch hose connections and one (1) four and one-half (4 ½”) inch
steamer connection and an individual auxiliary valve of the size required by the
appropriate Fire Protection District. Fire hydrants shall be Mueller Centurion or East
Jordan, depending upon which fire hydrant is predominant in the vicinity. Fire hydrants
shall be equipped with a 6” auxiliary valve and valve box stabilizer. The auxiliary valve
shall connect to the fire hydrant with a flange fitting. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-
08)
H. House Services
House services for sewer and water shall be constructed to connect each lot or building site
with the utility service mains for each utility as follows:
1. Such house services shall extend from the main to the property line;
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
VIII 7
2. House water service for each single-family residence shall be minimum of one and onehalf
inch (1.5"), type K, copper or approved equal and shall be terminated at a shut-off
valve and box of a type approved by the Village Engineer and located in the parkway,
three feet (3') from the sidewalk line. In no case shall the buffalo box be located in the
sidewalk or driveway, or buried underground.
3. The connection from the sanitary sewer main to sanitary house drain shall be six inches
(6") PVC (SDR35), or class 52 Ductile Iron pipe and conform with the Sanitary District
and/or Health Department regulations. (Amended by A-41-2-83) Connections to the
main shall be connected with a wye or gasketed saddle with dual stainless steel straps.
4. Connections from the storm sewer main to house storm drains shall be six (6) inches and
connected with a wye or gasketed saddle with dual stainless steel straps.
I. Public Sidewalks and Pathways
1. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets and rights-of-way within a
subdivision and on the adjacent side of any street or right-of-way contiguous to the
subdivision.
2. The Board of Trustees, upon recommendation by the Pathway Commission, may
determine that sidewalks are not needed on both sides of all streets and, therefore, may
waive the requirement for certain sidewalks. In the event sidewalks are not required on
both sides of the street, the following conditions shall apply: (Amended by Ordinance
A-894-01-15)
a. The subdivider shall deposit cash to be held by the Village to pay for the
installation by the Village of pathways or sidewalks in the Village.
b. The amount of the deposit shall be the estimated cost of the sidewalks not being
constructed as estimated by the Village Engineer. The estimated cost shall be
based on current costs for public sidewalk projects and shall include the cost of
the sidewalk as well as retaining walls, storm sewers and other appurtenances
that may be required to accommodate the sidewalk.
c. The deposit shall be made before recording of the final plat of subdivision.
d. The pathways or sidewalks constructed by the Village in lieu of required
sidewalks shall be installed by the Village at such time as the pathways or
sidewalks may be incorporated into a comprehensive pathway and sidewalk
system in the Village.
e. The subdivider may further be required by the Board of Trustees as a condition
of final plat approval to dedicate land for public use outside of street rights of
way on which hard surface pathways may be constructed in lieu of sidewalks.
3. Sidewalks shall be located 12 inches from the street right-of-way lines unless it is
determined by the Village Engineer upon consultation with the Village Forester, that
sidewalks should be made to meander around existing trees for the purpose of
preserving said trees. A subdivider may be required to dedicate easements or additional
rights-of-way to accommodate sidewalks under this circumstance. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of five (5) feet wide and five (5) inches thick. Sidewalks located across
driveways shall be a minimum of seven (7) inches thick. The Board of Trustees, upon
recommendation from the Pathway Commission, may require additional width as
determined appropriate. All sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland Cement Concrete
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
8 VII
with a twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds. All
concrete shall be air entrained with a maximum slump of five (5) inches. The Village
Engineer shall approve other admixtures.
4. Pathways shall be located within dedicated rights-of-way or easements and shall be
constructed in accordance with the following:
a. Pathways shall be constructed of the same materials and specifications as
sidewalks unless otherwise required by the Board of Trustees upon
recommendation from the Pathway Commission. If so approved by the Board of
Trustees, pathways may be constructed of asphalt consisting of a 2 inch stone subbase
on geo-textile fabric with a 4 inch bituminous base course and 2 inch
bituminous surface course.
b. Pathways shall be a minimum width of 5 feet but may be required to be wider if
determined appropriate by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation from the
Pathway Commission.
5. The requirements herein shall also be applicable to any subdivision where private streets
are permitted in the subdivision in lieu of public streets, and appropriate easements or
dedicated rights of way for required sidewalks and/or hard-surface pathways may be
required by the Board of Trustees.
J. Street Lighting Specifications
1. Residential
a. Street lights shall be provided as described herein and in substantial conformance
with the attached Appendix XI.
b. Lighting in residential areas shall consist of installing concrete poles with a coach
light style laminar. The concrete poles shall be sixteen (16') feet in height from
ground line to top of pole, with a three (3") inch outer diameter by three (3") inch
slipfitter to receive the laminar. The poles shall be furnished with a minimum five
(5') foot length butt base to be imbedded into the ground and surrounded by finely
compacted screenings. The pole shall be octagonal (eight-sided) in shape and shall
taper from approximately seven (7") inches at ground line to four (4") inches at top
of pole and shall be constructed of centrifugally cast concrete with prestressed
steel reinforcement. The poles shall include a two (2") inch by eight (8") inch
handhole with cover approximately eighteen (18") inches above ground level and
also a two (2") inch by nine (9") inch cable entrance hole approximately nine (9")
inches below grade level. The poles shall have a ¾” female threaded access hole to
accept a ¾” male threaded nipple, capped with a bronze ¾” male treaded cap,
located approximately 12” below the top of the pole. All poles shall be Stresscrete
manufacture with a “Saluki Bronze, S90” naturally polished finish. Substitute or
“or-equal” products can be used only if approval is granted by the Village
Engineer. (Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
c. Post top luminaires mounted on the aforesaid concrete poles shall be of the coach
light style and shall consist of a cast aluminum octagonal-shaped body of
approximate dimensions, thirty-five (35") inches in height and twenty (20") inches
in width. The body shall enclose eight (8) tightly secured polycarbonate lense
panels and accommodate a three (3") inch slipfitter. The luminaries shall be
primed and then painted with black thermoset acrylic enamel. All lines of the
luminaires shall be neat in appearance, and all hardware shall be stainless steel.
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
VIII 9
Laminar shall house a one hundred twenty (120) volt regulator ballast with high
power factor to accommodate a ten percent plus or minus (10%±) line voltage
variance. Lamps shall be color corrected one hundred (100) watt high pressure
sodium vapor lamps with a minimum initial output of eight thousand eight
hundred (8800) lumens and be designed to burn base down. All luminaries shall
be furnished with a photocell control. Wiring within the pole shall be No. 16
minimum. Luminaires shall be “King Luminaire Style K56-Octogon” or approved
equal. Substitute or “or-equal” products can be used only if approval is granted by
the Village Engineer. (Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
d. Lighting in residential area may either be lighted individually or in circuit.
Individually lighted poles shall be connected to a one hundred twenty (120) volt
Commonwealth Edison transformer service through existing easements and shall
be connected by 2-1/C, No. 8, 600 Volt, Type XHHW wiring in one (1") inch
PVC unit duct. All poles shall be grounded by a No. 8 bare wire ground adjacent
to the unit duct, or may be grounded by individual ground rods at each light. Poles
which are lighted in circuit shall be operated by a photo control unit mounted on
the first light connected to the relay unit at the main control center and shall be
connected by minimum 2-1/C No. 6, 600 volt type XHHW wiring in one (1") inch
minimum PVC unit duct and shall operate on one hundred twenty (120) volts. A
No. 8 bare wire ground shall be installed adjacent to the unit duct in trench. All
trenching shall be a minimum thirty (30") inches in depth and thoroughly
backfilled and compacted. All wiring shall be annealed seven (7) strand, soft
copper. Controls shall be mounted in a post top cabinet. Where street light cable
crosses previously restored surfaces, the cable shall be installed by guided auger
methods.
e. Street lights shall be located at street intersections, cul-de-sacs, and at points of
significant roadway curvature, as directed by the Village Engineer
2. Business and Manufacturing
a. Lighting in business and manufacturing areas shall consist of installing a
twenty-one (21') foot octagonal concrete pole with a two and one-half (2-1/2")
inch curved aluminum pipe arm with a six (6') foot spread of the "davit"
galvanized steel style to mount a two hundred fifty (250) watt metal halide "cobra
head" type luminar of cutoff distribution. The bracket arm shall slip onto an
indented pole top for a flush fit. The luminar mounting height shall be twenty-five
(25') feet. The pole shall be a centrifugally cast prestressed, reinforced, concrete
pole with approximate dimensions eight (8") inches at ground line and five and
three-eights (5-3/8") inches at top.
b. The pole shall be bolted to a five (5') foot deep, twenty-four (24") inch diameter,
Class X concrete foundation using one (1") inch by thirty-six (36") inch by four
(4") inch steel anchor bolts with an approximate bolt circle of eleven and one-half
(11-1/2") inches. The pole shall be of a natural polished white color.
c. Luminaries shall house a two hundred fifty (250) watt, metal halide lamp and shall
contain a highpower factor regulator ballast rated at two hundred forty (240) volts.
Wiring and controller details shall be as described for residential circuited lights
except that the operating voltage shall be two hundred forty (240) volts.
Luminaries shall be of Type II or Type III cut-off distribution. The lighting
system shall be designed to a maintained footcandle value of zero point six (0.6),
and a uniformity ratio of six (6) to one (1). Luminaries shall be equipped with a
flat lens to provide a cut-off type lighting distribution. (Amended by A-41-2-83)
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
10 VII
3. General
a. The subdivider shall be responsible for making electrical connection arrangements
with the utility company. All work shall conform to the applicable sections of the
latest edition of the National Electric Code, as well as to the specifications set forth
above. In the event of conflict between said specifications and said Code, the
more stringent requirement shall govern.
b. The Plan Commission may recommend variations to the pole, laminar, and lamp
specifications, upon submittal of a superior type of lighting equipment which
would be deemed unique and desirable for use in a particular subdivision.
c. The provisions of Section III.C of this Ordinance shall govern the recommendation
for and the granting of any such variation.
K. Street and Traffic Signs
Final engineering plans shall include specifications for all street and traffic control signs. Said
signs shall be provided in accordance with the following:
1 All traffic control signs shall be provided in conformance with the Manual for Uniform
Traffic Control Devices or as may otherwise be required by the Village Engineer.
2 Street name signs shall be posted on street light poles whenever possible. Whenever
determined appropriate, street sign posts may be used subject to specifications provided
by the Village Engineer.
3 Street name signs shall comply with the specifications attached hereto as Appendix XII.
L. Public Utilities
1. All utility distribution or transmission lines for telephone, electric service, cable and
other means of electronic and telephonic transmissions shall be placed underground.
Installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with the applicable orders,
rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission now or hereafter effective
and the subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations, now
and hereafter effective and filed with said Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public
Utilities Act and of any public utility whose service will be required for the subdivision
with respect to the provision of such facilities.
2. Underground telephone, electric and gas service shall be placed within easements or
dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground
services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or
hazardous to the public. Unless provided otherwise in easement provisions on the
subdivision plat or other plat note, in language acceptable to the Village, for those
subdivisions in which the right-of-ways are not dedicated to the Village, the subdivider
or subsequent subdivision property owners shall retain sole responsibility for the cost of
electric and gas service and maintenance for common use improvements, including, but
not necessarily limited to, street lights.
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
VIII 11
M. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
1. An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be provided including but not limited
to the following:
a Erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to meet the objectives of
this ordinance throughout all phases of construction and permanently after
completion of development of the site. Plans should include specifications,
details, and plan indications of the following;
1. Inlet protection at all exposed inlets
2. Silt fence plan
3. Stabilized construction entrance
4. Concrete wash-out area
5. Filter strip locations
6. Pipe outlet erosion control
7. Seed establishment note which reads: “All disturbed areas for which work
does not take place for 30 days shall be supplemented with topsoil and siltseeded.
The responsible party must ensure that the seed germinates and
results in soil stabilization to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer.”
8. Phasing note which reads: “Erosion control must be established prior to the
commencement of earthwork activities. All erosion control must be
inspected and approved by the Village Engineer prior to the commencement
of any other tasks. The contractor/developer is responsible for the continual
maintenance of all erosion control. In the event that erosion control is found
to be deficient, a Notice of Non-compliance will be issued, after which the
responsible party will have five (5) calendar days to resolve the matter to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer. If the matter is not satisfactorily
resolved within five (5) days, the Village will authorize the work to be
performed at the expense of the responsible party. The Letter of Credit
surety will be drawn upon for payment of this work.”
b Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation,
expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind
and quality of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control
measures shall be indicated on the final engineering plans.
c Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and
estimates of the cost of maintenance.
d Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal responsibility for
maintenance of erosion control structures and measures after development is
completed
e A copy of the IEPA NOI (Notice of Intent) and a copy of the cancelled permit
fee check must be submitted to the Village as proof that the NOI Permit has been
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
12 VII
procured. (Added by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
2. Except as provided below, no plat of subdivision shall be approved unless the final
plat and accompanying materials indicate that measures to be taken for control
erosion and sedimentation will be adequate to assure that sediment is not transported
from the site by a storm event of ten-year frequency or less, and that the following
principles will be applicable to all development activities in the area to be subdivided:
(Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
a Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to
create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and
fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible and natural contours
should be followed as closely as possible.
b Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas
immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left undisturbed
wherever possible.
c The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical
time during development.
d Silt fencing, sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps or
filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff
waters from land undergoing development.
e The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be based on
assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events likely to
contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and benefits involved.
f In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the
requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
g Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant
velocities of discharges will not create additional erosion, and should be
protected against erosion and sedimentation during development.
h Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as practical
during development.
i The subdivider shall regularly inspect all soil erosion and sedimentation
provisions and shall re-set silt fences and other measures as may be needed to
ensure compliance with this Ordinance.
N. Record Drawings (As-Built Plans)
1 Upon completion of the installation of improvements in a subdivision, one set of mylar
Record Drawings, which show all improvements as actually installed in the field, shall
Section VIII
Engineering Design Requirements
VIII 13
be filed with the Village Engineer. Said record drawings must be submitted prior to the
acceptance of the subdivision improvements. The purpose of the record drawings is to
ensure that such improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved
final engineering plans and to provide a permanent record of the improvements. Record
drawings shall indicate location (setback from property and easement lines), sizes,
dimensions, elevations, and construction materials of all improvements and any other
information as may be required by the Village Engineer. An electronic copy of the
record drawings (in AutoCad or ArcView format) must also be submitted prior to
acceptance of the subdivision improvements. (Amended by Ordinance A-894-03-08)
2 The record drawings shall include all house service connections in distances in feet from
side lot lines approved by the Village Engineer.
Table VIII-A Street Composition Standards
Local Residential Streets All Arterial, Collector and
Non-Residential Streets & Alleys
Bituminous
Concrete
Portland Cement
Concrete
Bituminous
Concrete
Portland Cement
Concrete
1 1/2" Surface, Class I,
Mixture CL, Type 3 1
8" P.C.C.
Non-reinforced
1 1/2" Surface, Class I,
Mixture C, Type 3 1
11 1/2" P.C.C.
Non-reinforced
2" Binder, Class I,
7 Mixture B,
Type 2
2" Binder, Class I,
Mixture B, Type 2
6" Bituminous Base
(Min. M.S. of 1700)
9 1/2" Bituminous Base
(Min. M.S. of 1700)
2" Crushed Limestone
Type CA-6 2
2" Crushed Limestone
Type CA-6 2
2" Crushed Limestone
Type CA-6 2
2" Crushed Limestone
Type CA-6 2
Table VIII-B Pavement Width
Type of Street Residential Zoning:
R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-5
Residential Zoning:
R-1 or R-2
Non-Residential
Zoning:
Arterial 37 Feet * 37 Feet * 48 Feet *
Collector 30 Feet * Rural: 24 Feet **
Other: 30 feet *
48 Feet *
Local 28 Feet * Rural: 22 Feet **
Other: 28 feet *
30 Feet *
Cul de Sac
Turnaround
90 Feet
(Including a 22 foot diameter
landscape island and a 34 foot wide
pavement)
90 Feet * 100 Feet *
Highways In accordance with Federal, State, County, or Local requirements.
* Street width is measured from back of curb to back of curb.
** Street width includes a 2 foot width of bituminous shoulder on each side.
IX 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION IX
LANDSCAPING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
A. Submittal of Landscaping Plan
Anyone subdividing property subject to this Ordinance shall submit a landscaping plan in
conjunction with the required final engineering plan. All landscaping plans shall comply
with the requirements contained herein. All improvements shown on the landscaping plan
and required herein shall be constructed as required by this Ordinance.
B. Purpose and Intent
The design specifications provided in this Section are intended to provide guidelines for the
conceptual and final design of all required and proposed landscaping improvements.
Where specific guidelines are not provided and where discretion is required, such
discretion shall reside with the Board of Trustees and the Community Development
Director. The Board of Trustees shall have sole authority to approve modifications to this
Section except where such authority is specifically delegated by the terms of this
Ordinance.
C. Right-of-Way Landscaping
1. Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a curbed landscaped island concentric with the radius
point of the outside curb of the cul-de-sac. Turnaround islands shall be graded, sodded
and planted with shade trees consistent with those permitted in parkways. The Village
Board, upon recommendation from the Village Forester, may approve decorative
landscaping in the, turnaround islands provided that the landscaping will be aesthetic
and properly maintained by parties other than the Village and that the landscaping will
not block sight lines around and through the island as determined by the Village
Engineer. Parkway trees around the perimeter of cul de sac turnarounds shall be setback
from the curb line as far as possible.
2. Landscaped parkways shall be required on both sides of all streets. They shall be graded
and prepared for seeding by the subdivider with at least four (4) inches of top soil.
Median strips in streets shall be considered as parkways All median strips shall be
bordered by a Type B6.12 curb and gutter with storm draining inlets where needed, as
approved or unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer. Ground cover consisting
of seed or sod and parkway trees shall be provided in all parkways as described in
Section IX.F.3, below.
D. Retaining Walls
Retaining walls may be used when determined appropriate by the Village Engineer for
purposes of stormwater management or when determined appropriate by the Village
Forester for purposes of tree preservation. Details of any proposed retaining walls shall be
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
I
2 IX
provided on both the final engineering and landscaping plans and shall comply with the
following:
1. Natural cut stone shall be the construction material employed for all retaining walls
located within a right-of-way, or easement dedicated to and maintained by the
Village, or common area of a subdivision such as a detention outlot. Pre-cast
segmental block retaining wall systems are not permitted. (Amended by A-894-01-
10)
2. Retaining walls shall not exceed 42 inches in height measured from the top of grade
at the bottom of a wall to the top of the wall except when written approval is obtained
from the Village Engineer. In such cases where retaining walls may exceed 42 inches
in height, a safety rail or other suitable barrier may be required at the top of the wall.
3. Terraced retaining walls shall be permitted where each section of the wall does not
exceed 42 inches in height and a minimum of 36 inches is provided between each
face of the retaining walls.
4. Retaining walls surrounding a stormwater detention or retention pond shall not exceed
10% of the circumference of the detention or retention pond as measured at the normal
water level. (Amended by A-894-01-10)
5. Final engineering submittals must include a complete geotechnical report and a
structural engineering report, signed and sealed by a licensed, professional Structural
Engineer. The Final Engineering plans must include proposed wall details, including
bedding conditions, minimum bedding compaction densities, minimum bedding bearing
capacities, and specific requirements regarding placement of retaining wall stones,
linking, placement of geogrid, laybacks, and overburden slope parameters. The
engineering plans must be signed and sealed by a licensed, professional, Structural
Engineer. (Amended by A-894-01-10)
6. The developer must retain the services of a materials testing consultant to ensure proper
compaction and to certify that materials and methodologies are compliant with the
structural and geotechnical requirements in the approved plan. The as-built engineering
plans shall include a certification and SE stamp which documents the same. (Amended
by A-894-01-10)
E. Detention/Retention Areas, Outlots, and Similar Areas
Detention areas, outlots, and similar areas (hereinafter referred to as outlots) shall be
landscaped in a manner consistent with landscaping of private lots in the Village of Burr
Ridge and to enhance outlots as open space amenities. Landscaping plans for outlots shall be
provided with the final engineering plans to be reviewed and approved by the Community
Development Director and the Village Engineer. Landscaping plans shall include installation
specifications and details, a plan for the establishment of the plants, and a long term
maintenance plan and specifications. The long term maintenance plans shall specify timely
replacement of any plants that die. In addition, landscaping of outlots shall comply with the
following:
1. With the exception of well defined planting beds, outlots shall be seeded or sodded with
an appropriate turf grass comparable to that used in typical single-family residential
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
IX 3
yards. The Village Engineer may require sodding of side slopes and detention bottoms
as determined appropriate.
2. Native grasses or prairie plantings may only be used when expressly permitted by the
Board of Trustees upon recommendation from the Village Engineer and only for a
subdivision that will have a homeowners association which has perpetual maintenance
responsibility. The Board of Trustees may require a letter of credit or other security
separate from the subdivision improvement security to ensure that native landscaping is
properly established and maintained.
3. Perimeter landscaping shall include shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs and similar
landscaping. At a minimum, perimeter landscaping of outlots shall include the
following:
a. Planting beds with a mix of canopy/shade, evergreen, and ornamental trees as
well as deciduous shrubs, ornamental grasses, and flowering plants next to interior
side and rear yards of adjacent private lots in an amount that will provide
continuous (but not necessarily opaque) landscaping.
b. Planting beds with a mix of canopy/shade, evergreen, and ornamental trees as
well as deciduous shrubs, ornamental grasses, and flowering plants extending
along approximately 50% or more of the front or corner side yards of an outlot and
along approximately 50% or more of the lot line next to the front yards of
adjoining private lots.
4. Pond overflow spillways shall provide a minimum of one foot of freeboard and shall be
protected by a “turfstone” type of erosion control application on and over the spillway.
F. Development Trees
It is the intent of this Section to ensure that the streets (whether public or private) in all new
developments, including subdivisions, land divisions, planned unit developments, and all
other developments of any kind (herein collectively referred to as "developments") approved
by the Village of Burr Ridge are landscaped in such a manner as to ameliorate the impact of
development on the natural setting and adjacent properties, and to provide an environment
which will protect and improve property values. At the same time, the requirements of this
Section are intended to minimize those factors which could result in increased development or
maintenance costs for the developer and, in future years, for the Village and its taxpayers.
1. General Provisions - Incorporation of Standards
Performance standards for activities required under this Section shall be in accordance
with the then latest available revision of the applicable standards as herein described,
unless specific exceptions are approved by the Village Administrator upon receipt of a
recommendation from the Village Forester or a Certified Arborist retained by the
Village. Said standards, including those contained in the American National Standards
Institute publication Z133.1 ("American National Standard for Tree Care Operations -
Pruning, Trimming, Repairing, Maintaining, and Removing Trees, and Cutting Brush -
Safety Requirements"), and "American Standard for Nursery Stock", published by the
American Association of Nurserymen, as such may be amended from time to time, be
and are hereby incorporated and adopted by reference as the standards of the Village of
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
I
4 IX
Burr Ridge for the purposes of this Section. At least 3 copies of such standards,
including any subsequent amendments thereto, shall be on file with the Village Clerk
and made conveniently available for public inspection, use and examination, and 3
copies have been on file and available for public use, inspection and examination in the
office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least 30 days prior to the adoption hereof.
2. Protection of Existing Trees
a. As a precondition to the approval by the Village of the pattern of streets, parking
or other paved areas, and the location of utilities, the developer shall submit a plan
which includes detailed information regarding existing trees. The above plans
shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer and Village Forester who, in
consultation with the developer, shall recommend modifications to the site
development plans.
(1) It shall be the purpose and intent of this review to maximize the number of
trees which can be preserved without reducing the number of buildings or
lots which would otherwise be permitted and without unreasonably
increasing the cost of development.
(2) No site plan or Preliminary Plat shall be approved until all requirements
herein set forth have been complied.
b. All site grading plans, preliminary plats and preliminary engineering plans shall
include a plan, drawn to the same scale as all other plats or plans, showing the
following
(1) The location, size, species and condition of all existing trees 8" D.B.H (as
measured 4.5' above the ground) and larger. Said plan shall distinguish
between existing trees that are proposed to be preserved at their present
location, destroyed, relocated or replaced.
(2) The location of all proposed tree fencing.
(a) Fencing for areas of trees to be preserved must be continuous in
order to completely separate the construction area and the areas of
trees to be preserved.
(b) No attachments, fences or wires, other than approved materials for tree
bracing, guying or wrapping, shall be attached to any trees to be
preserved during any of the construction period.
(c) All fencing shall be secured to metal posts driven into the ground at
intervals of no greater than ten feet (10').
(3) The areas for the placement of excavation spoils which will not be
immediately removed from the development property.
(4) The proposed measures, including, but not limited to, auguring, root pruning,
crown reduction, that are to be taken to minimize construction impact on
those trees remaining on the site.
c. Following approval of the site plan or Preliminary Plat, the final plans and
specifications to be submitted as required by Section V of this Ordinance shall
include any revisions required by the Village to comply with the above provisions.
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
IX 5
d. Prior to approval by the Village Engineer of the final plans and specifications,
as set forth in Section V of this Ordinance, the Village Forester shall complete
the review of all matters relating to the removal, relocation or preservation of
existing trees.
(1) When all aspects of the plans have been approved by the Village Forester,
the developer shall be notified to stake the property for inspection and to
clearly identify and tag all trees which are proposed to be removed and/or
relocated. Staking shall delineate all roadways, driveways, walkways,
utilities, detention/retention areas or other areas where significant grading or
excavation will occur.
(2) The Village Forester will complete an inspection of the staking and tagging
within two (2) working days of notification to the Village by the developer
that the staking and tagging is ready for inspection. Following any revisions
to the plans which are required as a result of this inspection and following
any corrections to the staking or tagging, as required following the site
inspection, including reinspection thereof, the Village Forester shall notify
the Village Engineer in writing of his approval of the plans.
e. Until such time as the required plans and specifications are approved by the
Village Engineer and until such time as the Final Plat is approved by the Board of
Trustees, the developer shall ensure that all staking and tagging, as set forth above,
remains undisturbed.
f. Following approval of the required plans and specifications, approval of the Final
Plat and the posting of the letter of credit to guarantee completion of the required
improvements, the developer shall notify the Village Engineer in writing at least
five (5) working days in advance of the date when site preparation work is
scheduled to begin. Site preparation shall be strictly limited to the following, in
the order listed:
(1) Installation of all tree fencing required by the approved plans and
specifications.
(2) Clearing from the site of only those trees and other vegetation indicated for
removal on the approved plans and specifications.
(3) Root pruning, crown reduction and other tree preservation measures required
by the approved plans and specifications.
g. Before the date indicated by the developer for the start of site preparation work,
the Village forester shall re-inspect the staking and tagging required herein to
ensure that it has remained as approved. Only after the Village Forester has
reported that all staking and tagging is acceptable will the Village Engineer notify
the developer in writing that site preparation may proceed.
h. No grading or installation of underground improvements shall be authorized by the
Village until all site preparation work is completed and approved, following an
inspection by the Village Forester.
3. Required Trees - Plan Approval
a. Street Trees
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
I
6 IX
(1) The developer shall submit a street tree planting plan, prepared at the same
scale as the engineering plans, for approval by the Village. Included on the
face of said plan shall be a calculation of the number of trees required to
comply with the provisions herein, including the method of calculation. Said
plan shall be submitted after approval of the Preliminary Plat, at the same
time that engineering plans and specifications are submitted.
(2) Trees shall be planted within the existing or proposed street rights-of-way
along all streets where the number of healthy trees that exist do not conform
to the requirements below. This requirement shall include the developer's
side of any existing street which the development adjoins.
(3) All trees selected shall be grown in a nursery located in the northern half of
the State of Illinois. The grade of all planting stock shall be in conformance
with the "American Standard for Nursery Stock" published by the American
Association of Nurserymen. Park grade trees shall not be allowed. The
Village reserves the right to inspect and tag trees selected by the developer at
the nursery before any trees are dug.
(4) All trees selected shall be healthy and shall be free of insects and diseases,
bark bruises and scrapes on the trunk or limbs before and after planting.
(5) Each tree selected shall be consistent in form and character with the species
and shall have a straight trunk with limbs not lower than six feet (6') above
the ground.
(6) All trees selected shall have a trunk diameter, measured six inches (6")
above the ball, of not less than three inches (3").
(7) Trees to be planted in the parkway shall be spaced no more or less than forty
feet (40') apart, unless otherwise approved. They shall be no closer than:
(a) Five feet (5') back from the curb or, in the case of streets without curbs,
five feet (5') back from the pavement edge or from the edge of any
swale or ditch.
(b) Forty feet (40') from the nearest corner of the pavement of intersecting
streets, said distance to be measured away from the corner along both
of the streets.
(c) Ten feet (10') from driveways.
(d) Fifteen feet (15') from street lights.
(e) Five feet (5') from fire hydrants, buffalo boxes, vaults, and the like.
(f) Five feet (5') from sidewalks, unless otherwise required or approved.
(8) The size and spacing requirements of this Section may also be satisfied, if
approved by the Village, if trees, ranging in size from two and one-half
inches (2-1/2") to five inches (5") exist, are planted, or a combination of
these, in a naturalistic manner compatible with existing trees and terrain in
the rights-of-way or within street tree easements in favor of the Village
located within the first ten feet (10') of each lot immediately adjoining the
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
IX 7
right-of-way. Such easement shall be on the Final Plat in a form and
substance satisfactory to the Village Attorney. Provided, however, the total
inches of trees to be planted shall comply with the requirements of this
Section (i.e. number of trees required at forty foot spacing, times three inches
per tree).
b. Planned Developments, Including Clustered Single Family Detached Residences,
Townhouses, Etc.
(1) The developer shall submit plans and specifications for the site and, if
appropriate, information relating to landscaping of adjacent or surrounding
areas affected by the proposed development. Such plans and specifications
shall be prepared and signed by a professional landscape architect. These
plans shall include:
(a) Distribution of plant material; location, quantity and key number of
each species of plant in each group; outline of all lawn areas, areas to
be seeded, sodded or sprigged; existing trees, if any, to be preserved,
transplanted or removed; kind, size and work involved as related to
slope control and/or physical environment.
(b) List of plant material giving standard botanical plant names and key
number for each variety for reference to plan and, in addition, the size,
quality or other pertinent description common to the trade.
(c) A specification describing the methods for planting the areas to be
landscaped with special emphasis on: soil preparation, fertilization,
plant material and methods of planting; and initial maintenance of the
plant material and slopes until a specified percentage of plant coverage
is established uniformly on the cut and fill slopes.
(d) A statement by the landscape architect regarding the length of time
after planting, with the specified maintenance normally required, to
produce the specified percentage of plant coverage on the slopes in the
slope control areas; the additional length of time, without any special
maintenance, normally required to produce a coverage of permanent
planting which will control erosion; and landscape maintenance and
plant replacement specifications.
(e) Details of all items and features pertaining to site preservation and
improvements such as retaining walls and tree wells.
(f) Such other and further details as may be specified and required by the
Village to carry out the purposes of this Section.
4. General Standards for Tree Planting
All required trees shall be planted during the first spring or fall planting season
immediately following installation of the required underground improvements, curbs
and gutters and roadway base, subject to prior written approval by the Village Forester.
a. Planting Seasons
(1) The fall planting season shall be from October 1 to December 1.
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
I
8 IX
(2) The spring planting season shall be from March 15 to May 15.
b. Planting Standards
(1) Trees shall be balled and burlapped and shall not be dug for removal from
the nursery until immediately prior to their planting.
(2) The planting hole shall be twelve inches (12") larger in diameter than the
diameter of the ball.
(3) All trees shall be hand planted and planted straight.
(4) The tree shall be planted the depth at which it was growing in the nursery.
The ball shall be placed in undisturbed soil on the bottom of the hole to
prevent settling.
(5) In most instances, the backfill around the ball shall be the same soil as that
which was removed from the hole; however, in cases where rocks, stones,
etc. are encountered, topsoil shall be used.
(6) Any excess soil, debris or trimmings shall be removed from the planting site
immediately upon completion of planting.
(7) Where necessary, trees shall be staked to ensure that they remain straight.
(8) All tags, wires, plastic ties and wire baskets shall be removed from each tree.
(9) Tree holes may be machine dug; but if any existing lawn is damaged, it shall
be the responsibility of the developer to restore the lawn to its original
condition, using sod. The sides of all holes that are machine dug shall be
hand-shaped to eliminate glazing.
5. Permitted Species and Diversity of Species
a. A list of permitted plant species shall be maintained by the Village Forester The
approval of a species for a particular site shall be dependent upon the following
criteria:
(1) Compliance with permitted species list.
(2) Compatibility of the species with the site.
(3) The overall species balance in the immediate area, as well as the overall
species balance in the Village.
b. The tree planting plan for a subdivision shall provide a diversity of species, genus
and taxonomic families. Trees planted shall not exceed more than 10% of one
species, 20% of any genus and 30% of one taxonomic family.
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
IX 9
6. Prohibited Species
The following plant species shall not be planted on any public street, parkway, or other
municipally-owned property:
Botanic Name Common Name
Acer negundo Box Elder
Acer saccharinum Siler Maple
Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven
Catalpa speciosa Catalpa
Coniferales ord. Evergreens of any type
Crataegus spp. Hawthorn (varieties with thorns)
Elaeagnus spp. Russian Olive
Franxinus spp. Ash of any type
Ginko biloba (female) Female Ginko
Juglans spp. Walnut of any type
Maclura pomifera Osage Orange
Malus pumila Apple
Morus spp. Mulberry
Populus spp. Cottonwood, Poplar, Aspen
P. alban nives Silver White Poplar
Prunus spp. Cherry plum
Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradford’ Bradford Pear
Quercus palustris Pin Oak
Rhamnus spp. Buckthorn of any type
Robinia pseudoacacia Black Locust (varieties with thorns)
Salix spp. Willow
Ulmus spp. Elms of any type (unless DED resistant)
Coniferales ord. Evergreens of any type
7. Required Maintenance
Throughout the installation of the required improvements, the developer shall be fully
responsible for the preservation and protection of those existing trees identified on the
approved plans and specifications. In addition, the developer shall be fully responsible
for the maintenance in a healthy, flourishing condition of all trees required to be planted
until the end of the two-year maintenance period (which is required by this Ordinance
for all improvements) following acceptance of the improvements by the Village. In the
case of those trees which are replaced during the two-year maintenance period and
which will not have been in the ground for two years at the expiration of the two-year
maintenance period (the time required to ensure the Village that they will continue to
flourish once they are being maintained by the Village), the developer shall be required
to post cash with the Village as a guarantee, as set forth in subsection e below.
a. At a minimum, the following schedule of specific maintenance activities shall be
observed:
(1) April - All tree wrap shall be removed and trees shall be fertilized and
mulched and checked for settling, straightness and soil moisture.
(2) April thru August - Trees shall be inspected and treated as needed to ensure
that they remain free of disease and/or insect infestation.
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
I
10 IX
(3) June thru August - Trees shall be watered on a regular schedule to prevent
drought stress and to ensure healthy growth. Care should be taken not to
over-water.
(4) Before November 1 - The trunks of all trees shall be wrapped to prevent
winter bark damage by the elements and/or animals. Trees shall be pruned
(as needed), fertilized and mulched.
b. In order to ensure that trees are maintained in the manner required, the Village
shall cause all new development trees, including the existing trees to be preserved
and protected, to be inspected by the Village Forester on a periodic basis. The
findings of the Village Forester shall be reported to the developer with specific
requirements for corrective action, which shall be immediately implemented by
the developer. The Village Forester shall also maintain a record of those trees
replaced and the date of their replacement.
c. Since the building construction activities associated with the new development can
endanger the well-being of those trees planted by the developer, as well as those
trees which are to be preserved and protected, developers are encouraged to
require individual builders or contractors to post bonds with them which can be
used to pay for tree replacement, if necessary. In no event, shall the Village
assume the role of arbitrator in determining the party responsible for tree damage.
Notwithstanding the above, the developer shall remain responsible for the health
and vitality of all trees required to be planted or preserved and protected until the
end of the required maintenance period set forth in this Ordinance and in Chapter
57 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
d. The developer shall be required to replace those trees which have become so
damaged, deformed, diseased or otherwise unhealthy that the Village has good
reason to believe they cannot survive in good condition. The determination of the
Village shall be based on the recommendation of the Village Forester and shall be
final.
(1) Where tree replacement is required by the Village, planting shall occur
during the current planting season, if possible, and, if not, then in the next
planting season following notification by the Village.
(2) The size and quality of replacement trees shall be equal to or better than the
size and quality of the trees to be replaced, as approved by the Village
Forester.
(3) In the case of those trees which were required to be preserved and protected,
the applicant shall be required to replace any such trees with trees equal in
diameter (measured 12" from the base) if the tree which is lost is 6" or less in
diameter, provided such trees are commercially available. If any such tree is
greater than 6" in diameter, or otherwise is not commercially available, then
the developer must replace any such lost tree with trees with a minimum
diameter of five inches and equaling in number the figure reached by
dividing the diameter of the tree which is lost by five (and rounded up if it
results in a fraction of .5 or above and down if it results in a fraction less than
.5) (e.g. if a 15" tree is lost, it would have to be replaced with 3 trees with
each to have a minimum diameter of 5" or better, with all diameters to be
measured 12" above the ground).
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
IX 11
e. As set forth above, there will be instances when the developer is required to
replace trees during the two-year maintenance period and, as a result, the Village
will be afforded less than two years to monitor the health and vigor of these trees
in order to ensure that it will be assuming responsibility for trees which will
continue to flourish. Therefore, prior to the expiration of the two-year
maintenance period and prior to the release of the letter of credit or other security
required by Section VII of this Ordinance, for each tree which has been in the
ground less than two years at the expiration of the two-year maintenance period
the developer shall be required to deposit with the Village a tree guarantee in the
form of a cash bond, which shall be held for a period of two years following the
expiration of said two-year maintenance period.
(1) The purpose of the required cash bond shall be to ensure against loss due to
improper planting techniques, disease or lack of proper maintenance by the
developer.
(2) The amount of the required cash bond shall be equal to 125% of the then
current replacement cost of each tree to be guaranteed.
(3) At least four (4) months prior to the expiration of the required maintenance
period, the Village Forester, using the record of tree replacement dates, shall
prepare a report to the Village Engineer listing those trees for which a cash
bond is required. This report shall include the date the tree was planted, the
current replacement cost of the tree, and the current condition of the tree.
(4) The developer shall be notified in writing by the Village Engineer of the
required amount of the cash bond. Said notice shall include a copy of the
Village Forester's detailed report. Any disagreement between the developer
and the Village Forester regarding the number of trees to be guaranteed or
the required amount shall be resolved by the Village Engineer not less than
two (2) months prior to the expiration of the required maintenance period
and the expiration of the required letter of credit or other security.
(5) Not less than one (1) month prior to the expiration of the required
maintenance period and the expiration of the required letter of credit or other
security, if the developer has not deposited the required cash bond with the
Village, the amount of said cash bond shall be drawn from the developer's
security to be held by the Village for the purposes herein set forth.
(6) For all such trees for which a cash bond has been deposited with the Village,
the Village Forester shall continue to conduct inspections on a periodic basis.
The findings of the Village Forester shall be reported to the Village (with a
copy to the developer) with specific requirements for corrective action.
Corrective action of a maintenance nature shall be immediately implemented
by the Village at its own expense. If, however, the only proper corrective
action, in the opinion of the Village Forester, is replacement, the cost for
such replacement shall be drawn from the cash bond following written notice
to the developer and, after replacement, any funds remaining for that tree
shall be released to the developer. Notice shall be given by depositing the
same in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the developer or his
authorized agent at such address as is shown on the then most current
records of the Village. Receipt of such notice shall be conclusively
presumed from proof of mailing.
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
I
12 IX
(7) At the end of the two-year period following the expiration of the two-year
maintenance period, any cash bond funds remaining on deposit with the
Village as a tree guarantee shall be released to the developer.
G. Subdivision Fences and Entryway Monuments
Subdivision fences and entryway monuments are hereby permitted subject to the following
regulations. Subdivision fences and entryway monuments are intended to be utilized as
decorative gateway features and to buffer rear and side yards from arterial streets. Subdivision
fences and entryway monuments are not intended to enclose subdivisions and are not allowed
as gates either for private or public streets.
1 Location of Subdivision Fences and Entryway Monuments
a. Subdivision fences shall be located on private property along the perimeter of
subdivision and are allowed only when adjacent to an arterial street.
b. Subdivision fences and entryway monuments shall be located in a dedicated fence,
sign, or entryway easement and shall not be located in a public right-of-way.
c. Subdivision fences or entryway monuments shall not be located in a clear sight
triangle defined as the area formed by two intersecting right-of-way lines (or
easement/property lines for private streets) and a diagonal line connecting two
points located along each right-of-way 25 feet from the point of intersection or as
may otherwise be determined appropriate by the Village Engineer.
2. Standards for Subdivision Fences and Entryway Monuments
a. Subdivision fences and entryway monuments shall not exceed six feet in height
measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level within five feet of either
side of the fence.
b. The primary materials for a subdivision fence or entryway monument shall be
limited to masonry, wrought iron, or similar materials. Additional materials may
be used as decorative detail subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
c. Signs located on subdivision fences or entryway monuments shall be restricted to
entryways and shall comply with the Sign Regulations of the Village of Burr
Ridge.
d. Subdivision fences and entryway monuments shall not interfere with established
or proposed drainage patterns as determined by the Village Engineer.
e. For each one foot wide segment extending over the length and height of a
subdivision fence, 50 percent of the surface area must be open and afford direct
views through the fence.
3. Procedures for Approval of Subdivision Fences and Entryway Monuments
a. Plans and specifications for subdivision fences and entryway monuments which
are proposed for new subdivisions should be submitted for staff review with the
final landscape plans and submitted for review and approval by the Board of
Trustees
b. Subdivision fences and entryway monuments proposed for existing subdivisions
are subject to the approval of the Village of Burr Ridge Board of Trustees.
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
IX 13
c. A permit shall be obtained prior to the construction of the fence.
4. Maintenance of Subdivision Fences and Entryway Monuments
a. Maintenance, repair, and replacement of a subdivision fence and entryway
monuments shall be the responsibility of the homeowners association unless
otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees.
b. The structural integrity, the appearance of subdivision fences and entryway
monuments, and maintenance of surrounding landscaping shall be continuously
maintained in a manner consistent with the approved fence elevations and plans.
c. Covenants shall be recorded delineating the homeowners responsibilities for
maintenance, repair, and replacement of subdivision fences and entryway
monuments. Said covenants shall grant to the Village of Burr Ridge the right
(but not the duty) to maintain, replace, or repair such fences upon failure to do
so by the responsible private party and to record a lien against properties within
the subdivision for failure to reimburse the Village for such costs. Subdivision
Entryway Guidelines
H. Subdivision Entryway Guidelines
The following subdivision entryway guidelines are provided for the purpose of establishing
common elements between subdivisions that will make the subdivision entryways uniquely
identifiable as Burr Ridge Subdivisions. Entrances to major residential subdivisions shall
be designed based on the following guidelines and subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees. For purposes of this subsection, only, major residential subdivisions shall
generally include those that have new streets and have an entryway intersecting an existing
collector or arterial street. These are general guidelines only and the Board of Trustees
may approve alternative materials or designs if such materials or design are determined to
be consistent with the purpose of these guidelines.
1. Architectural Features: Entrances should include interesting and attractive
architectural features including some or all of the following elements:
a. Low walls
b. Piers or pilasters
c. Ornamental steel fences and/or gates
d. Ornamental lights.
2. Materials: The color of materials comprising the architectural elements of the entries
shall be natural and the materials shall be limited to the following:
a. Stone
b. Brick
c. Architectural poured-in-place concrete
d. Precast concrete
Section IX
Landscaping Design Requirements
I
14 IX
3. Prohibited Materials: The following materials will not be allowed as part of the entry
features:
a. Plywood
b. Corrugated or pre-engineered metal
c. Unfinished concrete masonry units
d. Plastics
4. Lighting: Signage and architectural features shall be externally lit by well-hidden
light sources. Ornamental lighting features may be used.
5. Signage Text: Entryway signs shall be for subdivision identification purposes only.
Entryway signs should not include complex directional information or any form of
advertisement. Entryway signs shall include the words “Burr Ridge” (for example,
“Oak Subdivision of Burr Ridge”). All subdivision entryway signs shall be subject to
the regulations of the Village of Burr Ridge Sign Ordinance, No. 923. (Amended by
A-894-1-02)
6. Landscape Planting: Planting associated with entrance features shall include a rich
variety and mixture of plant materials. A careful mixture of plants shall be used to
provide interest in all four seasons of the year. Plant materials shall include some or
all of the following:
a. Shade Trees
b. Ornamental (Flowering Trees)
c. Evergreen Trees
d. Flowering and Evergreen Shrubs
e. Ground Covers
f. Perennial and annual flowers
X 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION X
DEDICATION OF PARK LAND OR PAYMENT OF
FEES IN LIEU THEREOF
As a condition of approval of a final plat of development, a final plat of subdivision, or a final
plat of or Special Use permit for a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will
be required to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes to serve the immediate and future
needs of the residents of the development, or make a cash contribution in-lieu-of actual land
dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the Village, in accordance with the
following criteria and formula:
A. Criteria for Requiring Park and Recreation Land Dedication
1. Requirements and Population Ratio:
The total requirement shall be 10 acres of land per 1,000 residents, except that in any
development, subdivision or planned unit development zoned R-1, R-2 or R-2A, the
total requirement shall be 5.5 acres of land per 1,000 residents. Illustrated uses
include:
Table X-A
Recreation Area Sizes
Types of
Recreation Area
Size Range
Maximum Acres
Per 1,000 People
(a) Play lot
Minimum 8,000 sq. ft.
Not Applicable
(b) School-park
Minimum park of 5 acres
2.25
(c) Neighborhood Park
Minimum 3-1/2 acres
1.5
(d) District-Wide Park
or Play Field
Minimum 4 acres, up to 30 acres
4.0
(e) Community Wide
Recreation Park
Minimum 12 acres, up to 30 acres
4.0
Total
10 acres of land per
1000 people
Section X
Dedication of Park Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
2 X
2. Acceptable Size
The minimum size of parcels that shall be deemed acceptable for dedication shall be
based on the following criteria:
a. Where the land is to be all useable for recreational purposes (no storm water
management), the minimum size of the donation shall be three and one half (3-
1/2) acres.
b. Where the donation is to include detention or retention facilities a minimum of
one and one half (1-1/2) acres of land above the high water level (HWL) shall
be required. This land shall be contiguous in one location. Where the above
criteria cannot be met, a cash contribution in-lieu thereof shall be required. No
storm water management area shall be accepted for park purposes without the
above criteria being met first.
3. Location
The comprehensive Park and Recreation Plans and/or the "Standards by Types of
Recreation and Park Area" as adopted by the Burr Ridge Park District and/or the
Pleasant Dale Park District shall be used as guideline in locating sites. A central
location which will service equally the entire development is most desirable. In large
developments these sites can be located throughout the development according to
established standards for park area distances set forth in Recreation Park and Open
Spaces Standards and Guidelines. Additional guidelines which shall be considered in
locating sites include, but are not limited to, size of the subdivision, proximity of the
site to other parks, schools and municipal services, topography and shape of the site
of not less than five (5) acres shall be located adjacent to each elementary school site.
4. Credit for Private Open Spaces and Recreation Areas
Subdividers and developers may provide their own open space for recreation areas
and facilities. Such open space may qualify at the option of the Village, in lieu of
dedicated open space. In determining whether to allow any such open space to
qualify as dedicated open space under this Ordinance, the Village will consider such
factors as, but not limited to, the degree that such open space meets the needs of the
residents, the degree to which the demand for public parks will be reduced, the degree
to which the open space will be accessible to all residents, and the degree to which it
is in conformance to the total park and recreation land requirements for the general
area and the Village's Comprehensive Plan. If the open space provided by the
subdivider or developer does not completely satisfy the requirements of this
Ordinance, the Village may credit such subdivider or developer with such partial
compliance. The subdivider or developer will then be required to contribute
sufficient other land, or cash in-lieu thereof, to meet the total park and recreation land
requirements of the extent of development of the facilities donated by the developer
Section X
Dedication of Park Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
X 3
and the extent of development of the facilities donated by the developer. The
developer shall offer any and all guarantees that the village requires with respect to
ongoing maintenance of dedicated areas, and the Village shall consult with the Park
District in which the development is located with respect to these guarantees. Any
area reserved for exclusively private use will not be deemed to meet the requirements
of this Ordinance.
B. Criteria for Requiring a Contribution in-lieu-of Park Land
Where the subdivision or development s small and resulting site is, in the opinion of the
Village, to small to be practical or when the available land, in the opinion of the Village, is
inappropriate for park and recreational purposes, the Village shall require the subdivider or
developer to pay a cash contribution in-lieu-of the land dedication required. The cash
contribution in-lieu-of park and recreation land dedication shall be paid to the Village
which shall then pay said contributions over to the park district and such contributions shall
be held in trust by the park district in which the development is located solely for the
acquisition and/or improvement of land, as herein below classified, which will be available
to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that development, subdivision or
planned unit development or for the improvement of other existing local park and
recreation land which already serves such needs. In the event that the development is not
located within a park district, the cash contributions in-lieu-of park and recreation land
dedication shall be paid to and held in trust by the Village solely for the acquisition and/or
improvement of land, as herein below classified, which will be available to serve the
immediate or future needs of the residents of that development, subdivision or planned unit
development or for the improvement of other existing local park and recreation land which
already serves such needs. Provided, however, the Village shall hold any such funds for
ma development that is not in a park district in a segregated account for a minimum of
three years before expending any such funds for such purposes. The Village shall have the
right to request and receive from the affected park districts annual audit reports and any
other information the Village may need from time to time to insure compliance with this
Ordinance. If any portion of a cash contribution in-lieu-of park and recreation land
dedication is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten (10) years from the
date of receipt, the Village or park district holding the funds shall refund such contribution
to the owners of record of all lots, except lots dedicated pursuant to the provisions of this
Ordinance, in the development, subdivision, or planned unit development for which such
contribution was made. (Amended by Ordinance A-41-2-89)
1. Acquisition Using Cash in-lieu-of Park Land Donations
a. The term acquisition as used in this ordinance shall mean - the acquiring of land
by purchase, condemnation or such other means as may be appropriate and shall
be a minimum of three and one-half (3-1/2) acres in size.
b. The acquired land shall not be for "special" use facilities (i.e. slough, river edge,
remnant forest, community swimming pool, etc.)
Section X
Dedication of Park Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
4 X
c. The acquired land shall support the type of facilities as defined in
"Improvement" below.
2. Improvement Using Cash in-lieu-of Park Land Donations
a. Where existing park lands will serve the needs of the development, the
cash contribution in-lieu-of land dedication shall be used for the following
types of physical improvements:
(1) play lots
(2) hard surface courts (tennis, basketball, tetherball)
(3) pathways (walkways, jogging and cycle paths)
(4) sport fields (baseball, soccer, football)
(5) picnic facilities (tables, grills, etc.)
(6) open shelters and restroom facilities
(7) support facilities (i.e. parking, drinking fountains, security lighting).
b. The types of improvements that will not qualify for expenditure of cashin-
lieu funds shall be generally defined as those facilities "that are selfsustaining"
i.e. public golf course; recreation building (indoor swimming pool,
tennis, ice rink), interpretive trails and center, boat launching facilities or other
such facilities for which a fee is charged for their use.
3. Fair Market Value
The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the sum of the fair market
value of a vacant, unimproved, and unsubdivided acre of land in the Village and the
estimate of the Village Engineer as to the cost of improving such land with electrical
utilities, water, sewer, and streets, including enclosed drainage and curbs and gutters,
and all other improvements required under this Subdivision Regulations Ordinance.
All cash contribution calculations shall be made by the Village, and the affected park
districts shall refer all developers to the Village for such calculations. It has been
determined that the fair market value of a vacant, unsubdivided acre of land in and
surrounding the Village is $105,000 as of April 26, 2004; increasing to $155,000 for
all plats approved on or after May 1, 2005; and increasing to $239,000 for all plats
approved on or after January 1, 2006. The estimate of the Village Engineer as to the
cost of improvements is $45,000, for a combined total of $150,000 as of April 26,
2004; increasing to $200,000 on May 1, 2005, and increasing to $284,000 on January
1, 2006; and such figure of $150,000, $200,000, and $284,000 respectively, shall be
used in making any calculation herein unless the subdivider, developer, or the park
district files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such objection, the
Section X
Dedication of Park Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
X 5
developer shall, at his cost and by a Member of Appraisal Institute (M.A.I.), submit
an appraisal showing the "fair market value" of the land in the development or other
evidence thereof and final determination of said "fair market value" per acre of such
vacant, unimproved, unsubdivided land shall be made by the Village Board based
upon such information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other
sources which may be submitted to the Village Board by the Burr Ridge Park District
or the Pleasant Dale Park District or others. The Village on its own motion or at the
request of the Burr Ridge Park District and/or the Pleasant Dale Park District may
from time to time amend this provision to provide for different fair market value for
parcels that are deemed by the Burr Ridge Park District and/or Pleasant Dale Park
District and the Village to be of greater or lesser value. Refer to Appendices VIII-A
to VIII-I.
(Amended by Ord. 894-01-04; further amended by Ord. A-894-01-05)
Cash contributions shall be paid at the time set forth in Section IXA, J Below;
provided, however, an owner may, on written request to the Village submitted at the
time of application for approval of final plat pay one half of the required contribution
at the time of final plat approval with the balance to be paid six months after the date
of final plat approval provided the balance due is secured by an irrevocable letter of
credit in a form and from an issuer approved by the Village at the time of final plat
approval. If the developer so chooses to pay the required contribution in two
installments, the amount of the second installment shall be based on the then current
price per acre of land and Engineer's estimate of the cost of improvements as
computed hereunder (for example, if the figure is $114,600 at the time of final plat
approval but is changed within the next six months to $120,000, the second
installment shall be determined by re-computing the entire contribution on the basis
of $120,000 per acre and then dividing that amount by two). (Amended by Ordinance
A-41-2-89)
4. Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Fee
There may be situations when both a land dedication and a cash contribution are
necessary. These occasions may arise, among others, when:
a. If it is determined by the Village that the land to be dedicated for a park site
within a development contains fewer acres than the amount called for by this
ordinance, a cash contribution shall be required for the difference between the
amount of land called for by this ordinance and the amount of land which is
actually to be dedicated.
b. If a major part of a local park or recreation site has already been acquired and
only a small portion of land is needed for the development to complete the site,
the remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution
for the difference shall be required.
Section X
Dedication of Park Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
6 X
C. Density Formula for Park Donation
Table X-B, Population Density, is generally indicative of current and short range projected
trends in family size fir a new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount of
required dedication of acres of land or the cash contribution in-lieu-of unless a written
objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer:
1. Objections to Density Formula
In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the Table of
Estimated Ultimate Population listed herein and submits his own demographic study
showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or
planned unit development, a final determination of the density formula to be used in
such calculations shall be made by the Village Board based upon such demographic
information as the Village shall require. It is recognized that population density, age
distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the specific formula for
the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in-lieu-thereof, as stated herein, is
subject to periodic review and amendment if necessary.
TABLE X-B
ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT*
CHILDREN PER UNIT
Type of
Unit
Pre-
School
Elementary Junior
High
High
School
Total Per
Unit
Grades K-5
6-8 K-8 9-12 Adults
Age 0-4 5-10
11-13 5-13 14-17 18-up
Detached Single Family:
2 Bedrooms
.102 .122 .041 .163 .020 1.694 1.979
3 Bedrooms
.256 .358 .143 .501 .146 1.962 2.865
4 Bedrooms
.413 .474 .303 .777 .307 2.176 3.673
5 or More
Bedrooms
.231 .317 .231 .548 .212 2.606 3.597
Section X
Dedication of Park Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
X 7
Attached Single-Family (Townhouse, Rowhouse, Qualriplex, etc.)
1 Bedroom
0 0 0 0 0 1.068 1.068
2 Bedrooms
.091 .094 .077 .171 .037 1.775 2.074
3 Bedrooms
.229 .212 .063 .275 .067 1.808 2.380
4 Bedrooms
.346 .321 .169 .490 .183 2.317 3.336
Apartments:
Efficiency
0 0 0 0 0 1.360 1.360
1 Bedroom
0 0 0 0 0 1.734 1.734
2 Bedrooms
.041 .080 .039 .119 .038 1.554 1.752
3 Bedrooms
.063 .203 .117 .320 .093 2.310 2.786
*This table was compiled by the Illinois School Consulting Services, Naperville,
Illinois, 1989.
2. Presumed Density Formula
In applying the above table of population density to a subdivision for which the types
of units and number of bedrooms cannot reasonably be determined from the data on
file with the Village at the time the application for final plat approval is complete, the
following types of units and bedroom data shall be used unless written objection is
filed thereto by the subdivider or developer:
Detached Single Family: Four Bedroom unit per lot.
Attached Single Family: Equal mix of two and three bedroom units at maximum
unit density permitted by applicable zoning.
Low Density Apartment: Equal mix of two and three bedroom units at maximum
unit density permitted by applicable zoning.
High Density Apartment: Equal mix of one and two bedroom units at maximum
unit density permitted by applicable zoning.
D. Reservation of Additional Land
Where the comprehensive plan of the Village calls for a larger amount of park and
recreational land in a particular proposed development, subdivision or planned unit
Section X
Dedication of Park Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
8 X
development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the
developer's contribution shall, if so determined by the Village Board, be designated by the
Village provided that such acquisition is made within one year for the date of approval of
the final plat.
E. Combining with Adjoining Developments
Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, public
open space which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications
for adjoining developments in order to produce sale recreation areas in park sites without
hardship on a particular developer.
F. Topography and Grading
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be
suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses
shall not differ greatly from surrounding land and shall be as outlined in the "Public Park
Site Standards" attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit A.
G. Improved Sites
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer
and streets (including enclosed drainage and curbs and gutter) as applicable to the location
of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor.
H. Title to Sites
All sites to be dedicated shall be conveyed to the Village either by warranty or trustee's
deed, or such form of conveyance as the Village shall require. The subdivider or developer
shall be responsible for conveying good, merchantable title to such sites, and shall be
responsible for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any
agricultural roll back taxes which might be extended or levied against such sites. In the
discretion of the Village, a commitment for title insurance issued by a company authorized
to do business in Illinois may be required as evidence of clear title. Conveyance shall occur
only after or simultaneously with the passage of an ordinance by the Park District in which
the development is located (or by the Village if the development is not located within a
Park District), in which it indicates that the property will be accepted by the Park District or
Village for park purposes. Immediately thereafter, the Village shall convey such property
to the Park District in which the property is located, if any.
I. Time for Dedication or Payment of Fees in-lieu Thereof
The dedication of park lands or payments of fees in lieu thereof shall be made by the owner
of land within ten days after the land is annexed to the Village or prior to or at the time of
the approval of the final plat of subdivision or in a final plat of planned unit development,
whichever is first to occur, except as otherwise provided in Section XA-B-3 hereof.
Section X
Dedication of Park Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
X 9
J. Expenditure of Cash Contributions
Any cash contributions received by Park District hereunder must be spent solely for land or
other improvements to be located entirely within the corporate limits of the Village of Burr
Ridge. (Lettered per Ordinance A-4-2-89)
K. Indemnification
Except as otherwise provided below, the affected Park Districts shall be required, as a
condition of receiving the donations hereunder, to indemnify and hold harmless the Village
of Burr Ridge from any loss, claims and causes of actions of every kind incurred by the
Village as a result, either directly or indirectly, of the passage oft his Ordinance, or the
administration or enforcement thereof, including any so incurred as a result of a lawsuit
brought or threatened by the affected Park Districts. If the Village is sued by any
subdivider or developer as a result, directly or indirectly, of the passage of this Ordinance,
the Village may, at its option, undertake the defense thereof but all costs and expenses of
such defense, including attorneys' fees, shall be immediately reimbursed by the affected
Park District. The Village may withhold delivery of any contribution to a Park District
pending compliance with these indemnity provisions.(Lettered per Ordinance A-4-2-89)
1. Where the Village receives land or fees in-lieu-thereof and fails to convey property to
the affected Park District or expends funds for Village use (i.e., police car, water
well) and suit is filed, the Village shall defend against such suit and pay for all costs
and expenses incurred from such suit, including attorneys' fees. (Numbered per
Ordinance A-4-2-89)
2. Where Park Districts improperly use funds or fail to use funds and do not return same
as specified in this Ordinance, the Village may sue the affected Park District and shall
be entitled to recover as part of the judgement therein, or any settlement thereof, all
costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the Village. (Numbered per
Ordinance A-41-2-89)
3. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the above indemnification provisions shall be
an implied condition of every intergovernmental contract entered into pursuant to this
Ordinance. (Numbered per Ordinance A-41-2-89)
L. Covenant Not to Sue
The affected Park Districts covenant and agree, in addition to the indemnification provided
in Section 5 of this Ordinance, not to sue the Village for any claim arising, directly or
indirectly, out of the passage of this Ordinance, or the administration or enforcement
thereof, except for a violation covered by Subsection A of Section 5. (Lettered per
Ordinance A-41-2-89)
XI 1
BURR RIDGE SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
SECTION XI
DEDICATION OF SCHOOL LAND OR
PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF
As a condition of approval of a final plat of development, a final plat of subdivision, or a final plat
of or Special Use permit for a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be
required to dedicate land for school purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents and children of the development, or make a cash contribution in-lieu-of actual land
dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the Village, in accordance with the following
criteria and formula:
A. CRITERIA FOR SCHOOL LAND DEDICATION:
1. REQUIREMENTS AND POPULATION RATIO. The ultimate density of a proposed
development, subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly upon the
amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication
requirement shall be determined in accordance with the data for the estimated number of
children entering school per type of dwelling found in the latest edition of the table
prepared by Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., which table is reproduced as a
density formula in Section Two C. hereof.
School Classifications and size of School sites within the Village shall be determined in
accordance with the following criteria based upon "Recommendations for Elementary
and High School Spaces." published by the Office of the Superintendent of Public
Instruction (now the State of Superintendent of Education), State of Illinois, Springfield,
Illinois:
School Classification Maximum number Minimum number
by grades of students of acres of land
Elementary 600 11
Junior High 900 29
Senior High 1500 45
2. LOCATION. The comprehensive plan of the Village, the comprehensive school plan or
facility utilization plan of the School District and the standards adopted by the School
District shall be considered in locating school sites. The location of dedicated school
sites shall be determined with the input of the school district involved. A central
location, which will serve equally the entire development, is most desirable. Additional
guidelines which shall be considered in locating sites include, but are not limited to, size
of the subdivisions, proximity of the site to other schools and municipal services,
topography and shape of the site, accessibility of the site, safety and other environmental
and use conditions.
Section XI
Dedication of School Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
2 XI
B. CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN-LIEU-OF SCHOOL LAND.
Where the subdivision or development is small and resulting school site is, in the opinion of
the Village, too small to be practical or when the available land, in the opinion of the Village,
after consultation with the affected school district, is inappropriate for school purposes, the
Village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in-lieu-of school
land dedication shall be paid to the Village which shall then pay said contributions over to the
school district and such contributions shall be held in trust by the school district in which the
development is located. Such contributions shall be expended solely for the acquisition of
land for school sites and/or the types of improvements of school land, as set forth in Section
IXB,B,2,a. below, which land and/or improvements will be available to serve the immediate
or future needs of the residents of that development, subdivision or planned unit development
or for the improvement of other existing local school land which already serves such needs.
The Village shall have the right to request and receive from the affected school districts annual
audit reports and any other information the Village may need from time to time to insure
compliance with this Ordinance. If development is within a school district that does not have
an intergovernmental agreement with the Village relating to the contributions collected
hereunder, the Village shall expend the funds for the construction of sidewalks between the
affected development and the school to which the children from said subdivision will attend.
If any portion of a cash contribution in-lieu-of school land dedication is not expended for the
purposes set forth herein within ten (10) years from the date of receipt, the school district (or
the Village if applicable) holding the funds shall refund such contribution to the owners of
record of all lots, except lots dedicated pursuant to the provision of this Ordinance, in the
development, subdivision, or planned unit development for which such contributions was
made. The refund shall be paid to the persons who are the owners of record on the day, which
is the tenth anniversary of the receipt of such contribution. The amount of the refund due to
each lot owner shall be equal to the amount of the original contribution, together with such
interest as may have been earned thereon, divided by the total number of lots in the
development, subdivision or planned unit development (excluding only those lots which were
dedicated pursuant to this Ordinance) for which such contribution was made.
1. ACQUISITION USING CASH IN-LIEU-OF SCHOOL LAND DONATIONS.
a. The term acquisition as used in this ordinance shall mean - the acquiring of land by
purchase, condemnation or such other means as may be appropriate.
b. The acquired land shall be used for the construction of new facilities or shall
support the types of improvements as set forth in Section Two B.2. a below.
2. IMPROVEMENT USING CASH IN-LIEU-OF SCHOOL LAND DONATIONS.
Where existing school lands will serve the needs of the development, the cash
contribution in-lieu-of land dedication shall be used for the following types of physical
improvements: Expansion of existing school facilities, additions to existing facilities
and additions to school grounds and environment.
Section XI
Dedication of School or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
XI 3
3. FAIR MARKET VALUE. The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the
sum of the fair market value of a vacant, unimproved, and unsubdivided acre of land in
the Village and the estimate of the Village Engineer as to the cost of improving such
land with electrical utilities, water, sewer, and streets, including enclosed drainage and
curbs and gutters, and all other improvements required under this Subdivision
Regulations Ordinance. All cash contribution calculations shall be made by the Village,
and the affected school districts shall refer all developers to the Village for such
calculations. It has been determined that the fair market value of a vacant, unimproved,
and unsubdivided acre of land in and surrounding the Village is $105,000 as of April
26, 2004; increasing to $155,000 for all plats approved on or after May 1, 2005; and
increasing to $239,000 for all plats approved on or after January 1, 2006. The
estimate of the Village Engineer as to the cost of improvements is $45,000, for a
combined total of $150,000 as of April 26, 2004; increasing to $200,000 on May 1,
2005, and increasing to $284,000 on January 1, 2006; and such figure of $150,000,
$200,000, and $250,000 respectively, shall be used in making any calculation herein
unless the subdivider, developer, or the affected school district files a written objection
thereto. In the event of any such objection, the developer shall, at his cost and by a
Member of Appraisal Institute (M.A.I.), submit an appraisal showing the "fair market
value" of the land in the development or other evidence thereof and final determination
of said "fair market value" per acre of such vacant, unimproved, and unsubdivided land
shall be made by the Village Board based upon such information submitted by the
subdivider or developer or school district and from other sources which may be
submitted to the Village Board by others. The Village on its own motion or at the
request of others may from time to time amend this provision to provide for different
fair market values for parcels that are deemed by others and the Village to be of greater
or lesser value. Refer to Appendices VIII-A to VIII-I.
(Amended by Ord. A-894-01-04; further amended by Ord. A-894-01-05)
Cash contributions shall be paid at the time set forth in Section IXB, J, provided,
however, an owner may on written request to the Village submitted at the time of
application for approval of a final plat, pay one half of the required contribution at the
time of final plat approval with the balance to be paid six months after the date of final
plat approval provided the balance due is secured by an irrevocable letter of credit in a
form and from an issuer approved by the Village at the time of final plat approval. If the
developer so chooses to pay the required contribution in two installments, the amount of
second installment shall be based on the then current price per acre of land and
Engineer's estimate of cost of improvements as computed hereunder (for example, if the
figure is $144,600 at the time of final plat approval but is changed within the next six
months to $120,000, the second installment shall be determined by recomputing the
entire contribution on the basis of $120,000 per acre and then dividing that amount by
two).
4. CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING DEDICATION AND A FEE. There may be situations
when both a land dedication and a cash contribution are necessary. These occasions
may arise, among others, when:
a. If it is determined by the Village that the land to be dedicated for a school site
Section XI
Dedication of School Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
4 XI
within a development contains fewer acres than the amount called for by this
ordinance, a cash contribution shall be required for the difference between the
amount of land called for by this ordinance and the amount of land which is
actually to be dedicated.
b. If a major part of a local school site has already been acquired and only a small
portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site, the remaining
portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution for the difference
is required.
C. DENSITY FORMULA. The following table of population density is generally indicative of
current and short range projected trends in family size for a new construction and shall be used
in calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contribution inlieu-
of unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or developer:
1. OBJECTIONS TO DENSITY FORMULA. In the event a subdivider, developer or
School District involved files a written objection to the Table of Estimated Ultimate
Population listed herein and submits his own demographic study showing the estimated
additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit development,
a final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be
made by the Village Board based upon such demographic information as the Village
shall require. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local
conditions change over the years, and the specific formula for the dedication of land, or
the payment of fees in-lieu-thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and
amendment if necessary.
2. PRESUMED DENSITY FORMULA. In applying the above table of population density
to a subdivision for which the types of units and number of bedrooms cannot reasonably
be determined from the data on file with the Village at the time the application for final
plat approval is complete, the following types of units and bedroom data shall be used
unless written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider, developer, or School District.
Detached Single Family: Four Bedroom unit per lot.
Attached Single Family: Equal mix of two and three bedroom units at
maximum unit density permitted by
applicable zoning.
Low Density Apartment: Equal mix off two and three bedroom units at
maximum unit density permitted by
applicable zoning.
High Density Apartment: Equal mix of one and two bedroom units at
maximum unit density permitted by
applicable zoning.
Section XI
Dedication of School or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
XI 5
D. RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND. Where the comprehensive plan of the
Village calls for a larger amount of school land in a particular proposed development,
subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land
needed beyond the developer's contribution shall, if so determined by the Village Board, be
reserved for subsequent purchase by the Village or other public body be reserved for
subsequent purchase by the Village or other public body designated by the Village provided
that such acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the final plat.
E. COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS. Where the subdivision or
planned unit development is less than forty (40) acres, school space which is to be dedicated
should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order
to produce usable recreation areas or school sites without hardship on a particular developer.
F. TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING. The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated
site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites
dedicated for school uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land.
G. IMPROVED SITES. All sites shall be dedicated fully improved with streets, water, sewer,
enclosed drainage, curbs and gutter and in a condition ready for full electrical and gas service,
as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor.
H. TITLE TO SITES. All sites to be dedicated shall be conveyed to the Village either by
warranty or trustee's deed, or such form of conveyance as the Village shall require. The
subdivider or developer shall be responsible for conveying good, merchantable title to such
sites, and shall be responsible for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance,
including any agricultural roll back taxes which might be extended or levied against such
sites. In the discretion of the Village, a commitment for title insurance issued by a company
authorized to do business in Illinois may be required as evidence of clear title. Conveyance
shall occur only after or simultaneously with the passage of a resolution by the School District
in which the development is located in which it indicates that the property will be accepted by
the School District for school purposes. Immediately thereafter, the Village shall convey such
property to the Regional Board of School Trustees, or the Trustees of Schools of Township
Number 38 North, Range 12 East, for the use and benefit of the appropriate School District,
whichever is applicable.
I. TIME FOR DEDICATION OR PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF. The
dedication of school lands or payments of fees in lieu thereof shall be made by the owner of
land within ten days after the land is annexed to the Village or prior to or at the time of the
approval of the final plat of subdivision, or a final plat of a planed unit development,
whichever is first to occur, except as otherwise provided in Section IXB-B-3 hereof.
(Relettered and Amended by A-41-2-89)
J. EXPENDITURE OF CASH CONTRIBUTIONS. Any School District which has a school
building located within the corporate limits of the Village may receive cash contributions
hereunder, such contributions to be utilized in accordance with Section 2.B.2.a. of this
Ordinance only at the School District's building to which children residing in the Village are
assigned.
Section XI
Dedication of School Land or Payment of Fees in lieu Thereof
6 XI
K. INDEMNIFICATION. Except as otherwise provided below, the affected School Districts
shall be required, as a condition of receiving the donations hereunder, to indemnify and hold
harmless the Village of Burr Ridge from any loss, claims and causes of actions of every kind
incurred by the Village as a result, either directly or indirectly, of the passage of this
Ordinance, or the administration or enforcement thereof, including any so incurred as a result
of a lawsuit brought or threatened by the affected School Districts. If the Village is sued by
any subdivider or developer as a result, directly or indirectly, of the passage of this Ordinance,
the Village may, at its option, undertake the defense, including attorneys' fees, shall be
immediately reimbursed by the affected School District. The Village may withhold delivery
of any contribution to a School District pending compliance with these indemnity provisions.
1. Where the Village receives land or fees in-lieu-thereof and fails to convey property to
the affected School District or expends funds for Village use (i.e., police car, water well)
and suit is filed, the Village shall defend against such suit and bear its own costs and
expenses incurred for such suit, including attorneys' fees.
2. Where School Districts improperly use funds or fail to use funds and do not return same
as specified in this Ordinance, the Village may sue the affected School District and shall
be entitled to recover as a part of the judgement therein, or any settlement thereof, all
costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the Village.
3. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the above indemnification provisions shall be an
implied condition of every intergovernmental contract entered into pursuant to this
Ordinance.
L. COVENANT NOT TO SUE. The affected School Districts covenant and agree, in addition
to the indemnification provided in Section 5 of this Ordinance, not to sue the Village for any
claim arising, directly or indirectly, out of the passage of this Ordinance, or the administration
or enforcement thereof, except for a violation covered by Subsection A of Section 5.
Basis = 1
SCHOOL DONATION
Elementary = 0.474 x 1 = 0.474 children = x x = 0.0087 acres
600 children 11 acres
Jr. High = 0.303 x 1 = 0.303 children = x x = 0.0098 acres
900 children 29 acres
0.0087 + 0.0098 = 0.0185 $284,000.00 x 0.0185 = $5,254.00
Sr. High = 0.307 x 1 = 0.307 children = x x = 0.0092 acres
1500 children 45 acres
$284,000 x 0.0092 $2,612.80
Elementary & Jr. High = $5,254.00
Sr. High = $2,612.80
Total School Donation = $7,866.80
APPENDIX VIII - A
SCHOOL DONATION CALCULATIONS
Effective January 1, 2006
(Total Number of Lots)
Single-Family Residential
Basis = 1 (Total Number of Lots)
Zoning R-2B or R-3
PARK DONATION
1 x 3.673 = 3.673 persons (4 bedroom homes)
0.01 acres per person x 3.673 persons = 0.0367 acres
$284,000.00 x 0.037 = $10,422.80
Basis = 1 (Total Number of Lots)
Zoning R-1, R-2, or R-2A
PARK DONATION
1 x 3.673 = 3.673 persons (4 bedroom homes)
0.0055 acres per person x 3.673 persons = 0.0202 acres
$284,000.00 x 0.02 = $5,736.80
APPENDIX VIII-B
PARK DONATION CALCULATIONS
Single-Family Residential
Effective January 1, 2006
Basis = 2
1 2-bedroom
1 3-bedroom
SCHOOL DONATION
Elementary = 0.094 x 1 = 0.094 children = x x = 0.002 acres
600 children 11 acres
Jr. High = 0.077 x 1 = 0.077 children = x x = 0.003 acres
900 children 29 acres
Sr. High = 0.037 x 1 = 0.037 children = x x = 0.001 acres
1500 children 45 acres
2-Bedroom Units 0.0017 + 0.003 + 0.0011 = $284,000.00 x 0.005 = $1,505.20
Elementary = 0.212 x 1 = 0.212 children = x x = 0.004 acres
600 children 11 acres
Jr. High = 0.063 x 1 = 0.063 children = x x = 0.002 acres
900 children 29 acres
Sr. High = 0.067 x 1 = 0.067 children = x x = 0.002 acres
1500 children 45 acres
3-Bedroom Units 0.0039 + 0.002 + 0.002 = $284,000.00 x 0.008 = $2,243.60
$3,748.80
1 x 2.074 = 2.074 persons in 2-bedroom units
0.01 acres per person x 2.074 persons = 0.0207 acres
1 x 2.38 = 2.38 persons in 3-bedroom units
0.01 acres per person x 2.38 persons = 0.0238 acres
0.0207 + 0.024 = 0.0445 $284,000.00 x 0.045 = $12,638.00
TOTAL SCHOOL DONATION
PARK DONATION
APPENDIX VIII-C
SCHOOL AND PARK DONATION CALCULATIONS
ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (TOWNHOMES)
Effective January 1, 2006
0.0053
0.0079
Basis = 1 Multi-Family Residential (MFR) Dwelling Unit with 1.5 Bedrooms Per Unit
Children Per Unit No. of Units
Elementary = 0.04 x 1 = 0.04 children = x x = 0.0007 acres
600 children 11 acres
Jr. High = 0.0195 x 1 = 0.02 children = x x = 0.0006 acres
900 children 29 acres
Sr. High = 0.019 x 1 = 0.019 children = x x = 0.0006 acres
1500 children 45 acres
Total Acres Required x Cost Per Acre: $284,000.00 x 0.0019 = $539.60
$539.60
No. of Units Population Per Unit
1 x 1.743 = 1.743 persons in equal mix of 1 and 2-bedroom units
Required Park Land: 0.01 acres of park land requried per person x 1.743 persons = 0.0174 acres of required park land
Land Value Per Acre x Total Acres Required: $284,000.00 x 0.0174 = $4,941.60
TOTAL PARK DONATION FOR MFR BASED ON EQUAL MIX OF 1 & 2 BEDROOM UNITS: $4,941.60
Equalizing Factor Total Acres Required
TOTAL SCHOOL DONATION FOR MFR BASED ON EQUAL MIX OF 1 & 2 BEDROOM UNITS:
PARK DONATION
Total Population =
APPENDIX VIII-D
SCHOOL ANDPARK DONATION CALCULATIONS
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
Effective January 1, 2006
Children Per Unit and Total Population Per Unit Are Based on an Equal Mix of One and Two Bedroom Units
SCHOOL DONATION
VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE
BUILDING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE #1124
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES ON
NOVEMBER 26, 2012 AND
EFFECTIVE AS OF JANUARY 1, 2013
AMENDED AS OF FEBRUARY 13, 2017
VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO BUILDINGS
C O N T E N T S
Article I - Enactment
101. Name of Ordinance
102. Purpose of Ordinance
103. Nature of Ordinance
104. Application of Ordinance
105. Provisions and Requirements of Ordinance
Article II - Administration and Supervision
201. Building Commissioner
202. Duties of Building Commissioner
203. Deputy Building Commissioners
204. Short Title for Building Commissioner and Deputy Building
Commissioners
205. Building Officers May Enter Premises
206. Personal Liability of Building Officers
219. Public Improvement Required Prior to Permit
220. Building Permit Required
221. Permit Waived for Ordinary Repairs
222. Duration of Building Permits
223. Extension of Building Permits
224. Issuance of Permits
225. Application for Permits
226. Landscaping Plans
240. Plans and Specifications to be Filed in Duplicate
241. Plans and Specifications - Essential Requirements
242. Architect, Structural Engineer, or Licensed Design Professional Must
Certify that Plans Comply . . .
243. Alterations Upon Stamped Plans Not Permitted
244. Permit, Plans, and Specifications Must be Kept on the Job
245. Plans and Specifications to Remain on File
246. Code of Conduct and Permit Sign
250. Fees for Building Permits
251. When Permit is Valid
260. Constructing Buildings Contrary to Approved Plans - Permit Made
Void by Deviation from Plans - Power to Stop Work
261. Revocation of Permit
269. Inspection
270. Foundation Location and Elevation Spot Survey
271. Engineering Fees
272. Certification of Occupancy - Single Family Residential
273. Certification of Occupancy - Other Than Single Family Residential
274. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy – Other Than Single Family Residential
275. Cash Performance Bond Requirements
276. Increased Fee for Work Started Without a Permit
Article III - Miscellaneous
301. Occupancy of Street
302. Driveways
303. Right to Complete Buildings Under Outstanding Permits
304. Building Changed or Repaired Must Comply with Ordinance
305. Construction Materials and Methods
306. Moving or Wrecking Buildings
307. Elevator and Escalator Inspections and Fees
308. Surface and Sub-Surface Water Drainage
309. Prohibited Times for Outside Construction
310. Soil Erosion Control Requirements
311. Water Meters
312. Dumpsters on Construction Sites
313. Temporary Sanitation Facilities on Construction Sites
314. Street and Site Maintenance
315. Swimming Pools
316. Construction Fencing
317. Depressed or Cut Curb Required for New Driveways
Article IV - Compliance and Enforcement
401. Compliance with Building Ordinance Necessary
402. Building Contrary to Building Ordinance a Nuisance
403. Deviations of Violations, if Found - Procedure
404. Work May be Stopped - Permit Cancelled
405. Persons Subject to Penalty - Nature of Penalty
Article V - General Penalty
501. General Penalty
Article VI - Construction of Ordinance
601. Conflicts Between General and Specific Provisions
602. Invalidity of One Portion of Ordinance Shall Not Affect Remainder
Article VII - Adoption of Regulations
701. Building Regulations Adopted
I 1
BURR RIDGE BUILDING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
ENACTMENT
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE AS FOLLOWS:
101. Name of Ordinance The name of this ordinance shall be "Building Ordinance." It
may be cited as such for all purposes, without reference to the respective Articles.
102. Purpose of Ordinance The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish rules and
regulations for constructing, erecting, enlarging, remodeling, altering, repairing,
raising, lowering, underpinning, moving or wrecking, change of use as defined in
the building code, of buildings, structures, or portions thereof. The ordinance
serves to regulate the location, equipment, use and occupancy thereof, in order to
promote public health and safety and to do substantial justice.
103. Nature of Ordinance This Ordinance is intended to be remedial and to be construed
liberally and justly to secure the beneficial aim and purpose thereof.
104. Application of Ordinance This Ordinance shall apply to all buildings, structures, or
portions thereof in the said Village of Burr Ridge, federal and state buildings, and
possessions being excepted.
105 Provisions and Requirements of Ordinance The following articles and their
several sections contain and shall constitute the provisions and requirements of the
Building Ordinance.
1 II
BURR RIDGE BUILDING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION
201. Building Commissioner There is hereby created and established the Office of
Building Commissioner. The official shall be appointed by the President by and with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees in the same manner and for the same
term as other Village Officials are appointed. The official shall receive such
compensation as the President and Board of Trustees shall from time to time approve.
The official may be removed from office at any time either (a) by the President with
the consent of the Board of Trustees, or (b) by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of
the Board of Trustees in favor of such removal.
202. Duties of Building Commissioner The duties of the Building Commissioner shall
be (a) to have general charge and supervision of the erection, construction, alteration,
repair, removal, and inspection of all buildings, walls, structures, or portions thereof,
and accessories thereto within the Village and to enforce all ordinances relating
thereto. (b) The Building Commissioner shall examine and approve/disapprove all
plans for building permit purposes. The official shall have charge of building
inspections on all buildings, structures, or portions thereof in connection with work
that has been authorized by a permit. (c) The Building Commissioner shall perform
such further duties, as the Building Ordinance requires.
203. Deputy Building Commissioners The Building Commissioner may appoint one or
more Deputy Building Commissioners with the consent and approval of the
President. They shall hold office for such periods as may be designated in their
appointment but not to exceed the term of the Building Commissioner. They shall
receive such compensation as may be approved by the President by and with the
consent of the Board of Trustees. They shall assist the Building Commissioner in the
performance of the official's duties.
204. Short Title for Building Commissioner and Deputy Building Commissioners
The title or phrase "Building Officers" when used in the Building Ordinances shall
mean and include the Building Commissioner and the Deputy Building
Commissioners as fully and effectively as if each and all of said officers were
specifically designated and named in lieu of the title or phrase.
205. Building Officers May Enter Premises Building Officers are hereby empowered to
lawfully enter upon any premises or into any building or structure or portion thereof
(upon showing their badge of office or other identification) when necessary to do so
in the performance of any duty imposed upon them by the Building Ordinance. It is
hereby made unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or prevent or to attempt to
hinder or prevent Building Officers from so doing.
Any person or persons hindering or attempting to hinder, resisting or attempting to
resist any Building Officer in the performance of duty shall be charged with resisting
Article II
Administration and Supervision
2 II
an Officer. The person or persons convicted of such offense shall be subject to the
general penalty provided for violations of the Building Ordinance.
206. Personal Liability of Building Officers In all cases where any action is taken by the
Building Officers, or any other officers of the said Village, to enforce the provisions
of any of the sections in the Building Ordinance, or to enforce the Provisions of any
of the laws of said Village (whether such action is taken in pursuance of the express
provisions of such sections or laws, or in a case where discretionary power is given
by the Building Ordinance, or said laws), such acts shall be done in the name of, and
on behalf of, the said Village of Burr Ridge and the said officers, in so acting for said
Village, do not thereby render themselves liable personally, and they are hereby
relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of such act committed or permitted (in good faith) in the
discharge of their duty, and any suit brought against the said officers by reason
thereof shall be defended by the Law Department of the said Village until final
termination of the proceedings therein.
219. Public Improvement Required Prior to Permit All building permits shall carry
with them the condition that no occupancy of the building subject to the permit will
be permitted until such time as all land improvements required under the Subdivision
Ordinance of this Village, as amended have been substantially completed as required
by said Subdivision Ordinance.
If the property for which a permit is being sought is not subject to the Subdivision
Ordinance of this Village, the building permit shall carry with it a condition that no
occupancy of the building subject to the permit will be permitted until such time as
the water main, public sewer and any other required land improvement, has been
completed as required by the Ordinances of the Village and as approved by the
Village Engineer.
All building permits issued prior to completion of said land improvements shall
include a statement signed by the owners of the property involved or an authorized
representative of the owner as follows:
"As owners of the property described in the building permit, the undersigned
hereby acknowledge and accept the condition that no occupancy of the
building to be constructed thereon will be permitted, no Certificate of
Occupancy issued, until such time as all land improvements required under
the Subdivision Ordinance of this Village, as amended, and/or any other
Ordinances of the Village of Burr Ridge have been installed, except street
and alley improvements as therein required may be in the process of
installation, provided that roadway pavement base course has been installed
and is suitable for vehicular traffic."
220. Building Permit Required It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to commence or to perform or engage in any work in connection with the
construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering,
Article II
Administration and Supervision
3 II
underpinning, change of use, moving or wrecking of any building, structure, or
portion thereof without having first made application to and secured the necessary
permit therefore. Any person, firm or corporation so doing shall be subject to the
general penalty for violation of the Building Ordinance. The building permit shall
carry with it the right to install any crane, derrick, material elevator, heating or
lighting apparatus, inside the lot line which may be required for temporary use during
the progress of the work.
There is miscellaneous type work such as concrete patios, landscaping without grade
changes and repairs (see Section 221) which will not require a building permit. The
Building Commissioner shall inspect any such projects and make the final decision as
to the applicability of this section. It is the obligation of the property owner or their
agent to consult with the Building Commissioner to determine the application of this
section.
221. Permit Waived for Ordinary Repairs A permit will not be demanded for ordinary
repair work incidental to the upkeep of a building or structure, provided there is not
contemplated or involved any change in the classification or any increase in the fire
hazard thereof. The Building Commissioner shall make the final determination as to
the meaning of “ordinary repair work.” Nothing in this section contained shall be
interpreted or construed to allow any work included in the permit exemptions thereof
to be done in any manner contrary to the requirements of the Building Ordinance and
other laws or ordinances. Violations of said Ordinance in any work not required to
be done under a permit shall be subject to the general penalty of said Ordinance the
same as if a permit has been required.
222. Duration of Building Permits
222.1 Any building permit approved pursuant to this Ordinance under which the
building permit fee has not been paid in full within three (3) months from the
date of approval, shall expire automatically by date of approval of the
Building Commissioner; and the fees paid therefore, if any, shall be forfeited
to the Village.
222.2 Any building permit issued pursuant to this ordinance under which no
substantial progress shall have been made within six (6) months from the date
of issuance thereof shall expire automatically by limitation and may not be
extended or renewed without the written approval of the Building
Commissioner; and unless such permit is surrendered to the Village Clerk
within two (2) months after its expiration for such cause the fees paid
therefore shall be forfeited to the Village. However, under any circumstances
the Plan Exam fee will not be returned.
222.3 Any building permit issued hereunder shall expire automatically upon
cessation of work for more than two months. A cessation of work shall be
deemed to have occurred in any case where for any such period no substantial
progress has been made in the work for which a permit has been issued and
all fees paid shall be forfeited to the Village.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
4 II
222.4 A building project shall be considered abandoned if no significant progress
has been made for a period of six (6) months or more. A building,
structure, or part thereof so abandoned shall be declared a public nuisance
by the Building Commissioner and the Board of Trustees and shall be dealt
with accordingly.
222.5 Substantial progress for purposes of this ordinance shall be defined as the
amount of work a journey tradesperson can perform in one week.
222.6 A building permit for a single-family residence, single-family residential
room addition, or a building or structure accessory to a single-family
residence shall expire automatically if all exterior work is not completed
within one year from the date of the first scheduled footing inspection as
per Section 269.2 herein or within one year from the issuance of a permit if
there is no footing inspection. Exterior work shall include, but not be
limited to the following:
222.6.1 The exterior façade, including but not limited to doors,
windows, and siding, the roof of the building, paving of
driveway(s), final grading, and required landscaping;
222.6.2 Removal from the exterior of the property of all construction
fencing and unneeded appurtenances including building
materials, construction trailers and equipment, and
construction fencing. Dumpsters and portable sanitation
facilities may remain on the site as may be needed but shall be
moved to a hardsurfaced area or inside a garage whenever
possible. (Added by Ord. A-860-1-02)
222.7 A building permit that has or will expire as per Section 222.6 above, may be
extended as follows:
222.7.1 Completion of landscaping and driveways may be extended
without further action when the deadline for completion falls
between October 16 and March 31 as per Section 272.8
herein.
222.7.2 The Building Commissioner may grant up to four, 90-day
extensions upon written request by the permit applicant and
payment of an extension fee as per Section 222.7.3 below.
222.7.3 For each extension granted as per Section 222.7.2 above, an
extension fee shall be paid as follows:
Article II
Administration and Supervision
5 II
Work Remaining Fee*
First 90-day Extension Site Improvements**,
Only 25%
First 90-day Extension Building w/or w/o Site
Improvements 50%
Second 90-day Extension Site Improvements**,
Only 25%
Second 90-day Extension Building w/or w/o Site
Improvements 50%
Third 90-day Extension Site Improvements or
Building 50%
Fourth 90-day Extension Site Improvements or
Building 50%
*
**
Percent of Building Permit Fee
Site Improvements include walks, drives,
grading, ground cover, and removal of silt
fencing, dumpsters, and other outside
construction appurtenances
(Amended by Ord. A-860-04-03)
223. Extension of Building Permits Upon payment of 10% of the original building
permit fee, building permits for buildings or structures upon which work has been
commenced may be once extended for a period not exceeding six (6) months.
Provided said extension is requested within six (6) months after expiration and that
the work complies with the building codes in effect at the time of the extension.
Permits for which work has not begun also may be extended once for up to six (6)
months upon payment of 10% of the original building permit fee and subject to
compliance with building codes in effect at the time of such extension.
224. Issuance of Permits Permits authorized to be issued and required to be obtained
under the Building Ordinance shall be issued by the Building Commissioner when
the application therefore and the plans submitted therewith shall have been approved
by the Building Commissioner and all fees have been paid.
225. Application for Permits When any person, firm, or corporation shall be desirous of
constructing, erecting, enlarging, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering,
underpinning, moving, changing the use as defined by the building code, or wrecking
any building structure, or portion thereof, the Village shall make a written application
therefore upon the blank forms furnished for such purpose. This application shall be
filed with the Building Commissioner and shall set forth the following:
225.1 The name, telephone number, fax number, and address of the applicant.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
6 II
225.2 The name, telephone number, fax number, and address of the architect,
structural engineer, or other licensed design professional permitted by the
laws of the State to make plans who has prepared the plans and specifications
accompanying the application.
225.3 The name, telephone number, fax number, and address of the owner of the
real estate upon which the proposed work is to be performed.
225.4 The name, telephone number, fax number, and addresses of the general
contractor.
225.5 The location of the proposed work, that is, the street address assigned by the
Village, the subdivision, lot number, and township of the subject property.
225.6 The type of work the applicant is seeking permission for.
225.7 The permanent index number of the real estate upon which the proposed
work is to be performed.
225.8 The application shall be accompanied by duplicate plans, specifications, and
plats as specified in Section 240, drawn to scale, of the lot or lots composing
the site, showing the exact location of the proposed building and any
buildings and also septic systems and wells already located on the lot or lots
involved. The application shall also be accompanied by plans and
specifications signed and sealed in the manner hereinafter required by Section
242 of this Ordinance, and by an exact legal description of the property
involved.
225.9 An agreement signed by the owner, his duly authorized agent, architect, or
structural engineer that he will, if granted the permit applied for, construct the
work in accordance with the description set forth in the applications and plans
and specifications accompanying such applications; and that the general and
detailed work connected with such construction, erection, enlargement,
remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering, underpinning, moving,
changing of use as defined by the building code, or wrecking or any such
building structure or portion thereof, as the case may be, shall be done in
strict compliance with the ordinance of the Village and the provisions of the
permit.
225.10 The purpose of this regulation is to protect existing property, to enhance the
general appearance of the community, to protect the individual from making
construction errors, and to aid in general drainage of all properties in the area.
225.10.1 Grade Line. The grade line noted on the architectural
elevation drawings shall be a line where the ground line
intersects the foundation.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
7 II
225.10.2 Approval by Village Engineer. The grade line is at a point,
which is established by the Village Engineer in accordance
with the approved master grading plan.
225.11 Whenever an application for a permit is made to the Building Commissioner
for property served by the Hinsdale Sanitary District, such application shall
be accompanied by a receipt issued by the Hinsdale Sanitary District showing
that all payments required by the Hinsdale Sanitary District for connection of
said property to the sanitary sewers of the Hinsdale Sanitary District have
been paid in full.
225.12 Whenever an application is made to the Village Clerk for property in the Du
Page portion of the Village, such application shall be accompanied by proof
of compliance with the applicable provisions set forth in Chapter 8 of the
Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
226. Landscaping Plans For any building to be constructed in a Business District,
Transitional District, Office District, or Manufacturing District, the application for
permit shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of detailed landscaping plans to
indicate conformance with the requirements of any approved site plan and the
requirements of the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, as amended, pertaining to the
landscaping of all required yards or other required open spaces and to buffer
landscaping. Landscaping plans shall indicate location, number, size, and species of
all proposed landscaping materials. The Village Forester must approve landscaping
plans.
Once installed, approved landscaping shall be maintained in such manner as to retain
at a minimum the intended standards of the initial landscaping plan and to conform to
the landscaping requirements of the Village.
240. Plans and Specifications to be Filed in Duplicate The number of drawings to be
submitted for residential shall be four (4) sets, maximum size of 24” x 36”. The
number of drawings to be submitted for industrial, commercial, and multi-family
shall be five (5) sets, maximum size of 30” x 48”. Each set of drawings shall consist
of a site plan showing dimensions to all property lines, foundation and footing plan,
basement or cellar plan, the plans of all floors and roofs, transverse and longitudinal
sections necessary to show all details to verify building, zoning, and floor area ratio
requirements, elevations, and the necessary framing plans to show the complete
framing of the building or structure. Such other plans shall be filed as may be
required in the opinion of the Building Commissioner to illustrate the features of construction
and equipment of the building structure referred to.
241. Plans and Specifications – Essential Requirements All plans and drawings shall
be drawn to a legible scale. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured
and drawings made explicit and complete showing the front and side lot lines and the
entire sewage and drain pipes and the location of all plumbing fixtures within such
building. The dimensions of the structural members shall be given on the drawings
Article II
Administration and Supervision
8 II
whether shown in the specifications or not. The specifications shall describe all the
materials to be used in the proposed building. The Building Commissioner shall
approve each set of plans presented before a permit will be granted.
242. Architect, Structural Engineer, or Licensed Design Professional Must Certify
that Plans and Specifications Comply with the Building Ordinance By Signing
and Sealing It shall be unlawful for any architect, structural engineer, or any other
licensed design professional to prepare or submit to the Building Commissioner for
his approval any final plans for any building or structure which do not comply with
all of the provisions of this Building Ordinance and all other applicable laws and
ordinances specifically including but not limited to the Burr Ridge Zoning
Ordinance. Any plans submitted under this Ordinance shall bear the signature and
seal of the architect, structural engineer, or other licensed design professional who
prepared the plans and specifications. A seal will not be required where the Building
Commissioner determines the work to be non-structural or minor in nature.
Every licensed architect or structural engineer shall have a reproducible seal, or
facsimile, the print of which shall contain the name of the architect or structural
engineer, the license number, and the words “Licensed Architect,” or “Structural
Engineer,” “State of Illinois.” The licensed architect or structural engineer shall affix
the signature, current date, date of license expiration, and seal to the first sheet of any
bound set or loose sheets of technical submissions utilized as contract documents
between the parties to the contract or prepared for the review and approval of any
governmental or public authority having jurisdiction by that licensed architect or
structural engineer or under that licensed architect’s or structural engineer’s
responsible control. The sheet of technical submissions in which the seal is affixed
shall indicate those documents or parts thereof for which the seal shall apply. The
seal and dates may be electronically affixed. The signature must be in the original
handwriting of the licensee. Signatures generated by computer shall not be
permitted. All technical submissions issued by any corporation, partnership,
professional service corporation, or professional design firm as registered under this
Act shall contain the corporate or assumed business name and design firm
registration number, in addition to any other seal requirements as set forth by the
Illinois Department of Professional Regulation.
Anyone falsely making any such certification shall be subject to the penalty provided
in Section 501 (Article V) of this Ordinance and to such further penalties as may be
provided or allowed by law.
243. Alterations Upon Stamped Plans Not Permitted It shall be unlawful to erase,
alter, or modify any lines, figures, or coloring contained upon such drawings so
stamped by the Building Commissioner or filed with him for reference. If, during the
progress of the work authorized, it is desired to deviate in any manner affecting the
construction or other essentials of the building from the terms of the application or
drawings, notice of such intention to later on deviate shall be given to the Building
Commissioner, and written consent of the Building Commissioner shall first be
obtained before such alteration or deviation may be made.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
9 II
244. Permit, Plans, and Specifications Must be Kept on the Job The permit issued for
any work to which the Building Ordinance is applicable, together with a set of the
approved plans and specifications, if any, must be kept on the job while the work is in
progress, and must be shown for inspection on request of any Building Officers.
Inability or refusal to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute
sufficient cause for stopping either all or such portion of the work as may be involved
in the violation.
245. Plans and Specifications to Remain on File One or more copies, as may be
required by the Building Commissioner, of the plans and specifications as finally
stamped and approved shall be left on file in the office of said Commissioner.
Complete plans and specifications of buildings of a public character for which
permits are granted shall remain on file permanently in said Commissioner’s office.
It shall not be obligatory upon said Commissioner to retain plans and specifications
for buildings or structures except those of a public character for more than six months
after the completion or occupation of any such building or structure.
246. Code of Conduct and Permit Sign All job sites on which exterior construction
work is being conducted, such as new residential or non-residential buildings or
building additions, shall maintain a Code of Conduct and Permit sign to be provided
by the Building Officer and in a location designated by the Building Officer. Said
sign shall comply with the following:
246.1 Visibility of the sign shall be maintained at all times. At no time shall
materials, dumpsters, equipment, vehicles, or other appurtenances be placed
so as to block the view of the sign from the public way.
246.2 If the sign becomes lost or damaged at any time, the permit applicant shall
immediately contact the Building Officer and request a replacement sign.
The original fee for the sign shall be kept by the Village, and a new sign fee
paid by the permit applicant.
250. Fees for Building Permits All work subject to a building permit as defined in
Section 220 herein shall be subject to building permit fees. Applications for
building permits shall be accompanied by an application fee as described herein.
There shall be no application fee required for permits unless said fee is specifically
listed below. The Building Commissioner shall not issue a building permit until
such time that all required building permit fees have been paid in full. (All of
Section 250 amended by Ordinance A-1124-01-17)
250.1 Application Fee for New Construction, Additions, and Alterations The
following application fee, which will be credited to the final building permit
fee, but which will in all cases be the minimum fee, shall be paid at the time
plans for the following types of construction are submitted for review:
Article II
Administration and Supervision
10 II
250.1.1 New single-family residence $1,000
250.1.2 Single-family residential addition $600
Single family residential alteration $200
250.1.3 New non-single-family residential building $2,000
250.1.4 New non-single-family residential building addition $1,000
250.1.5 New non-single-family residential building alteration $650
250.1.6 If for whatever reason a permit is not issued, a permit applicant
shall be responsible for any plan review costs incurred by the
Village beyond the amount of the application fee.
(Amended by Ordinance A-1002-02-07)
250.2 Landscaping Plan Review Fee
250.2.1 Non-Single-Family Residential
In addition to all other fees herein, the following plan review fees shall be
required in connection with the construction of any building in a Business
District, Transitional District, Office District, or Manufacturing District.
250.2.1.1 Building lots of 3.5 acres or less $300
250.2.1.1 Building lots greater than 3.5
acres through 6 acres
$250
250.2.1.3 Building lots exceeding 6 acres $500
250.2.1.4 Any direct expenses incurred by the Building
Commissioner that exceed the landscaping plan
review fee shall be paid in full by the permit
applicant.
(Ord. A-1002-01-06)
250.2.2 Single-Family Residential
In addition to all other fees herein, the following plan review fees
shall be required in connection with the construction of any
single-family residence on a wooded lot.
250.2.2.1 Partially Wooded Lot $335
250.2.2.1 Heavily Wooded Lot $600
250.2.2.3 The Building Commissioner shall
determine whether a lot is partially wooded
or heavily wooded.
(Amended by Ordinance No.A-1002-01-06)
Article II
Administration and Supervision
11 II
250.3 Single-Family Residential Building Permit Fees No building permit for
the construction of a new single-family residence or for an addition or
alteration to a single-family residence shall be issued until a building permit
fee is paid in accordance with the fee schedule attached hereto as Table
250.3.
250.4 Non-Single-Family Residential Building Permit Fees No building permit
for the construction of a new non-single-family residential building or for an
addition or alteration to a non-single-family residential building shall be
issued until a building permit fee is paid in accordance with the fee schedule
attached hereto as Table 250.4 and as described below.
250.4.1 Non-Single-Family Residential Plan Review Fee
The plan review fee for a new non-single-family residential building,
building addition, or building alteration shall be paid after the first
plan review is completed and the Building Commissioner has
determined the area of the building as per Table 250.4.1. Resubmitted
plans will not be accepted until the plan review fee is paid.
250.4.2 Non-Single-Family Residential Inspection Fee
The inspection fee for a new non-single-family residential building,
building addition, or building alteration shall be paid prior to issuance
of the permit.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
12 II
Table 250.3
250.3a Permits for New Single-Family Residences
Not Exceeding 2,000 square feet = . $1.73 per square foot
From 2,001 to 3,000 square feet = 3,458 plus $1.46 for each square
foot over 2,000
From 3,001 to 4,000 square feet = $4,921 plus .$1.33 for each square
foot over 3,000
From 4,001 to 6,000 square feet = $6,251 plus $1.20 for each square
foot over 4,000
From 6,001 to 8,000 square feet = $8,645 plus $1.06 for each square
foot over 6,000
From 8,001 square feet plus = $
10,773 plus .
$0.93
for each square
foot over 8,000
250.3b Permits for Single-Family Residential Additions and Alterations
Not Exceeding 500 square feet = $1.73 per square foot
From 501 to 750 square feet = $865 plus $1.60 for each square
foot over 500
From 751 to 1,000 square feet = $1,264 plus $1,46 for each square
foot over 750
From 1,001 to 2,000 square feet = $1,629 plus $1.20 for each square
foot over 1,000
From 2,001 to 3,000 square feet = $2,826 plus $1.06 for each square
foot over 2,000
From 3,001 square feet plus = $3,890 plus $0.93 for each square
foot over 3,000
Article II
Administration and Supervision
13 II
Table 250.4.1 Plan Review Fee for Non-Residential Permits
Cubic Feet Building
Plan Review
Plumbing Plan
Review
Mechanical
Plan Review
Electrical Plan
Review
Energy Plan
Review
1 to 60,000 $ 718 Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
60,001 to
80,000 1,413 Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
80,001 to
100,000 $ 1,130 Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
100,001 to
150,000 $ 1,374 Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
150,001 to
200,000 $ 1,468 Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
200,001 plus
$ 1,725 +
$16 for each
10,000 cubic
feet over
200,000
Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.25
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
Building Plan
Review x 0.5
Plan review Fees are cumulative. For example, the plan review fee for an 80,001 cubic foot building with
plumbing, mechanical and electrical is $3,390 as follows:
80,001 Cubic
Feet $1,130 $283 $283 $565 $565
Table 250.4.2 Inspection Fee for Non-Residential Permits
Building Plumbing Mechanical Electrical Energy
$0.29 per
square foot
$0.09 per
square foot
$0.09 per
square foot
$0.09 per
square foot
$0.09 per square
foot
Inspection fees are cumulative. For example, the inspection fee for a 30,000 square foot building with
plumbing, mechanical and electrical is $19,500 as follows:
$8,700 $2,700 $2,700 $2,700 $2,700
Article II
Administration and Supervision
14 II
250.4.3 Non-Single-Family Residential Permit Fee
The permit fee for a new non-single-family residential
building, building addition, or building alteration shall
be equal to the combined plan review and inspection
fees (minus the application fee) and shall be paid in
full prior to issuance of the permit.
250.5 Engineering Permit Fees No building permit for any of the following work
shall be issued until an engineering permit fee is paid in accordance with the
following fee schedule.
250.5.1 New Single-Family Residence
$450
250.5.2 Non-Residential Parking Lot, New or
Expansion
$450
250.5.3 New Non-Residential Building on lot
less than 1 acre
$875
250.5.4 New Non-Residential Building on lot
of 1 to 4.9 acres
$950
250.5.5 New Non-Residential Building on lot
of 5 to 9.9 acres
$1,000
250.5.6 New Non-Residential Building on lot
of 10 acres or more
$1,100
250.5.7 Any grading of property related or
unrelated to work on a building as per
Section 220 herein determined by the
Village Engineer to have a significant
impact on drainage as per Section 308
100
250.5.8 Additional Stormwater Permit Fee As Set Forth in
Appendix A, Schedule A of the Burr Ridge Municipal
Code.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
15 II
250.6 Building Permit Fees for Other Permits No building permit for the
construction of any building, structure, or for the performance of any work described
in Section 220 herein shall be issued until a building permit fee is paid in accordance
with the following fee schedule.
Single Family Residential Permits
250.6.1 Single-Family Residential Building
Demolition $50
250.6.2 Single-Family Residential
Electrical Service Upgrade $50
250.6.3 Single-Family Residential
Electrical Work $50
250.6.4 Single-Family Residential
Plumbing Work $50
250.6.5 Single-Family Residential
Mechanical Work $50
250.6.6 Single-Family Residential Detached
Accessory Building 500 square feet
in floor area or less
$50 + fees for electrical,
plumbing,& mechanical (see
sections 250.6.3-5 above)
250.6.6a Single Family Residential
Accessory Building 501 square feet
in floor area or greater
Same as Additions and
Alterations as per Table 250.3b
250.6.7 Single-Family Residential Decks
and Patios $50
250.6.8 Single-Family Residential Fences
and Gates $50
250.6.8a Single Family Residential Stand By
Generator $50
250.6.8b Single Family Residential Outdoor
Kitchen $50
250-.6.8a Miscellaneous Single-Family
Permits not specified above.
$50 + fees for electrical,
plumbing,& mechanical (see
sections 250.6.3-5 above)
250.6.9 Single-Family Residential Elevator
or Escalator Installation $200
250.6.10 Single-Family Residential Pools $200 + fees for electrical,
plumbing,& mechanical (see
sections 250.6.3-5 above)
250.6.10a Single Family Residential Hot Tubs
and Spas
$50
Non-Single-Family Residential Permits
250.6.11 Non-Single-Family Residential
Electrical Service Upgrade $250
250.6.12 Non-Single-Family Residential
Electrical Work $250
Article II
Administration and Supervision
16 II
250.6.13 Non-Single-Family Residential
Plumbing Work $250
250.6.14 Non-Single-Family Residential
Mechanical Work $250
250.6.15 Non-Single-Family Residential
Elevator or Escalator Installation
(Ord. A-1002-01-06)
$400
250.6.15a Non-Single-Family Residential
Elevator or Escalator Maintenance $150
250.6.16 Non-Single-Family Residential
Storage Tank Installation $250
250.6.17 Non-Single-Family Residential
Building Demolition $250
250.6.18 Non-Single-Family Residential
Parking Lot, New or Expansion $250
250.6.19 Based on established fees for comparable work, the Building
Commissioner shall determine the appropriate permit fee for any work
to be permitted which is not specifically listed herein. Under any
circumstance, the minimum fee for single-family residential permits
shall be $50, and for non-single-family residential permits the
minimum fee shall be $250.
250.6.20 The fees set forth above are not charged when such work is in
connection with construction of a new building, building addition, or
building alteration.
250.7 Other Fees In addition to the application and permit fees described in
Sections 250 herein, any building, building addition, building alteration, or
work performed under the authority of a building permit issued by the Village
of Burr Ridge shall be subject to the following fees.
250.7.1 Re-inspection as per Section 269.19.1
$100
250.7.3 Removal of Stop Work Order as per
Section 404 herein $300
250.7.5 Temporary Building Certificate of
Occupancy as per Section 274 herein $100
250.7.6 Reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the
Building Commissioner as a result of any additional
reviews, inspections, or studies required beyond the
typical plan reviews and inspections outlined herein.
(Amended by Ord. A-860-01-03)
251. When a Permit is Valid No permit for constructing, erecting, enlarging,
remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering, underpinning, moving, or
wrecking buildings, structures, or portions thereof, or any permit for which a fee is
Article II
Administration and Supervision
17 II
prescribed by the Village Treasurer or his designated agent shall be valid unless the
plans are stamped approved by the Village and all required fees have been paid.
260. Constructing Buildings Contrary to Approved Plans - Permit Made Void by
Deviation from Plans - Power to Stop Work
260.1 It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or architect or for any contractor or
builder engaged in constructing, erecting, enlarging, remodeling, altering,
repairing, raising, lowering underpinning, moving, or wrecking of any
building, structure, or portion thereof, to make any departure from the plans
as approved by the Building Commissioner without first obtaining the written
consent of the Building Commissioner for any such change.
Any departure from the approved plans involving a violation of the
requirements of any law or ordinance or any such change in the plans or
construction without the consent of the Village Board shall operate to annul
the permit which has been issued for such work and shall render the same
void, and all fees paid shall be forfeited.
260.2 In any case where work is done under a permit authorizing the erection,
alteration, or repair of a building or structure, which work is contrary to the
approved plans, or any law or ordinance, the Building Officer shall have
power to at once stop such work and to order all persons engaged therein to
stop and desist therefrom. Such work shall not be resumed until satisfactory
assurance has been given to the Building Commissioner that it will be done
properly and lawfully and according to the approved plans or until said
Building Commissioner has consented, in writing, to the changes made in
such approved plans. The Building Commissioner may request that a new
permit must be issued before work proceeds. The usual fee for the permit
shall be paid by the contractor doing such work.
260.3 No contractor or builder shall begin any work on any building or structure for
which a permit is required until such permit shall have been issued. In case
any work is begun on the erection, alteration, repair, or removal of any
building or structure without a permit authorizing the same being issued
therefore, the Building Commissioner or his deputy shall have power to at
once stop such work and to order any and all persons engaged therein to stop
and desist therefrom until the proper permit is issued.
261. Revocation of Permit If the work in, upon, or about any building or structure shall
be conducted in violation of any law or ordinance, it shall be the duty of the Building
Commissioner to revoke the permit for the building or wrecking operations in connection
with which such violation shall have taken place. It shall be unlawful, after the revocation of
such permit, to proceed with such building or wrecking operations unless such permit shall
first have been reinstated or reissued by the Building Commissioner. Before a permit so
revoked may be lawfully reissued, the entire building and building site shall first be put into
condition corresponding with the requirements of all laws and ordinances, and any work or
Article II
Administration and Supervision
18 II
material applied to the same in violation of any of the provisions of any law or ordinance
shall first be removed from such building and for such permit as reissued the fee required
shall be paid.
269. Inspection The permit applicant, owner, or contractor shall give 24 hours advance
notice to the Building Official to request each of the following required inspections:
Single-Family Residential Inspections:
269.1 Site Preparation - An inspection to ensure the adequate provision of all
required soil erosion control and tree protection prior to grading, footing
excavation, or any other work on the property.
269.2 Footing Excavation - An inspection is required before concrete is poured and
after excavation and forming have been completed.
269.3 Foundation Forms - An inspection is required after the foundation wall forms
are set and before concrete is poured. It is required that two (2) copies of a
spot survey be submitted for review and approval after the foundation form
inspection has been passed, but before the foundation wall inspection can be
scheduled.
269.4 Foundation Wall - An inspection is required before backfilling and after
footing draintile has been placed and dampproofing completed.
269.5 Tree Protection, Erosion Control and Gravel Access Drive – An inspection is
required to ensure that all erosion control and tree protection measures are
properly maintained and in place and temporary construction (gravel) access
is in place prior to any other work on the property and prior to decking and
rough framing. The street shall be cleaned of mud.
269.6 Driveway - After placing of forms or otherwise establishing the border of a
driveway and prior to installation of asphalt, concrete pavers, or other hardsurface
material, the Engineering Department will inspect to ensure that the
driveway complies with the approved site plan, maximum and minimum
width requirements, and setback requirements. Placement of driveway forms
and the driveway inspection can be conducted at any time during the
construction process.
269.7 Electric Service - An inspection is required after electric panel, meter
enclosure, and temporary grounds have been installed.
269.8 Underground Plumbing - An inspection is required before concrete is poured
in a basement or floor slab and after underground plumbing work has been
completed.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
19 II
269.9 Rough Framing - An inspection is required before any insulation and vapor
barrier are installed and after the rough framing, rough plumbing, and rough
electrical work are completed.
269.10 Fireplace Inspections – An inspection is required for all masonry and pre-fab
fireplaces. This inspection shall be scheduled at the same time as the rought
framing inspection.
269.11 Rough Plumbing - An inspection is required before any insulation and vapor
barrier are installed and after the rough plumbing work is complete.
269.12 Rough Electric - An inspection is required before any insulation is installed
and after the rough electrical work is complete.
269.13 Insulation - An inspection is required before any interior wall finish is applied
and after the insulation is installed.
269.14 Septic System - If a private sanitary sewer system has been approved by the
Village of Burr Ridge Board of Trustees as required by the Zoning
Ordinance, an inspection is required before any backfilling and after the
septic tank and seepage system has been installed.
269.15 Final - Final inspection is required before issuance of a Building Certificate
of Occupancy for a structure. A final inspection must be scheduled a
minimum of two days before the certificate of occupancy will be issued. The
final inspection shall ensure that the building and site comply with all Village
codes and regulations including but not limited to the building codes, Zoning
Ordinance, and engineering requirements. The final inspection shall include
inspections for the following: building, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, site
engineering, landscaping, forestry, and fire protection. The local fire
protection district shall approve all fire protection systems after inspection by
the respective district or by its authorized inspection agency.
269.16 Other – Demolition and swimming pool – Refer to Sections 306 and 315.
269.17 Bond Release - An inspection is required prior to the release of any
outstanding bonds to ensure compliance with all required local codes,
ordinances, and standards including landscaping improvement.
269.18 All Inspections Other Than Single-Family – All new construction other than
single-family residences shall be inspected to verify compliance with all
building codes, fire codes, Zoning Ordinance, mechanical codes, electrical
codes, plumbing codes, engineering codes, and all mandated States codes.
269.19 General Inspection Requirements
Article II
Administration and Supervision
20 II
269.19.1 All re-inspections required, as a result of builder error, shall
be performed at an additional prepaid fee per inspection per
Section 250.
269.19.2 Proper and safe ladders for access to basements and attic are
the responsibility of the contractors. There will be no
inspections performed if adequate ladders are not provided.
269.19.3 All materials required for testing are the responsibility of the
contractor.
270. Foundation Location and Elevation Spot Survey Immediately after the
foundation has been poured and prior to scheduling a backfill inspection, the owner
or contractor shall submit to the Building Commissioner three (3) copies of an on-site
(spot survey) location of the structure showing the top of foundation elevations in
USGS Datum, prepared by a registered land surveyor. Construction shall not
proceed until the Building Commissioner and Village Engineer have approved the
spot survey.
271. Engineering Fees Changes to grading, drainage, top of foundation elevation, etc.,
approved by the Village, that would require engineering services, shall be approved
by the Village Engineer. Costs for such services shall be paid by Permittee at the
fees in effect.
272. Certificate of Occupancy - Single Family Residential The request for a
"Certificate of Occupancy" shall be made at least two (2) business days before
occupancy is requested. This will allow for time for a final inspection and to process
all paperwork. Minimum requirements for occupancy shall be as follows:
Connection to public water and sewer complete or, in the alternative, well and
septic systems complete. In the case of connection to the Village of Burr Ridge
public water supply, connection shall not be considered complete until both the
water meter and remote meter are installed and connected in accordance with the
requirements of Section 311 of this Ordinance and Section 58.13 of Chapter 58
(Water Works System) of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
271.2 All plumbing shown on the approved plans unless otherwise approved by the
Building Official. All fixtures added or installed after this inspection will
require a separate permit.
271.3 Electrical wiring shall be completed in compliance with applicable codes.
271.4 Heating system shall be completed in compliance with applicable codes.
271.5 Basement floor, draintile, and sump pump (if used) shall be installed in
compliance with applicable codes.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
21 II
272.6 Any concrete floors in the habitable area of the house must be poured.
272.7 Completion of any applicable water main extensions and other land
improvements as required under Section 220 hereof, Chapter 58 of the
General Municipal Code of the Village of Burr Ridge of 1974, and/or the
Subdivision Ordinance of this Village.
272.8 Further, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until final grading, all
required landscaping, and driveway hardsurfacing have been installed.
However, if weather or other conditions do not permit the completion of
final grading, required landscaping, or driveway hardsurfacing, the owner
may request issuance of a conditional Certificate of Occupancy subject to
completion of the outstanding work. The recipient of a conditional
Certificate of Occupancy shall provide a Twenty-Five Hundred Dollars
($2,500.00) cash deposit to guarantee completion of the outstanding work.
If the work to be completed exceeds Twenty-Five Hundred Dollars
($2,500.00), the Building Commissioner may increase the amount of the
cash deposit based on estimates prepared by the Village Engineer and
Village Forester. If a Certificate of Occupancy under these terms is issued
between April 15 and October 15, the final grading, landscaping, and
hardsurfacing shall be completed within 45 days. If a conditional
Certificate of Occupancy under these terms is issued between October 16
and March 31 of each year, the final grading, landscaping, and
hardsurfacing shall be completed prior to the forthcoming May 15.
272.9 No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all construction recapture
costs and all sewer and water connection fees required by Village ordinances
have been paid.
273. Certificate of Occupancy - Other Than Single-Family Residential The request
for a "Certificate of Occupancy" for any portion of the building shall be made at least
two (2) business days before occupancy is requested. This will allow for time for a
final inspection and to process all paperwork. Minimum requirements for occupancy
shall to be as follows: Minimum requirements for occupancy shall be those set forth
in detail in the building regulations adopted by reference in Section 701 of Article
VII of this ordinance and the following:
273.1 The structure shall be substantially complete, the exterior enclosure shall be
complete, and the structure shall comply with all general, special, and
structural requirements of the code.
273.2 All means of egress and all fire protection features shall be in place and
continually maintained.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
22 II
273.3 Sanitary and water facilities shall be complete. Water facilities shall not be
considered complete until both the water and remote meter are installed and
connected in accordance with the requirements of Section 312 of this
Ordinance and Section 58.13 of Chapter 58 (Water Works System) of the
Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
273.4 Heating system shall be complete in compliance with applicable codes.
273.5 Electrical system shall be complete in compliance with applicable codes.
273.6 No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all construction recapture
costs and all sewer and water connection fees required by Village ordinances
have been paid.
273.7 Further, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all landscaping
required and indicated on the approved landscaping plans has been installed.
However, if weather conditions do not permit the completion of required
landscaping, the owner may request Village approval of a cash deposit to
guarantee completion of landscaping as soon as weather permits. Such
request shall be accompanied by an estimate of cost to complete all required
landscaping. Upon Village approval of the request for a cash deposit and the
cost estimate, cash deposit equal to 125 percent (125%) of the cost of all
required landscaping shall be deposited with the Village in escrow. If a
Certificate of Occupancy under these terms is issued between April 15 and
October 15, the final grading, landscaping, and hardsurfacing shall be
completed within 45 days. If a conditional Certificate of Occupancy under
these terms is issued between October 16 and March 31 of each year, the
final grading, landscaping, and hardsurfacing shall be completed prior to
the forthcoming May 15.
273.8 In addition, the owner shall be required to execute such agreements as may
from time to time be required by the Village to delineate the conditional
status of the Certificate of Occupancy, including, but not limited to, notice to
be given to any subsequent purchasers.
274. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy - Other Than Single-Family Residential
A temporary certificate of occupancy can be issued when a building owner, tenant,
or agent wants to occupy the building for purposes of stocking, preparing the space
for all occupants, training of new employees, or similar circumstances subject to
the following terms:
274.1 The building shall be substantially complete.
274.2 All means of egress shall be completed and unobstructed.
Article II
Administration and Supervision
23 II
274.3 All fire protection, alarm and detection system shall be approved by the
local Fire District and able to transmit an alarm.
274.4 All hazards to occupants shall be removed.
274.5 Full occupancy for all future occupants shall not take place until all code
related items are in compliance.
274.6 An inspection is completed by the building and fire inspector with a list of
outstanding items.
274.7 The temporary occupancy fee is paid.
274.8 The maximum length of a temporary occupancy is 30 days.
274.9 A request for a temporary occupancy shall be in writing. The person
requesting the temporary occupancy shall provide a description of the type
of work being performed, indicate the number of occupants, and state that
the building or space will not be open to the general public.
275. Cash Performance Bond Requirements
(Added by Ordinance A-1002-02-07)
275.1 Prior to issuance of a building permit for a new building, a building
addition or exterior alteration, an in ground pool, or any other work that
requires significant exterior construction activity or heavy construction
equipment as determined by the Building Commissioner, the applicant
shall deposit with the Village, a performance guarantee in the form of a
cash bond in the amount of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00 USD).
275.2 Purpose of Bond: Such Case performance bond shall be for the purpose of
insuring against damage to public property by the general contractor or any
subcontractor or employee that he may engage to perform work under the
building permit; to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of this
Ordinance and the Village’s Zoning Ordinance; and to ensure that the
property is maintained in a condition that does not endanger the public
health or safety.
275.3 Damage to public property shall include, but is not limited to:
accumulation of dirt, gravel, sand, building material, etc., on street
pavement; damage to street surface, curb and gutter, water mains, fire
hydrants, sewer lines, street lights, street trees, etc., resulting from
construction equipment and vehicles; and damage to the parkway,
landscaping and vegetation resulting from construction activity.
275.4 If and when the Building Commissioner determines that there is damage to
public property, that any situation exists that endangers the public health or
safety, or that the general contractor has abandoned the job site without
completing final grading, landscaping and securing of the building; the
Article II
Administration and Supervision
24 II
authorized agent of the contractor or responsible party shall be notified in
writing.
275.5 Written notification to the authorized agent shall request that the necessary
improvements, repairs, replacements, restorations and/or removal shall be
made. This written notice shall be waived if the Building Commissioner
determines that there is an emergency situation that presents an immediate
danger to the public health and safety. In such circumstances, the Building
Commissioner will proceed with the minimum work necessary to resolve
the danger.
275.6 If such improvement, repair, replacement, restoration or removal has not
been completed within five (5) working days following the receipt of
written notification, the Building Commissioner shall cause said work to be
done and shall reimburse the Village for all cost incurred from the cash
performance bond.
275.7 If the cash performance bond is reduced as a result of reimbursement to the
Village for costs incurred in improving, repairing, replacing or removing
such damage, or restoring public property; the cash performance bond shall
be replenished to the full amount ($5,000.00) within five (5) working days
following such improvement, repair, replacement, restoration, or removal,
and if not, then construction shall be halted.
275.8 The cash performance bond will not be refunded until all work is
completed in compliance with all local codes, ordinances, and standards.
275.9 Refunding of Bond: Upon certification by the Building Commissioner and
the Village Engineer that all construction, grading and fee requirements
have been met and completed, the cash performance bond shall be released
without interest to the permit applicant. In addition, an “As-Built”
topographical survey shall be filed with the Village and approved by the
Village Engineer prior to the release of the cash performance bond.
Provided, however, that if the structure meets all other requirements of this
Ordinance, but as a result of inclement weather or other seasonal
restrictions, final grading, submission of an approved “as-built” survey,
and landscaping cannot be performed an additional Twenty-Five Hundred
Dollars ($2,500.00) will be required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
275.10 It is the responsibility of the permit applicant to ensure that all
construction, grading, and fee requirements are completed and certified by
the Building Commissioner and the Village Engineer and to submit a
request for release of the performance bond. Failure by the permit
applicant to complete the work and to submit a request for release of the
bond within one year after issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or one
year after issuance of the permit when the permit does not require issuance
of a Certificate of Occupancy will constitute a forfeiture of the bond to the
Village for reimbursement of its costs, including any purpose already
provided for the use of such bond, for those costs related to the
Article II
Administration and Supervision
25 II
requirements, implementation and oversight of the permitting process and,
as a liquidated amount, to address any future cost to the Village of the
failure to complete the required improvements. (Amended by Ordinance
A-1002-01-11).
276. Increased Fee for Work Started Without a Permit If any work for
which a permit is required hereunder is commenced without first applying
for and receiving the permit, then the fee for issuance of such permit shall
be increased by an amount equal to 50% of the customary fee in order to
defray the cost of extra inspections and work involved. (Added by
Ordinance A-1002-02-07)
III 1
BURR RIDGE BUILDING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE III
MISCELLANEOUS
301. Occupancy of Street
It shall not be lawful to occupy with building material, construction equipment, or
construction related accessories, any street, right-of-way, or any part thereof.
302. Driveways
A gravel construction entrance and driveway shall be installed prior to any other
work on the property. The contractor is responsible for maintaining the gravel access
drive and keeping the street clean at all times. (Amended by Ord. A-860-1-02)
303. Right to Complete Buildings Under Outstanding Permits
Authority is hereby affirmed to complete any building, structure, or portion thereof
either in the process of being constructed, erected, enlarged, remodeled, altered,
repaired, raised, lowered, underpinned, or moved at or prior to the date of adoption of
this Building Ordinance; provided a valid and prior permit outstands therefore, the
work accords with the Building regulations in force at issuance of such permit, and
the building, structure and various portions thereof will be safe and sanitary upon
completion and will fully accord with the building and other laws of said Village in
force at the time the permit was issued.
304. Building Changed or Repaired Must Comply with Ordinance
Any building, structure, or major portion thereof that is enlarged, remodeled, or
repaired or has a change of use in said Village shall be made to comply throughout
with the provisions of the Building Ordinance as if applied to new or original work,
provided the cost of the work proposed to be done exceeds one-third of the assessed
value of the building, as determined by the county assessor, proposed to be changed
or repaired. All new work of any type shall comply with the current Building Code
Ordinance. The same materials and type of construction as were employed originally
may be used for such changes and repairs when the cost of the work to be done is less
than the said one-third estimated value, provided such work when completed will be
consistent with the provisions of the Building Ordinance pertaining to the district and
to public health and safety. The value and cost referred to in this section shall be as
of the date when the permit is sought and shall be determined or approved by the
Building Commissioner.
305. Construction Materials and Methods
These rules and regulations specify minimum acceptable construction materials and
methods. However, the provisions of these rules and regulations are not intended to
prevent consideration of the use of types or methods of construction or material
required by those rules and regulations. Any person desiring to use types or methods
Article III
Miscellaneous
2 III
of construction or materials not specifically mentioned in these rules and regulations
shall file with the Building Commissioner authentic proof in support of claims that
may be made regarding the sufficiency of such types or methods of construction or
materials. Such proof may include adequate reports and test data from a recognized
testing laboratory, or proven and authentic methods or types of construction or
materials are at least the equivalent of the types and methods of construction and
materials now required under these rules and regulations, then shall recommend to
the Board of Trustees an amendment to these rules and regulations in order to make
permissible the use of the same. If, in the opinion of the Building Commissioner,
such proof is not sufficient to justify such amendment to these rules and regulations,
the applicant may refer the entire matter to the Board of Trustees, as provided by
ordinance. The applicant desiring to use alternate materials or methods or types of
construction shall guarantee payment of all expenses for necessary tests made by or
on behalf of the Village. No such alternate types or methods or construction or
materials shall be used unless authorized by the Board of Trustees by amendment to
these rules and regulations.
306. Moving or Wrecking Buildings
306.1 Permit. It shall not be lawful for any person to move or wreck any building
within the Village of Burr Ridge without having first obtained a permit as
hereinbefore described.
306.2 Bond. Any person so moving or wrecking any building within the Village of
Burr Ridge shall first submit to the Village Clerk a performance bond in the
amount of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for the protection of any streets
or other public or private property that may be involved in such moving or
wrecking.
306.3 Restoration. That any person moving or wrecking any such building shall be
required to backfill the remaining foundation hole level to the existing
landscaping and shall remove and clear said premises of any litter, building
materials, masonry materials, or other similar materials remaining after such
moving or wrecking. The disturbed area shall be planted with permanent
ground cover, grass or sod, to prevent erosion.
306.4 Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions
hereinafter set forth shall be fined not less than Twenty-Five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
306.5 Dust Control. Any person moving or wrecking a building shall have facilities
available to water the construction site during demolition activity for the
purpose of providing adequate dust control. Watering shall be provided in
order to prevent excessive dust from moving beyond the property lines of the
site on which the moving or wrecking is occurring. (Added by Ord. A-860-1-
02)
Article III
Miscellaneous
3 III
306.6 Notice to Adjoining Properties. The permit applicant shall submit an
affidavit to the Building Officer verifying that notice has been provided to all
property owners within 250 feet of the property of the impending demolition
work. The notice shall specify a period of one week or less in which the
demolition will occur. The notice shall be mailed at least 7 days in advance
of the demolition (not counting the day or week of demolition and not
counting the day the notice is provided). If demolition does not occur during
the time specified in the notice, a new notice shall be provided with a new
affidavit submitted to the Building Official. (Added by Ord. A-860-1-02)
306.7 Demolition Submittal Requirements. When applying for a demolition permit,
the following items shall be submitted:
? A completed permit application.
? Water/sewer disconnect application.
? Two (2) copies of a legal plat of survey showing existing water and sewer
lines to be disconnected, well and septic system (where applicable), and
all existing accessory structures.
? $5000.00 cash bond.
? All applications, affidavits, and forms required by other governmental
agencies as outlined in the Village Demolition Guideline Handout.
307. Elevator and Escalator Inspections and Fees
307.1 Every elevator and escalator now in operation or which may hereafter be
installed, together with all equipment thereof, shall be inspected at least once
every six months, and in no case shall any new equipment be placed into
operation until an inspection of the new equipment be placed into operation
until an inspection of the same has been made. It shall be the duty of each
owner, agent, lessee, and occupant of any building wherein any such
equipment is installed, and of the person in charge or in control of any such
equipment, to permit the making of a test of such demand has been made.
Whenever any elevators or escalators, and all devices and equipment used in
connection therewith have been inspected, and all required tests have been
made of all safety devises with which such elevator or escalator is equipped,
and the result of such inspection and tests show such equipment, including all
safety devices, to be in good working condition and in good repair, it shall be
the duty of the Building Commissioner to issue or cause to be issued a
certificate setting forth the result of such inspection and tests and containing
the date of inspection, the weight which such equipment will safely carry, and
a statement to the effect that the elevator complies with all Village
requirements. It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner, agent,
lessee, or occupant of the building in which such equipment, to frame the
certificate and place the same in a conspicuous place in each elevator and
near each escalator. The words "safe condition" in this Section means that is
safe for any load up to the approved weight indicated in such certificate.
Article III
Miscellaneous
4 III
307.2 If the result of the inspection or tests required under "a" above show that such
elevator or escalator is in an unsafe condition or bad repair, or show that any
of the safety devices have not been installed or if installed are not in good
working order or not in good repair, the certificate provided for in "a" above
shall not be issued until such elevator or escalator, or such device or devices,
have been put in good working order and good repair.
307.3 When the elevator inspector finds any elevator or escalator in an unsafe
condition, he shall immediately report the same to the Building
Commissioner, together with a statement of all facts relating to the
condition of such equipment. It shall be the duty of the Building
Commissioner, upon receiving any such report, to order the operation of
such equipment to be stopped and to remain inoperative until it has been
placed in a safe condition and in good operating condition, and it shall be
unlawful for any agent, owner, lessee, or occupant of any building wherein
any such equipment is located to permit or allow the same to be used after
receipt of a notice from the Building Commissioner, which notice shall be
in writing, that such equipment is in an unsafe condition, and it will remain
so unlawful until it has been restored to a safe and proper operating
condition.
307.4 The fee for the semi-annual inspection of an elevator or escalator shall be
$90.00. Said fee shall be the joint and several obligation of the owner,
agent, lessee, and occupant of any building wherein such equipment is
installed. An additional fee of $90.00 shall be charged for each additional
re-inspection, which may be required. (Amended by Ord. A-1002-01-06)
(Amended by Ord A-1002-01-09)
307.5 The provisions of this Section 307 shall not apply to elevators and escalators
now or hereafter in operation or installed in a single-family residence located
in the Village (except where such is used in connection with either a legal,
non-conforming or illegal non-residential use of said residence).
308. Surface and Sub-Surface Water Drainage
308.1 It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, or other person in control or
possession of any premises jointly or severally to permit any eave trough,
footing drain, drain downspout, piping, sump pump, or other device or
appliance, permanent or temporary, above or below grade, for collecting and
discharging surface water, rain water, or any other source of surface run-off
water, ground water or sub-surface water to be so designed, located, or
constructed over or across any street, alley, public way, or any rights-of-way
thereof, or public property other than by means of a Village approved storm
sewer, drainage swale or other drainage system or structure. It is further the
intent of this Ordinance that no such waters shall be collected and discharged
Article III
Miscellaneous
5 III
on any adjoining property. All such waters must be discharged on the
owner's property, and no such waters shall be collected and discharged closer
than six (6) feet from the side or rear lot line of the premises unless it is
enclosed in a sub-surface drainage system approved by the Village which
discharges such water at or near the front property line or at a point no closer
than ten (10) feet from the rear property line; provided, however, if there is a
public sidewalk on or adjacent to the subject property, no such waters shall be
collected and discharged closer than six (6) feet from any such sidewalk.
308.2 In addition, the following shall apply to all new single-family home
construction and additions larger than 1,000 gross square feet. All waters
collected and discharged from sump pumps must be connected to a Villageapproved
storm sewer or structure. If no storm sewer is adjacent to the
property, then sump pump drainage must be discharged on the owner’s
property no closer than fifteen (15’) feet from the rear, front, or side lot line.
Furthermore, if standing water is present as a result of said sump pump
discharge, further effort may be required as determined by the Village
Engineer to minimize the presence of the standing water. (Amended by
Ordinance A-860-03-03)
309. Prohibited Times for Outside Construction
309.1 It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or for the owner, agent, or any
person in control of any premises to allow performance of any construction,
repair, building, or remodeling work on the outside of any enclosed structure
or anywhere on any structure not completely enclosed by walls, windows,
doors, and roof at any time except during the following hours:
Monday through Friday: 7 AM to 7 PM
Saturday and Sunday: 8 AM to 5 PM
309.2 Any violation of the construction work hours listed herein shall be subject to
a stop work order and fee as described in Sections 404 and 250.6.7.2 herein.
(Amended by Ord. A-860-1-02)
310. Soil Erosion Control Requirements
The Permittee shall provide soil erosion control measures including, but not limited
to, continuous and secured straw bales / silt fencing at all points of downstream
discharge to adjacent properties.
311. Water Meters
When any new construction, addition, or alteration includes connection to the Village
of Burr Ridge public water supply, connection shall not be considered complete until
both the water meter and remote meter are installed and connected in accordance
with the requirements of this Ordinance and Section 58.13 of Chapter 58 (Water
Works System) of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code. The installation of the conduit
for the remote meter wire must be complete prior to the Rough Electrical Inspection.
Article III
Miscellaneous
6 III
312. Dumpsters on Construction Sites
Dumpsters on construction sites shall be kept covered at all times and shall be
emptied when full before they over flow or construction waste is blown out of the
dumpster. The dumpster shall not be placed where they will block the vision of any
roadway and shall not be placed in the right-of-way, roadway, or street. The
dumpster shall be removed before a temporary or final occupancy is granted.
313. Temporary Sanitation Facilities on Construction Sites
All construction sites for new homes and non-residential construction sites shall have
temporary portable sanitation facilities. They shall be emptied on a regular basis and
not be allowed to over flow. The portable bathrooms shall not be placed where they
will block the vision of any roadway and shall not be placed within the right-of-way,
roadway, or street. The Building Official shall approve the location of temporary
sanitation facilities. The temporary sanitation facilities shall be locked when there are
no construction personnel on site. They shall be removed before a temporary or final
occupancy is granted.
314. Street and Site Maintenance
The contractor shall be responsible for keeping the street clear of mud and for
keeping all debris in the on-site dumpster. The contractor shall be responsible for
removing any paper or debris which blows off the construction site.
315. Swimming Pools
Swimming pools shall be constructed in compliance with Appendix G of the
International Residential Code for one- and two-family dwellings as amended and
stipulated in Article VII, herein. All swimming pools are subject to application and
issuance of a permit prior to construction. Fences and location of pool equipment
shall be subject to the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance.
(Amended by Ordinance A-860-1-00)
315.1 Inspections
? Pool Shell – An inspection is required for the pool shell reinforcing and bonding
required by Article 680 of the National Electrical Code prior to placing concrete.
? Pool Deck – An inspection is required for the pool deck reinforcing and bonding
required by Article 680 of the National Electrical Code prior to placing concrete.
? Pool Final – An inspection is required for the pool and pool equipment when it is
completed.
? Pool Fence – An inspection is required for the pool fence at the same time as the
pool final to verify that all barrier requirements have been met in conformance
with the Village of Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance and Appendix G of the
International Residential Code.
Article III
Miscellaneous
7 III
316. Construction Fencing
In order to ensure that construction activity is contained within a specified area on
the construction site and to prevent damage to trees, slopes, and other sensitive
areas, construction fencing shall be provided as follows:
316.1 Construction fencing shall be erected prior to the commencement of
construction for all non-residential buildings and building additions, all
new single-family residences and additions, and any other construction
activity that involves substantial grading or foundation work as determined
by the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer may waive the requirement
for construction fencing if it is determined to be unnecessary by the scope
of work involved.
316.2 Construction fencing shall be maintained for the duration of exterior
construction activity on a property.
316.3 Construction fencing shall enclose the entire work area except for the
designated construction access drive. The location of construction fencing
shall be specified on a site plan submitted for the building permit and shall
be subject to the approval of the Building Officer.
316.4 No construction work shall extend beyond the confines of the fenced area
except as may be specifically authorized by the Building Officer.
316.5 Construction fencing shall be of the materials and construction
specifications indicated in Exhibit 316 herein.
316.6 A stop work order as per Section 404 herein may be issued by the Building
Officer for any failure to maintain construction fencing or violation of the
work perimeter established by the construction fencing. Upon issuance of
a stop work order, work shall not be allowed to commence until the
construction fencing has been repaired to the satisfaction of the Building
Officer and a fee has been paid as per Section 250.6.7.2. (Added by Ord.
A-860-3-02)
317. Depressed or Cut Curb Required for New Driveways
Any new driveway built for a new building accessing a street improved with
perimeter curbs shall include cutting the existing curb or replacement of said curb
with a depressed curb. This requirement shall apply to new driveways built for
new residential and non-residential buildings on all streets with curbs regardless of
the type of curb that exists prior to installation of the driveway.
(Ord. A-860-05-02)
IV 1
BURR RIDGE BUILDING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE IV
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
401. Compliance with Building Ordinance Necessary
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or persons, firm, or corporation to
construct, erect, enlarge, remodel, alter, repair, raise, lower, underpin, change of use
as defined in the building code, move, or wreck any building, structure, or any
portion thereof, in violation of the Building Ordinance. It is further declared
unlawful to equip, use, or occupy any building, structure, or any portion thereof in
said Village with any devices or for any business or other purposes, in any manner
prohibited by the Building Ordinance of said Village. Violators of any of the
provisions or requirements of this Section of the Building Ordinance shall be subject
to the general penalty provided for violations of the Building Ordinance.
402. Building Contrary to Building Ordinance a Nuisance
Any building, structure, or any portion thereof hereafter constructed, erected,
enlarged, remodeled, altered, repaired, raised, lowered, underpinned, or moved
within said Village, in any manner contrary to the provisions of the Building
Ordinance or any laws of the Village, is hereby declared a nuisance, and the person,
owner, agent, architect, builder, contractor, house-mover, or mechanic, so
constructing, erecting, enlarging, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering,
underpinning, or moving the same, contrary to any of the provisions of said laws or
Ordinance, shall be subject to the general penalty provided for violations of said laws
of Ordinance.
403. Deviations of Violations, if Found - Procedure
The procedure in all cases of unauthorized deviations from, or violations of, the
provisions of the Building Ordinance found on inspections required by the preceding
section shall be as follows: A verbal notice shall be immediately served by the
Building Officer at the site, and on the person or persons doing or in charge of the
work being done, or responsible for or capable of correcting, or of causing to be
corrected the deviation observed. If a verbal notice cannot be served on the site, or if
served, is disregarded (or deemed inadequate by the Building Officer for the purpose)
then written notice, on forms prepared for the purpose and designating the deviation
observed, shall be posted at the site, in as safe and conspicuous a place as practical,
and where, if unmolested, the same must certainly come to the notice of any person
or persons either employed on the work, or frequently occupying the building,
structure, or premises; and a copy of the notice so posted shall be mailed to the last
known address of the owner, agent, or person in control of the building observed
from the provisions of the Building Ordinance has been posted and mailed, as
aforesaid, and the work or condition continues in defiance thereof, or if the deviation,
or whatever nature, is not promptly corrected in a manner consistent with the
Article IV
Compliance and Enforcement
2 IV
provisions of the Building Ordinance and the urgency of the case, then the deviation
shall be considered a willful violation and the Building Officer shall promptly stop
the work and, if need be, shall close the building or structure to the public. The facts
pertaining to the case and the steps so far taken therein shall next (and forthwith) be
reported in writing to the Building Commissioner, who in turn shall forthwith
proceed to enforce the provisions and penalties of the Building Ordinance for and in
such case provided. The Chief of Police and Village Attorney, pursuant to, and
consistent with, the duties of their respective offices, shall assist in enforcing the
Building Ordinance against violators who defiantly refuse to comply with notices
from the Building Officers; and such officer named in this paragraph shall act in
conjunction with the Building Commissioner and Deputy Building Commissioners,
in so far as may be necessary and practicable. But nothing in this paragraph contained
is intended, or shall be construed, to disqualify or exempt any officer of the Village
not named therein from the duty of assisting in the enforcement of the Building
Ordinance. The Building Officers and other officers named, who may assist them in
case of flagrant or defiant violations of the Building Ordinance, are hereby authorized
to sue with the police power of the Village in such manner and to such extent as the
character of the violation and the urgency, hazards, rights, and interests of public
health and safety may justify and demand for the case involved. No failure on the
part of any officer to take any action hereby did not require, nor any failure to give
any notice hereby required, shall excuse any violation of any law or ordinance.
404. Work May Be Stopped - Permit Cancelled
Building Officers are hereby empowered and directed to stop work on any building
structure or portion thereof that is being done in a reckless, unsafe or unsanitary
manner, or with the use of defective or improper materials and on any building,
structure, or portion thereof, proposed for unlawful purposes as regards locations,
intended use or occupancy and any work that in any other respect is being done
contrary to the provisions of the Building Ordinance or to the requirements of any
other laws or ordinances. This right and duty shall exist and be performed
irrespective of any permit that may or may not have been either required or issued for
the work, building, structure, or any portion thereof involved. The suspension of
work shall be for such time as may be necessary to secure a correction of the
particular violations and features complained of, or at least until a satisfactory
agreement and arrangement approved by the Building Commissioner is reached that
such correction will be made, and if a court trial is made, then the work shall be
suspended and held in abeyance until the court trial is made, then the work shall be
suspended and held in abeyance until the court renders it decisions. Any person, firm
or corporation having charge of, directing, or in any way engaged in work that
violates the Building Ordinance who shall refuse or fail to promptly desist from such
work on written notice from any Building Officer, or who having desisted on either
verbal or written notice shall resume the work before the violation which occasioned
the order is corrected or agreed to be corrected satisfactory to the officer causing the
work to be stopped (or to some other Building Officers higher in authority) and
consistent with the purposes of the Building Ordinance, or who, before having been
authorized by the Officer causing the same to be stopped (or to some other Building
Article IV
Compliance and Enforcement
3 IV
Officer) shall be deemed guilty of violating the Building Ordinance, and shall be
subject to the general penalty provided therefor in said Building Ordinance. Permits
for work being done in violations of the Building Ordinance may be cancelled or
revoked on order of the Building Commissioner as is elsewhere provided in said
Ordinance.
405. Persons Subject to Penalty - Nature of Penalty
Any architect, structural engineer, contractor, subcontractor, or other person, firm, or
corporation directly or indirectly engaged in the design, construction, erection,
enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering, underpinning, moving
or wrecking of any building structure or portion thereof who shall knowingly design,
construct, erect, enlarge, remodel, alter, repair, raise, lower, underpin, move or
wrecking of any building structure or portion thereof who shall knowingly design,
construct, erect, enlarge, remodel, alter, repair, raise, lower underpin, move or wreck
such building structure or a portion thereof to be designed, constructed, erected,
enlarged, remodeled, altered, repaired, raised, lowered, underpinned, moved or
wrecked in violation of the Building Ordinance shall be subject to the general penalty
provided for violation of the Building Ordinance and all permits granted by the
Village to any such person, firm or corporation so engaged may be suspended for not
less than thirty (30) days nor more than one (1) year.
V 1
BURR RIDGE BUILDING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE V
GENERAL PENALTY
501. General Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be fined
not less than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) nor more than Seven Hundred and Fifty
Dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and every such person or corporation shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day on which such violation, neglect, or
refusal shall continue; and any builder or contractor who shall construct any building
in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, and any architect designing,
drawing plans for, or having charge of such building or who shall permit it to be
constructed, shall be liable to the penalties provided and imposed by this Section.
VI 1
BURR RIDGE BUILDING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE VI
CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCE
601. Conflicts Between General and Specific Provisions
When (if ever) a general provision or requirement of the Building Ordinance
conflicts with a specific provision thereof relating to the construction, equipment,
maintenance, use, or location of any building, structure, or any portion thereof, in
said Village, then, and for that case, the specific provision or requirement shall
prevail and govern.
602. Invalidity of One Portion of Ordinance Shall Not Affect Remainder
In administering and enforcing the Building Ordinance, the invalidity (if any) of any
section or of any provision thereof shall not be constructed or held to invalidate any
other section or any provision thereof - unless such invalidity shall have been
specifically established. The invalidity (if any) of any section of any provision of the
Building Ordinance, when applied to buildings, structures, or any portion thereof
completed before the adoption of said Ordinance, shall not, for such cause, be
construed or held to be invalid in its application to buildings, structures, or any
portion thereof constructed subsequent to said adoption - unless such invalidity shall
have been otherwise specifically in its application to such subsequent work.
VII 1
BURR RIDGE BUILDING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE VII
ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS
701. Building Regulations Adopted
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as a part of the Building
Ordinance of the Village of Burr Ridge, Illinois, subject, however, to the
modifications and exceptions set forth in Subsections 702 through 712:
701.1 Regulations for Detached Single-Family Residential Permits and Multiple
Single-Family Dwellings (Townhouses) as Defined by the International
Residential Code (IRC):
? International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings
(IRC), 2012 Edition
? Illinois State Plumbing Code (ISPC), Latest Edition as mandated by the
State of Illinois
? International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2012 Edition
? NFPA 70, National Electric Code (NEC), 2011 Edition
? International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2012 Edition
? International Swimming Pool and Spa Code – 2012 Edition
701.2 Regulations for Commercial, Industrial, and all Permits Other Than Detached
Single-Family Residential and Multiple Single-Family Dwellings
(Townhouses):
? International Building Code (IBC), 2012 Edition
? International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2012 Edition
? International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2012 Edition
? International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2012 Edition
? Illinois State Plumbing Code (ISPC), Latest Edition as mandated by the
State of Illinois
? International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2012 Edition
? International Fire Code (IFC), 2012 Edition
? International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 2012
? NFPA 70, National Electric Code (NEC), 2011 Edition
? NFPA 101, Life Safety Code (NFPA 101), 2012 Edition
? Illinois Accessibility Code (IAC), Latest Edition as mandated by the State
of Illinois
? International Existing Building Code , 2012 Edition
701.3 Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance conflict with specific or implied
provisions of the codes, rules, or regulations set forth in Section 701.1 or
701.2, as herein incorporated, the provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail
and govern.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
2 VII
702. International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (IRC), 2012
Edition
The following sections of the International Residential Code (IRC) are deleted,
modified, amended or added:
702.1 Section R101.1 Title. Add the Village of Burr Ridge in the space provided
for [Name of Jurisdiction].
702.2 Section R104.10.1 Areas Prone to Flooding. Delete the entire paragraph after
the section heading and replace with: For regulations pertaining to
construction in special flood hazard areas in addition to storm water run-off
requirements, refer to Chapters 7 and 8 of the Village of Burr Ridge
Municipal Code.
702.3 Section R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. Delete the entire section up to
R105.2.1 and replace with: Refer to Section 221 Permit Waived for Ordinary
Repairs of this Ordinance.
702.4 Section R105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application. Delete the entire
paragraph after the section heading and replace with: Refer to Section 222.1
of this Ordinance.
702.5 Section R105.5 Expiration. Delete the entire paragraph after the section
heading and replace with: Refer to Section 222 of this Ordinance.
702.6 Section R112.1 General. Delete all sections R112.1 through R112.4 and
replace with: Section R112.1 General. The Village Board shall function as
the Board of Appeals. All appeals shall be submitted in writing no more than
30 days after the issuance of a violation notice on the matter to be appealed.
702.7 Table R301.2.(1). Insert the following data:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
GROUND SNOW
LOAD
WIND SPEED
(mph)
SEISMIC DESIGN
CATEGORY
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM
WINTER DESIGN
TEMPATURE
ICE SHIELD
UNDERLAYMENT
REQUIRED
FLOOD HAZARDS
AIR FREEZING
INDEX
MEAN ANNUAL
TEMATURE
Weathering
Frost line
Depth
Termite
Decay
25
P.S.F.
90
mph
B Severe 42"
Moderate
to Heavy
Slight to
Moderate
0o F Yes * 1600 41oF
* Refer to Chapters 7 and 8 of the Village of Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
3 VII
702.8 Section R313 Residential Fire Sprinklers. Delete this section in its entirety.
702.9 Section R314.3.2 Smoke Alarms. Add the following sentence: For the
purpose of this section “immediate vicinity” shall mean within 15’-0” of the
bedroom door.
702.10 Section R403.2 Wood Foundations. Delete this section and Add: wood
foundation systems are not permitted.
702.11 Section R403.1.3.3 Add: Deck Piers. Piers for open decks without a roof or
enclosed walls shall be concrete a minimum of 10” in diameter, 42” below
grade, and 6” above grade. Masonry deck columns supported on concrete
piers shall be designed by a licensed architect.
702.12 Section R403.2 Footings for Wood Foundations. Delete this section in its
entirety.
702.13 Sections R403.3, R403.3.1 through R403.3.4 Frost Protected Shallow
Foundations. Delete these sections.
702.14 Section R404.1.8 Delete this section in its entirety.
702.15 Sections R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls through R404.4.11 Delete all
sections and tables in their entirety and add: wood foundation and ICF
foundation systems are not permitted.
702.16 Section R405.2 Wood Foundations. Delete this section in its entirety.
702.17 Section R406.3 Dampproofing for Wood Foundations. Delete this section in
its entirety.
702.18 Section R504 Pressure Preservative-Treated Wood Floors (On Ground).
Delete this section in its entirety and add the following: Treated wood floors
are not permitted to bear directly on ground.
702.19 Section R505 Steel Floor Faming. Delete all sections and tables in their
entirety.
702.20 Section R603 Steel Wall Framing. Delete all sections, figures, and tables and
add the following: Steel wall framing is not permitted for load bearing walls.
Steel wall framing is permitted for non-load bearing walls and furring.
702.21 Section R611 Insulating Concrete Form Wall Construction. Delete all
sections, figures, and tables and add the following: ICF wall construction is
not permitted.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
4 VII
702.22 Section R702.3.4 Insulating Concrete Form Walls. Delete this section.
702.23 Section R804 Steel Roof Framing. Delete this section in its entirety.
702.24 Section R.1006.2 Exterior Air Intake. Delete the following from the first
sentence: “or from spaces within the dwelling ventilated with outside air
such as crawl or attic spaces.”
702.25 Section R1006.6 Add a new section: All masonry fireplace combustion air
ducts shall be class O non-combustible ducts.
702.26 Delete Chapters 25 through 32 in their entirety.
702.27 Adopt Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs.
702.28 Delete Section AG105.2. (6) and replace with the following: Barriers and
fencing shall meet the restrictions set forth in the General Regulations of the
Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance.
702.29 For specific construction requirements, fire suppression, and fire alarm
requirements for townhouses and multiple-family dwellings, see the
amendments in Subsection XIII, International Fire Code, of this Ordinance.
703. Illinois State Plumbing Code (ISPC), Latest Edition
The following items are changes, additions or deletions to the Illinois State Plumbing
Code:
703.1 Temporary construction water
A. Backflow protection is required on all water outlets taken from the
Village water supply.
703.2 The following plumbing materials are allowed
A. Drain, waste, vent
a. Schedule 40 PVC below ground
b. Cast iron
c. Galvanized (above ground only)
d. Copper type K,L,M no DVV
e. Foam core PVC above ground only, non pressure lines (1 & 2
family dwellings only)
f. Ductile iron
g. Schedule 40 PVC (above ground only)
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
5 VII
B. Water
a. Type K or L only above ground
b. Type K copper below grade
c. Brass
d. Galvanized
e. Cross Linked Polyethylene (Inside 1 and 2 family dwellings
only)
C. Storm drainage
a. PVC Schedule 40 or greater above grade
b. Cast iron or ductile iron below grade
c. Clean out at base of stack
703.3 The following are required for all pipe sizing:
A. Drain and waste
a. Minimum sewer size 4 inch
b. Full size clean out within 5 feet of foundation wall
c. Minimum size to kitchen sink 2 inch
d. Future bathroom in basement requires minimum two inch
ejector pump
B. Water service sizes allowed
a. Minimum 1-1/2 inch except on a smaller existing tap where
the sizing complies with the Illinois Plumbing Code
b. Allowable sizes 1-1/2 inch or greater depending on fixture
count
c. Assumes simultaneous use of all fixtures
d. Full size shut off valves the same size as the water service
C. Storm
a. Sized per the 2012 International Plumbing Code
b. Separate overflow system required
703.4 The following joints and connections are allowed:
A. Drain, waste and vent
a. Purple primer required
b. Proper adapter between PVC and other materials required
c. All elastomeric couplings require full stainless steel bands
d. No push rubber compression gaskets above ground for cast
iron
e. All closet collars must be properly secured to sub floor
Screws for wood floor Anchors drilled or poured in concrete
f. No wet vents
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
6 VII
B. Water
a. Lead free or silver solder
b. Flare, water service compression or silver solder below grade
c. Compression connection from fixture shut-off to fixture only
d. No compression on main distribution piping
e. No compression or corrugated water pipe at water heater
f. Dielectric union at water heater or dissimilar metals
g. Inside shut off for sill cocks
h. Plastic or polybutylene faucets supplies not allowed
i. Drip/drain valve at water meter
j. Vacuum relief valve on all elevated or bottom inlet water
heaters
k. Minimum 10 foot separation between sewer and water service
line or water service line shelved 18 inches above sewer
C. Storm
a. Clean out at base of stack
b. Purple primer on PVC inch opening below roof
c. Air and water same as residential same as residential
703.5 After August 1, 1990, all new buildings and all building additions where
basements, floors, rooms, or occupancy areas will be below ground level at
the building site shall have overhead plumbing installed for all connections to
sanitary sewer facilities. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any
building or building addition commenced subsequent to August 1, 1990, that
is not in compliance with the provisions hereof.
704. International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2012 Edition
The following sections of the International Plumbing Code (IPC) are deleted,
modified, amended or added:
704.l Section 101.1 Title. Insert Village of Burr Ridge in the space provided for
[Name of Jurisdiction].
704.2 Section 106.6.2 Refer to fee schedule in Section 250 of this Ordinance #860.
704.3 Section 106.6.3 Delete this section in its entirety.
704.4 Section 109 Delete this section in its entirety and add: The Village Board
shall act as the Board of Appeals. All appeals shall be submitted in writing
no more than 30 days after the issuance of a violation notice on the matter to
be appealed.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
7 VII
704.5 Delete Chapters 2 through 13 and refer to the latest edition of the Illinois
State Plumbing Code and the changes, additions, and deletions outlined in
Article VII Section II of this Ordinance #860.
705. NFPA 70, National Electrical Code (NEC), 2011 Edition
The following sections of the NEC are deleted, modified, amended, or added:
705.1 Article 80 - Delete this section in its entirety and add the following: Appeals
Board: The Village Board shall function as the Board of Appeals. All
appeals shall be submitted in writing not more than 30 days after the issuance
of a violation notice.
705.2 Delete the following articles in the National Electric Code: (The following
wiring methods are not permitted.)
Article 320 – Armored Cable: Type AC
Article 326 – Integrated Gas Spacer Cable: IGS
Article 330 – Metal-clad Cable: Type MC
Article 332 – Mineral-insulated, Metal Sheathed Cable: Type MI
Article 334 – Nonmetallic Sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC, and NMS
Article 338 – Service-Entrance Cable: Type Se and USE
Article 550 – Mobile Homes, Manufactured Homes, and Mobile Home Parks
705.3 Section 210.12 (A) Revise Arc faults are required in bedrooms only
706. International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2012 Edition
The following sections of the International Mechanical Code are deleted, modified,
amended, or added.
706.1 Section 101.1 Title. Insert Village of Burr Ridge in the space provided for
[name of jurisdiction.]
705.2 Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule. See Section 250 in this Ordinance.
705.3 Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds. Delete this section in its entirety.
705.4 Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace with Article V, Section 501, of this Ordinance #860.
705.5 Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders. Enter $200.00 in the space provided for
[Amount] and delete the last part of the sentence “or more than [amount]
dollars.”
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
8 VII
705.6 Section 109 Means of Appeal. Delete this section and add the following:
“The Village Board shall function as the Board of Appeals. All appeals shall
be submitted in writing no more than 30 days after the issuance of a violation
notice.
705.7 Adopt Appendix A
707. International Fuel-Gas Code (IFGC), 2012 Edition
The following sections of the International Fuel-Gas Code are deleted, modified,
amended, or added.
707.1 Section 101.1 Title. Insert Village of Burr Ridge in space provided for [name
of jurisdiction].
707.2 Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule. See Section 250 of this Ordinance.
707.3 Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds. Delete this section.
707.4 Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace with Article V, Section 501, of this Ordinance #860.
707.5 Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders. Enter $200.00 in the space provided for
[Amount] and delete the last part of the sentence “or more than [amount]
dollars.”
707.6 Section 109 Means of Appeal. Delete this section and add the following:
“The Village Board shall function as the Board of Appeals.” All appeals
shall be submitted in writing no more than 30 days after the issuance of a
violation notice.
707.7 Section 403.5.4 Corrygates Stainless Steel Tubing Delete the section in its
707.7 Adopt Appendices A, B, C
708. Illinois Accessibility Code (IAC), Latest Edition
No changes, deletions, or modifications to the Illinois Accessibility Code.
709. International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2012 Edition
709.1 Sections C101.1 and R101.1 Title. Insert Village of Burr Ridge in the space
provided for [Name of Jurisdiction].
709.2 Section C108.4 and R108.4 5. Stop Work Orders. Enter $200.00 in the space
provided for [Amount] and delete the last part of the sentence “or more than
[amount] dollars.”
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
9 VII
710. International Building Code, 2012 Edition
The following sections of the IBC are deleted, modified, amended or added:
710.1 Section 101.1 Insert the Village of Burr Ridge
710.2 Section 102.4 and 102.4.1 Change as follows: Referenced Codes and
Standards: The standards referenced in this code and listed in Chapter 35
shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed
extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the
provisions of this code and reference standards, the most stringent shall
apply.
710.3 Section 109.2 See Fee Schedule Section 250 in this Ordinance.
710.4 Section 113 Board of Appeals. Delete entire section. The Village Board
shall function as the Board of Appeals. All Appeals shall be submitted in
writing no more than 30 days after the issuance of a violation notice on the
matter to be appealed.
710.5 Section 113.4 Penalties. See Section 701 in this Ordinance.
710.6 Section 114 Stop Work Orders See fee Schedule Section 520 in this
Ordinance
710.7 Section 310.7 Add the following: For walls and openings in R-3 and R-4
Use groups within six (6) feet of adjacent buildings or property lines, a two
(2) hour fire resistance rating shall be provided. All two (2) hour fire
resistive rated walls shall either protrude through the outer roofline or shall
have horizontal roofline protection, as shall be pre-approved by the code
official.
710.8 Section 708.1 Change as follows: Add line 6 tenant spaces are required to
have a minimum of a one hour fire rating.
710.9 Section 901.9 Vacant Buildings: Vacant or unoccupied buildings or portions
thereof shall maintain all required sprinkler, standpipe, fire alarm and/or
protective signaling systems and all component parts in a workable condition
at all times.
710.10 Section 903.2 Fire Sprinklers: Delete sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10.3
and insert the following:
All new buildings and structures shall have an automatic fire sprinkler
system installed. This includes duplexes and townhomes. Exceptions to
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
10 VII
this requirement are limited to detached buildings which comply with all of
the following:
1. Less than 1,000 square feet
2. Maximum one story
3. No below grade areas
4. No High hazard storage or process
5. No residential or dwelling units
6. Minimum separation distance 20 feet
710.12 Section 905 Standpipe Systems: Delete text and Add: Fire standpipes where
required: Standpipes shall be installed on new construction when:
1. Any part of the building is over thirty (30) feet above the lowest level
for access.
2. Any floor of the building is three (3) or more stories in height.
3. When any part of the building is over one hundred fifty (150) feet
from where the closest fire department vehicle can operate.
4. Design Requirements: All standpipes shall be Class I or III system
designed and installed in accordance with NFPA #14, Standpipe and
Hose Systems, 2010 Edition.
5. All two and one-half (2-1/2) inch outlets shall include a two and onehalf
(2-1/2) by one and one-half (1-1/2) inch reducer with a one and
one-half (1-1/2) inch cap.
6. Maintenance and Testing: The maintenance program for fire
protection systems and components shall conform to the requirements
in this Ordinance.
7. The system(s) shall be tested in the presence of the appropriate Fire
District’s code official if the adequacy of the system(s) is required.
710.13 Section 905.3A Add the following: Any floor of the building is three (3) or
more stories in height.
710.14 Section 907.2.9 Automatic Fire Alarm Systems: Delete sections 907.2.1
through 907.2.7 and insert the following:
All new buildings and structures as listed shall have a fire alarm system
installed as follows:
1. Groups A, B, E, I M, R
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
11 VII
2. Groups, F, H and S Manual pull stations though out the building.
Smoke and heat detection in any accessory areas that would be as
classified in item # 1
710.15 Delete sections 907.2.8 and 907.2.9 and insert: Install complete system in
all Groups R-1 and R-2 with the exception of existing buildings of R-2
Use Group with six (6) units or less, such as lodging house, dormitories,
apartments and similar occupancies.
710.16 ADD Section 907.2.24 All buildings having multiple uses and all other
buildings over one (1) story in height; and one (1) story buildings over one
thousand (1,000) square feet in area with the following exceptions:
Existing one (1) story buildings under five thousand (5,000) square feet in
area and multi -family residences having six (6) units or less.
710.17 Section 907.2.25 Add the following: All Townhomes.
710.18 Section 1014.1 Add the following sentence: All areas, rooms, and spaces
over 2,000 square feet shall have a minimum of two separate remote exits
except for multiple-family residential dwelling units located on a single story
with up to 2,500 square feet and with an occupancy load not to exceed 12.5
persons may have only one means of exit provided said unit provides an
exterior area of rescue and that the building, unit and the exterior area of
rescue are protected throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system
in accordance with 903.3.1.1.
710.19 Section 1021.2 Add item number 4 as follows: All buildings over 2,000
square feet shall have a minimum of two separate remote exits.
710.21 Section 1027.5 Hard Surface Requirements and Remove all Exceptions:
Delete the exceptions and Add: From any exit discharge to the public way,
the walking surface shall be a paved or other permanent hard surface that
shall be maintained year round as approved by the code official.
710.22 Section 1807 and 1808 Wood footings and foundations – Delete entire
section. Wood footings and foundations are not permitted.
710.23 Section 3412.2 Original Village of Burr Ridge Building Ordinance adopted
January 23, 1957.
710.24 See the Chapter 35 for an expanded list of approved referenced standards.
710.25 Delete Chapter 11, Accessibility and replace with “See Article VII, Section
701 VIII of this Ordinance
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
12 VII
710.26 Delete Chapter 27, Electrical, and replace with “See Article VII, Section 701
IV of this Ordinance.
710.27 Delete Chapter 29, Plumbing Systems, and replace with “See Article VII,
Section 701 III of this Ordinance.
711. NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2012 Edition
There are no changes, deletions or modification to NFPA 101 Life Safety Code.
712. International Fire Code (IFC), 2012 Edition
The following sections of International Fire Code are deleted, modified, amended, or
added:
712.1 101.1 Insert: Village of Burr Ridge
712.2 Section 101.1 Insert: It is hereby noted that the Village of Burr Ridge
defers plan review authority regarding matters of fire prevention and fire
protection to the Pleasantview Fire Protection District and the Tri-State
Fire Protection District in adherence with the particular fire districts'
geographical boundaries with ultimate final authority for decisions given to
the Village of Burr Ridge Board of Trustees.
712.3 Section 102.7 and 102.7.1 Change as follows: Reference Standards: The
standards referenced in this code and listed in Chapter 44 shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of
this code and referenced standards, the most stringent shall apply.
712.4 Section 103.1.1 It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Chief
Administrative of the appropriate Fire District, or their designee, to enforce
the provisions of this Code. The designated enforcement officer of this
code is herein referred to as the Code Official.
712.5 Section 104.11.3 Add: Barricading Vacant or Fire Damaged Property:
Every person owning or having charge or control of any vacant or fire
damaged building shall remove all combustible waste and refuse therefrom
and lock, barricade, or otherwise secure all windows, doors, and other
openings in the building to prohibit entry by unauthorized persons.
712.6 Section 105.4.1 Add: Analysis Review and Approval of New
Construction Plans: The appropriate Fire Protection District's Bureau of
Fire Prevention shall analyze, review, and approve all plans for new
construction (as defined by this code and those codes of the appropriate
Fire Protection District) in that District; that approval will certify that, if
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
13 VII
the construction is completed in conformity with the plans and
specifications submitted to the Bureau of Fire Prevention then that
construction will be in compliance with the then applicable District Codes
and Ordinances.
712.7. Section 105.4.7 Add: Analysis Review and Approval of Minor Alterations
and Repairs: The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall analyze, review, and
approve all plans for any minor alterations or repairs to property in the
appropriate Fire Protection District.
712.8 Section 105.4.8 Add: Application Requirements: All persons, firms, and
corporations seeking to build new construction within the Village of Burr
Ridge shall make application for the approval of all plans and
specifications therefore by submittal of the same, along with an application
form and any other information as may be required by the Village of Burr
Ridge Building Department and the appropriate Bureau of Fire Prevention.
New construction is prohibited in the Village of Burr Ridge without the
prior approval of the appropriate Bureau of Fire Prevention, and all new
construction shall be constructed and completed in strict compliance with
the plans and specifications and any other documents submitted to and
approved by the Village of Burr Ridge Building Department and the
appropriate Bureau of Fire Prevention.
712.9 Section 201.5 Add: Abbreviations
1. The abbreviations NFPA and NFiPA mean National Fire Protection
Association.
2. The abbreviation IFC shall mean the International Fire Code, 2012
Edition.
3. The abbreviation LSC shall mean the NFPA #101, Life Safety
Code, 2009 Edition.
712.10 Section 202.1 Add: Definitions
1. Boarding Houses, Multi-Family Dwellings: Use Group R-2 shall
include all boarding houses and similar buildings arranged for the
shelter and sleeping accommodations in which the occupants are
primarily not transient in nature.
2. Change of Use: For the purpose of determining a "change in use",
this shall mean the change from one general property use to
another, or change from one specific property use to another within
the same general property use. Listings of both general and specific
property uses are found in NFPA #901, Uniform Fire Coding for
Fire Protection.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
14 VII
3. Buildings or parts of a building vacant for more than one (1) year
shall be considered a change of use.
4. Code Official: Wherever the term "Code Official" appears in this
Fire Prevention Ordinance, it shall mean the appropriate Chief
Administrator or designee.
5. Condominium: A condominium is a form of ownership of real
estate.
6. Fireworks: The term fireworks shall mean and include any
explosive composition, or any substance or combination of
substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible
or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion,
combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and shall include blank
cartridges and toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type
of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs,
sparklers, smoke bombs, snakes, or facsimile, or other fireworks of
like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive
compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual
effects: provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall not
include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths (25/100)
grains or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so
constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when
in place for the explosion; and the toy pistol paper or plastic caps
which contain less than twenty hundredths (20/100) grains of
explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at
all times.
7. New Construction: New construction, when used in this code, are
(1) those new buildings, (2) those buildings having height and/or
area added to an existing building, (3) those buildings having
interior alterations, (4) those buildings changing Use Groups.
8. Townhouse/Rowhouse: A townhouse or rowhouse is considered
are constructed following the International Residential Code. For
walls and openings within six (6) feet of adjacent buildings or
property lines, a two (2) hour fire resistance rating shall be
provided. All two (2) hour fire resistive rated walls shall either
protrude through the outer roofline or shall have horizontal roofline
protection, as shall be pre-approved by the code official.
9. Uniform Fire Coding for Fire Protection.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
15 VII
712.11 Section 319Add: Cooking and Heating Appliances; Hotels, Motels,
Boarding Houses, Rooming Houses, and Dormitories: The use of any
cooking or heating appliances, other than what has been provided by any
hotel, motel, boarding house, rooming house, or dormitory shall be
prohibited.
712.12 Section F-311.2.2 Delete text and Exceptions, Add: Fire Protection Vacant
Buildings: Vacant or unoccupied buildings or portions thereof shall
maintain all required sprinkler, standpipe, fire alarms and/or protective
signaling systems, and all component parts in a workable condition at all
times.
712.13 Section The system(s) shall be tested in the presence of the appropriate Fire
District's code official if the adequacy of the system(s) is questioned.
712.14 Section 315.6 Add: Periodic Removal: Combustible materials shall be
removed daily, or more often as is necessary, to suitable vaults, bins,
dumpsters, compactors or separate buildings. Such practices shall be as
approved by the code official.
712.15 Section 503.1.1 Delete the Exceptions and add the following: Public
Access and Fire Lanes on Private Property, Devoted to Public Use, shall be
provided so that:
1. Public or private access is provided to each building (including any
building under construction) so that the first responding fire
apparatus will be able to be so located that all points of the interior
of the building may be reached by one hundred fifty (150) feet of
initial attack hose.
2. Where the size or height of the building does not allow Section
503.1.1(1) to be met, an interior standpipe equipped with hose
connection approved by the code official may be permitted as an
exception. The standpipe system shall be connected to a public
water supply system. Refer to Section 905.1 (Design Requirements
for Standpipe Systems).
3. Public or private access for fire apparatus shall be provided around
the building.
4. Access shall be designed so that there may be proper operation of
ladders and mechanically elevated mechanisms.
5. Minimum width of the fire lanes shall be twenty (20) feet with
greater widths to accommodate vehicles when turning and
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
16 VII
laddering buildings. The turning radius shall be per the current
handout from the appropriate Fire District.
6. Access routes shall be so arranged that apparatus may respond to all
points of the building.
7. Parking of vehicles otherwise obstructing such fire lanes or access
routes shall be prohibited at all times.
8. The access requirements may be modified by the building code
official where adequate building access openings and a complete
fire suppression system is provided.
9. Permanent all weather signs identifying fire lanes and access ways
shall be posted, as determined by the code official.
10. A minimum of six (6) inches of granular stone surfaced by at least
two (2) inches of bituminous asphalt or similar permanent material
shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
11. Access roads shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
building. The distance is measured from the building to the closest
edge of the road.
12. Greater setback distances are required for tall buildings to allow for
proper laddering of the building.
13. For buildings under construction, this criterion may be modified by
the code official based on the type, extent and status of
construction.
712.16 Section 505 Premises Identification: Delete Section 505.1 and replace with
the following:
1. Responsibility: All owners of every building within the corporate
limits of the Village of Burr Ridge shall place and maintain on the
building or building accessory (defined as a mailbox, sign, post, or
other such item) Arabic numbers showing the proper street number
assigned to the building by the municipality or county in which the
building is located.
2. Design: The Arabic numbers are to be a minimum of three (3)
inches in height.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
17 VII
3. Exception: On buildings that are set back from the street in excess
of forty (40) feet (from the curb line), the Arabic numbers are to be
a minimum of four (4) inches in height.
4. Building Accessory: On buildings that are not visible from the
street, the building accessory with the required Arabic numbers
shall be located within ten (10) feet of the driveway or sidewalk
leading to the building.
5. Contrasting Colors: The Arabic numbers shall have a color that is
different from and contrasts with the building or building accessory
to which the numbers are attached and shall be visible from any
direction of travel from the street.
6. Multi-Tenant Buildings: Multi-tenant buildings with multiple
access locations shall have building identification on the front and
rear of the building for each tenant.
712.17 Section F-506 Add: Rapid Entry System (Key Boxes) Delete Section 506
and add the following:
1. General: All buildings that are equipped with an approved fire
alarm system that consists of automatic detection and/or all
buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system
and are interconnected to an alarm monitoring agency shall have an
approved key box system.
2. Location: The code official shall approve the location of the key
box.
3. Contents: The key box shall contain keys to gain necessary access
to the building at:
a. Locked points of ingress/egress whether on the exterior or
interior of the building.
b. Locked electrical, mechanical, or storage rooms.
c. Elevator controls.
d. Alarm panels and devices.
e. Other areas designated by the code official.
4. Key Identification: Each key shall be identified in an approved
manner for quick use in case of an emergency.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
18 VII
5. Master Key: Where possible, a single master key shall be provided.
6. Alarm: At the request of the owner or lessee, the code official shall
permit the installation of a key box tamper switch connected to the
building's security alarm system.
712.18 Section 508 Fire Protection Water Supplies: Delete the entire section and
replace with the following:
1. Application: This section defines water supplies for use for new
construction.
2. Water Source: All buildings or structures shall be served by a
public water supply system meeting this criterion. This system
shall be under pressure with an average static pressure of not less
than thirty-five (35) pounds per square inch (psi). Flows shall be
calculated at twenty (20) (psi) residual pressure. The supplies shall
be available for a continuous four (4) hour duration except for flows
less than two thousand (2,000) gallons per minute (gpm) need be
available for a two (2) hour duration.
3. All changes to the Village water system to comply with the water
source requirements shall be at the expense of the owner or
developer.
4. Fire Flow Required: The following water supplies in gallons per
minute (gpm) are required based on the hazards therein:
a. Single-Family Detached Residential - one thousand (1,000)
(gpm) to one thousand five hundred (1,500) (gpm).
b. Town/Row or Cluster Housing - one thousand five hundred
(1,500) (gpm) to two thousand (2,000) (gpm).
c. Apartment Type Construction - three thousand (3,000)
(gpm) to four thousand (4,000) (gpm).
d. Industrial and Storage - three thousand (3,000) (gpm) to five
thousand (5,000) (gpm).
e. Research and Development Laboratories - three thousand
(3,000) (gpm) to four thousand (4,000) (gpm).
f. Business and Commercial Areas - three thousand (3,000)
(gpm) to four thousand five hundred (4,500) (gpm).
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
19 VII
g. Mercantile Centers - three thousand (3,000) (gpm) to six
thousand (6,000) (gpm).
h. Assembly and Educational - three thousand (3,000) (gpm) to
five thousand (5,000) (gpm).
i. Health Care and Institutional - three thousand (3,000) (gpm)
to four thousand (4,000) (gpm).
j. High Hazard - three thousand (3,000) (gpm) to eight
thousand (8,000) (gpm).
5. Plans Submitted: Plans shall be provided prior to any construction
showing the location of fire hydrants and sprinklers and/or
standpipe connection on either public or private property and shall
be approved by the code official before any building construction
starts.
All changes to the Village water system to comply with the hydrant
requirements shall be at the expense of the owner or developer. An
approved hydrant layout shall be submitted before a permit is
issued.
6. Distance to Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be located along public
streets so that no portion of the building or structure to be protected
will be over two hundred fifty (250) feet from any hydrant. Where
this may not be physically possible, additional hydrants shall be
located upon the premises accessible to motorized fire apparatus.
7. Hydrants in Operation: Water supplies, including fire hydrants in
accordance with this code, shall be in operation prior to the start of
construction of any building.
8. Hydrants Along Streets: Hydrants shall be located at street
intersections with intermediate hydrants provided so that the space
between hydrants shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet. This
distance shall be measured along an approved fire lane, access
route, street or similar apparatus route.
9. Multiple Hydrants Required: At least two (2) hydrants shall be
located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of each building.
10. Special Locations: Additional fire hydrants may be required and
located closer than the spacing required for high hazard
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
20 VII
classifications, as defined in NFPA 101 (Life Safety Code) (2003),
for dead end roads or at the termination of cul-de-sacs.
11. Supplemental Hydrants: Additional fire hydrants shall be provided
within five hundred (500) feet of each building so that the required
fire flow divided by one thousand (1,000) will equal the number of
hydrants available.
12. Connections: Hydrants shall be located in close proximity (50'-75')
to any fire department connection (sprinkler or standpipe) as
determined by the code official.
13. Parking Restricted: Parking is not permitted within ten (10) feet of a
fire hydrant.
14. Access: Access to fire hydrants shall be by an approved roadway
adequate in width (minimum twenty (20) feet), clearance and
strength for firefighting purposes. Such routes shall be maintained
accessible during all seasons of the year. Easements for access or
other access approval may be required for private roads.
15. Distance to Roadway: Hydrants will be located approximately five
(5) feet from all weather roadways.
16. Distance to Buildings: Hydrants shall be located no closer than
twenty-five (25) feet from the building to be protected. Hydrants
shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet from transformers,
other hazardous electrical equipment or other hazards to the use of
the fire hydrants.
17. Pumper Outlet Direction: Each hydrant shall have the pumper
(steamer) connection facing the primary street and shall be
accessible so that a connection can be made between the hydrant
and the apparatus located in the street with twenty (20) feet of
suction hose.
18. Hydrant Outlet Location: Fire hydrant outlets shall be a
minimum of eighteen (18) inches and no more than thirty-six (36)
inches above the finished grade.
19. Hydrant Protection: When subject to physical damage from
vehicles, fire hydrants shall be protected from damage by approved
methods, including barriers.
20. Fire hydrants used in conjunction with water supplies shall be of a
type acceptable to the Village of Burr Ridge Water Department and
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
21 VII
the appropriate Fire Protection District. Hydrants shall meet the
standards of the American Water Works Association C-502.
Hydrants shall include a six (6) inch barrel, two (2) two and onehalf
(2-1/2) inch and one (1) four and one-half (4-1/2) inch outlets.
Outlet threads shall be American National Standard. An auxiliary
gate valve shall be provided on the hydrant branch line (minimum
six (6) inch diameter).
21. Existing fire hydrants that are replaced shall meet the above criteria.
712.19 Section 511 Add: Miscellaneous Provisions
1. Tenant Separation: Each tenant space shall be separated from other
tenant spaces and corridors by walls, partitions and floor-ceiling
assemblies having at least a one (1) hour rating approved fire
resistance rating. The floor-ceiling assembly is not required to have
a one (1) hour rating when not required by the IBC and the building
has a complete automatic sprinkler system.
2. Hazardous Areas: Rooms used for storage, elevator equipment,
electrical equipment, boiler or furnace rooms, fuel storage, janitor's
closets, laundry rooms, maintenance shops, kitchens and similar
hazardous areas shall be separated from other building areas by
wall/floor/ceiling/window/opening assemblies having a fire
resistance rating of not less than one (1) hour with appropriate
protection of openings into the rooms. Opening protection shall be
per the IBC.
The floor ceiling assembly is not required to have a one rating when
not required by the IBC.
3. Fire Resistance Rating, Maintenance, and Repair: The fire
resistance of walls, floors, ceilings, and partitions, including
openings therein and other static fire protection requirements shall
be maintained in proper condition and repair at all times.
4. Smoke Resistance: Walls, floors, ceilings, and partitions, including
openings therein that can assist in the prevention of smoke and gas
movement, shall be maintained in proper condition at all times.
5. Ambulance Cot: Where elevators are provided, at least one (1)
elevator cab shall be of such size to accommodate a cot that is 24
inches by 76 inches in the horizontal open position and the
accompanying personnel.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
22 VII
712.20 Section 901.6.3 Add: Maintenance and Testing: The maintenance program
for fire protection systems and components shall conform to the
requirements in this Ordinance.
712.21 Section 901.5.2 Add: Building Occupancy: When any building or structure
is required to be equipped with an approved fire protection system, the
system shall be in full operation before the building may be occupied.
712.22 Section -901.5.3 Add: Complete Information: The code official shall
determine the detail of information required, including a description of the
maintenance performed, time, date, and extent of test performed.
712.23 Section 901.6.2 Records: Delete text and add: Reports shall be submitted
to the appropriate Fire District Bureau of Fire Prevention on an annual
basis.
712.24 Section 903.2 Automatic Sprinkler Systems: Minimum Requirements:
1. Design: Automatic fire suppression systems shall be designed in
accordance with appropriate standards of the National Fire
Protection Association. The code official shall approve design
criteria.
2. Automatic Sprinkler Protection: The fire suppression system shall
be an automatic sprinkler system unless the code official approves
another type of system.
3. Periodic Testing and Inspection: All automatic sprinkler systems
shall be maintained, periodically inspected, and tested in
accordance with NFPA 13, NFPA 25, Chapter 45 and any other
applicable NFPA Standards.
4. Whenever a backflow prevention device is required to be installed
on any existing sprinkler system, the system shall be recalculated to
assure that the design density is satisfied. Should the design density
be inadequate, the automatic sprinkler system shall be redesigned as
needed to be in compliance with the required design density.
5. Valve Control Area Diagram: A diagram showing areas served by
control valves shall be placed adjacent to such valves and in the riser
room.
6. Where Required: The following are locations where an automatic fire
suppression system is required:
7. Where required in the 2012 IBC.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
23 VII
8. All new construction over one (1) story in height and all other one
(1) story buildings over two thousand (2,000) square feet in area. .
Any provisions of the IBC which are stricter shall apply.
9. All stories below grade.
10. All buildings or structures for the manufacture of combustible
goods or merchandise, and all business occupancies, exceeding
seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
11. Existing motor vehicle repair or storage buildings exceeding seven
thousand (7,000) square feet.
12. Existing storage buildings over seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
13. Existing hotels, motels, boarding houses, rooming houses, and
dormitories.
14. All sprinkler control valves shall be electronically supervised by the
building's fire alarm system and shall be directly connected to the
appropriate Fire Protection District's Communications Center in an
approved manner.
15. All sprinkler control valves shall be chained and locked in the open
position.
712.25 Section 905 Standpipe Systems: Delete text and Add: Fire Standpipes where
Required: Standpipes shall be installed on new construction when:
1. Any part of the building is over thirty (30) feet above the lowest
level for access.
2. Any floor of the building is three (3) or more stories in height.
3. When any part of the building is over one hundred fifty (150) feet
from where the closest fire department vehicle can operate.
712.26 Section 905.1 Design Requirements: All standpipes shall be Class I or III
system designed and installed in accordance with NFPA #14, Standpipe
and Hose Systems, 2000 Edition.
712.27 Section 905.2 All two and one-half (2-1/2) inch outlets shall include a two
and one-half (2-1/2) by one and one-half (1-1/2) inch reducer with a one
and one-half (1-1/2) inch cap.
712.28 Section 907 Fire Alarms and Detection Systems: Delete the entire Section
907 and replace with the following:
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
24 VII
1. Protective Signaling (Fire Alarm) Systems and Automatic
Detection Systems.
2. Design: Automatic protective signaling (fire alarm) systems and
automatic detection systems shall be designed in accordance with
the appropriate standards of the National Fire Protection
Association. The Code Official shall approve the design criteria.
3. Where Required: The following are locations where a protective
signaling system with automatic detection is required.
4. Residential Uses: In all buildings of Use Groups R-1 and R-2.
5. All buildings having multiple uses, including residential use (except
R-4).
6. Exception: Existing buildings of R-2 Use Group with six (6) units
or less, such as lodging house, dormitories, apartments, and similar
occupancies.
7. Townhomes All new construction townhomes or similarly used
buildings.
8. Other Uses: All other buildings over one (1) story in height, and
one (1) story buildings over one thousand (1,000) square feet in
area.
9. Exception: Existing one (1) story buildings under five thousand
(5,000) square feet in area.
10. Panel Identification: An outside strobe light shall be located at the
entrance providing access to each alarm and/or annunciator panel.
11. Annunciator Panel: An annunciator panel is required where the fire
alarm control panel is not visible from the building exterior. The
annunciator panel shall be visible from the exterior of the building.
12. Zone Identification: Each zone of each panel shall be clearly and
permanently identified in a manner approved by the code official.
13. Periodic Testing and Inspection: All automatic protective signaling
(fire alarm) systems and automatic detection systems shall be
maintained, periodically inspected and tested in accordance with
NFPA 72, Chapter 80, and any other applicable NFPA standards.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
25 VII
14. All protective signaling system connections shall be installed in a
method approved by the appropriate Fire Protection District.
15. Exception: Single-family residences.
16. Signals to be monitored: All alarm, supervisory, panel trouble, line
trouble or loss of communication signals shall be monitored at
the appropriate Fire Protection District's Communications Center.
17. Systems Out of Service: Protective-signaling systems shall be
maintained in service at all times. Systems shall not be out of
service for more than eight (8) hours for maintenance or repair.
18. Zones: Each floor and each type of system shall be separately
zoned.
19. Alerting Devices: All alerting devices shall be an approved
audio/visual type.
20. Outside Alerting Device: All fire alarm and fire suppression
systems shall have an outside alerting device of a type and at a
location approved by the code official.
21. Duct Detectors: All duct smoke detectors installed or repaired after
the effective date of this Ordinance shall signal in a supervisory
condition only.
712.29 Section 909.1 Smoke Control Systems: Scope and Purpose: Add the
following:
1. Where Required: An emergency smoke control system shall be
provided in "new construction" as follows:
2. Sprinklered Buildings: In all sprinklered buildings with a gross area
(combined area of all floors) exceeding forty thousand (40,000)
square feet, including all "unlimited area" buildings as defined by
the applicable building code.
3. Multiple Story or Height of Buildings: In all buildings over three
(3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, whichever is less.
4. Atriums: In buildings with multi-story atriums or open wells.
5. Covered Malls: In all covered malls, including individual tenant
spaces and anchor stores.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
26 VII
712.30 Section 909.2 General Design Requirements: Add the following:
1. Where roof gravity venting is used, the maximum spacing between
vents shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet. The vent
area to floor area ratio shall not exceed 1:100 for ordinary hazards
and 1:150 for light hazards.
2. High Hazard: Roof venting requirements shall be determined by the
specific hazards involved.
3. Mechanical Systems: Mechanical smoke removal may be used in
lieu of gravity venting. A minimum of six (6) air changes per hour
of the entire space shall be provided.
4. Supply/Return Air: The mechanical smoke management system
shall have an adequate supply and/or return air source to allow the
system to operate properly.
5. Controls: The design of the controls for the systems, including
their location shall be approved by the code official.
712.31 Section 913.5.5 Add: Pump Flow Tests: Each fire pump shall be tested
annually by discharging to the atmosphere the required flow one hundred
percent (100%) rated capacity at one hundred percent (100%) of the rated
pressure and at one hundred fifty percent (150%) rated capacity at sixtyfive
percent (65%) of the rated pressure. The test results shall be recorded
and a copy of all pump test information shall be submitted to the code
official.
712.32 Section 1006.1 Illumination Required: Delete the Exceptions and Add:
Emergency Lighting: Emergency power supplies from an independent,
approved reliable source (battery or automatic starting generator) shall be
provided in all rooms and spaces where two (2) or more exits are required,
stairways, corridors, access routes and other exit components.
712.33 Section 1014.1 Add Item #3. Number and Locations of Exits: All rooms,
spaces, or buildings over 2,000 square feet in area shall have two separate
remote means of egress.
712.34 Chapter 56 Delete Chapter Add: Chapter 56 - Fireworks
1. Scope: Sale, handling, and display of fireworks: Except as
hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, copartnership,
or corporation to offer for sale, display, or expose for
sale, sell at retail, provide storage for, use or possess, or
manufacture fireworks, or explode any fireworks within the Village
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
27 VII
of Burr Ridge or allow any such acts on property owned by such
person, firm, co-partnership, or corporation within the Village,
provided, however, the code official may issue a permit for
supervised public displays of fireworks, provided the applicant for
such permit shall comply with the regulations hereinafter
established for the issuance of such permit. The fire code official
shall issue the fireworks permit.
2. Explosives: The storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited.
3. Seizure: The code official shall seize, take, remove or cause to be
removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks or
explosives offered or exposed for display or sale, stored or held in
violation of this article.
4. Exceptions: Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed
to prohibit the use of fireworks by railroads, public utilities, public
and private carriers, or other transportation agencies, for signal
purposes or illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges, for a
show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or
sports, or for use by veteran or military organizations.
5. Requirements for Approved Displays: The supervised public
display of fireworks may be permitted in accordance with the
following requirements.
a. The person in charge of a public fireworks display shall
have a copy of the permit required by this Article in his
possession.
b. Due to the hazardous nature of materials involved, no
fireworks shall be stored on location prior to set up and
show time.
c. Personnel setting up and shooting the fireworks display
shall be experienced and professional shooters; a
Pyrotechnic/Blasters license or equivalent credentials are
acceptable.
d. Sufficient security shall be provided to keep all persons,
except personnel setting up and shooting the fireworks, at
least five hundred (500) feet from display area during set up
and firing.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
28 VII
e. The supplier of the fireworks shall have a current State of
Illinois permit identified by number.
f. There shall be no trees or utility poles or any type of
obstruction within fifty (50) feet of the firing range and the
firing range shall be no less than two hundred (200) feet
from railroads, highways, general public, or any other
structures, or six hundred (600) feet of any hospital, asylum
or infirmary.
g. The grass around any mortar shall be wet down
continuously for a minimum of eight (8) hours before firing,
or to the satisfaction of the code official. One (1) mortar
loader shall be provided for each six (6) mortars.
h. The appropriate Fire District may be at the site of the firing
with a minimum of one (1) engine company.
i. Mortar holes are to be drilled in a minimum of threequarters
(3/4) of the length of the mortar and dirt is to be
packed around the mortar.
j. Mortars shall be two (2) feet apart with the minimum
distance of six (6) feet between mortars of different sizes.
k. The loader and shooter shall wear tight fitting noncombustible
clothing and shall not have consumed or used
alcoholic beverages, drugs or controlled substances for
twelve (12) hours before firing, nor be under the influence
thereof.
l. No firing shall take place if the wind is twenty (20) miles
per hour or above, or if fireworks are wet.
m. All aerial displays shall be kept in wooden boxes with selfclosing
covers, the maximum size of which shall be thirtysix
(36) inches by twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-four
(24) inches; the boxes shall be placed two (2) inches off the
ground and boxes shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from
the mortars.
n. All shows shall be suspended for severe weather until
deemed safe by the Code Official or the Chief Administrator
or his designee.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
29 VII
6. Recovery Responsibility: The supplier of the fireworks shall be
solely responsible for the recovery of all fireworks and aerial
displays that have not been fired.
7. Search for Unfired Displays: Recovery or the search for unfired
displays shall start immediately, or not later than sunrise.
8. Guards: The area of a misfired shell shall be guarded by the display
company at its cost from the time of the firing until discovery and
removal of the shell.
9. Recovery Cost: The cost of recovering the shells shall be solely the
responsibility of the fireworks supplier and/or dealer.
712.35 Section 5703.1.1Add: Inside Storage of Fuel: Flammable and combustible
fuel stored inside a building shall be stored in approved metal containers
with self -closing lids and the total amount shall not exceed ten (10)
gallons.
712.36 Section 5703.5.1 Labeling Containers and Tanks Over Thirty (30) Gallons
Capacity: Any flammable or combustible liquid cans, containers, tanks, or
similar vessel having a capacity over thirty (30) gallons shall be labeled
using N.F.P.A. 704, Standard System for the Identification of the Fire
Hazards of Materials.
1. Outside Flammable Liquid Storage: Outside flammable liquid
storage tanks are not permitted above ground.
2. Fuel Dispensing Inside the Building: No fuel dispensing is allowed
inside of a building.
3. Basements, Pits and Sub-floor Work Areas: Basements, pits and
sub-floor work areas are not permitted in new construction for
service stations and repair garages.
712.37 Amend Section 5704.2 as follows:
5. Add: Automotive Service Stations: Above-ground tanks shall not
be utilized for the storage of motor fuels at automotive service
stations which the public has access to. Above-ground tanks
utilized for the storage of motor fuels at automotive service stations
to which the public does not have access to shall be installed in
accordance with this section and the requirements for fire-resistant
tanks or tanks in vaults specified in NFPA 30A listed in Chapter 80.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
30 VII
6. Add: Barrier Protection: Physical barriers complying with Section
312 shall be provided to protect the area where tanks, except those
installed in special enclosures, are located. Barriers shall be spaced
at a distance apart from each other and located at a distance away
from the tanks so that vehicles which are normally operating in the
area of the tanks are prevented from coming into contact with the
tanks. Additional and/or upgraded physical barrier protection shall
be required where deemed necessary by the Code Official.
7. Access: Each tank and each special enclosure shall be surrounded
by a clear open space not less than 3 feet (914mm) in width for
maintenance and inspection.
8. Add: Capacity Limits: Above-ground tanks containing combustible
liquids shall be limited to the following capacities. Tanks shall also
be installed in accordance with the requirements of this section.
9. Add: Class II Liquids - Tanks containing CLASS II liquids shall
not exceed 1,000 gallons individual capacity or 1,000 gallons
aggregate capacity. Tanks containing over 250 gallons of a CLASS
II liquid shall be installed in accordance with the requirements for
fire-resistant tanks and tanks in vaults specified in NFPA 30A listed
in Chapter 80. Such tanks shall also be approved and meet
equivalent standards of those tanks which are listed as
AProtected@ as defined by UL 2085. Tanks containing 250
gallons or less of a CLASS II liquid shall be installed in accordance
with the requirements for fire-resistant tanks specified in NFPA
30A listed in Chapter 80. Such tanks shall also be approved, and
meet equivalent standards of those tanks which are listed as AFire
Resistant@ as defined by UL 2080.
10. Add: Class III A Liquids - Tanks containing CLASS III A liquids
shall not exceed 1,500 gallons individual capacity or 1,500 gallons
aggregate capacity. Tanks containing over 1000 gallons of a
CLASS III A liquid shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements for fire-resistant tanks and tanks in vaults specified in
NFPA 30A listed in Chapter 80. Such tanks shall also be approved
and meet equivalent standards of those tanks which are listed as
AProtected@ as defined by UL 2085. Tanks containing 1000
gallons or less of a CLASS III A liquid shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements for fire-resistant tanks specified
in NFPA 30A listed in Chapter 80. Such tanks shall also be
approved, and meet equivalent standards of those tanks which are
listed as AFire Resistant@ as defined by UL 2080.
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
31 VII
11. Class III B Liquids - Tanks containing CLASS III B liquids shall
not exceed 2,000 gallons individual capacity or 2,000 gallons
aggregate capacity. Tanks containing over 1000 gallons of a
CLASS III B liquid shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements for fire-resistant tanks and tanks in vaults specified in
NFPA 30A listed in Chapter 80. Such tanks shall also be approved
and meet equivalent standards of those tanks which are listed as
AProtected@ as defined by UL 2085. Tanks containing from 100
gallons up to 1000 gallons of a CLASS III B liquid shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements for fire-resistant tanks
specified in NFPA 30A listed in Chapter 45. Such tanks shall also
be approved, and meet equivalent standards of those tanks which
are listed as AFire Resistant@ as defined by UL 2080.
12. Add: Overfill Prevention: Above-ground storage tanks shall be
equipped with overfill prevention equipment that will comply with
one of the following.
a. Automatically shut off the flow of liquid into the tank when
it is no more than ninety percent (90%) full.
b. Alert the transfer operator when the tank is no more than
ninety percent (90%) full by restricting the flow of liquid
into the tank or triggering a high-level alarm.
c. Other methods as approved by the Code Official.
13. Add: Distances to Buildings, Property Lines, etc.: The minimum
distance between above-ground tanks and other tanks, buildings,
sewers, catch basins, septic tanks and property lines shall be thirty
(30) feet. The minimum distance between tanks located within the
same aggregate tank area shall be five (5) feet.
Exception - Class III B liquids: The minimum distance between
above-ground tanks and other tanks, sewers, catch basins, septic
tanks and property lines shall be five (5) feet. The minimum
distance between tanks and buildings and between tanks located
within the same aggregate tank area shall be three (3) feet.
14. Add: Tank Labeling: All tanks shall be labeled in accordance with
5703.5 In addition, the following shall be displayed on all visible
tank sides in 4" or taller letters clearly legible, and in a contrasting
color to the tank.
- Either FLAMMABLE or COMBUSTIBLE (depending on contents
flashpoint)
- NO SMOKING
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
32 VII
- The common name of the contents; i.e. WASTE MOTOR OIL
712.38 Adopt the following Appendices: D, E, F, G, H, I, J.
Chapter 80 Change the following referenced standards
NFPA 2 – 2011 NFPA 11 - 2010 NFPA 12 – 2011 NFPA
12A-2009 NFPA 13 – 2010 NFPA -13D 2010 NFPA 13R – 2010
NFPA 14 – 2010 NFPA 15 – 2012 NFPA - 16 2011 NFPA 17
– 2009 NFPA 17A - 2009 NFPA 18 - 2011 NFPA 20 – 2010
NFPA 25 – 2011 NFPA 30 – 2012 NFPA 30A – 2012 NFPA
30B- 2011 NFPA 31 – 2011 NFPA 32 – 2011 NFPA 33 –
2011 NFPA 34 – 2011 NFPA 35 – 2011 NFPA 36 – 2009
NFPA 40 – 2011 NFPA 45- 2011 NFPA 50 – 2001 NFPA 51
– 2007 NFPA 51B – 2009 NFPA 61 – 2008 NFPA 70 – 2008
NFPA 72 – 2010 NFPA 85 – 2011 NFPA 96-2011 NFPA
120 – 2010 NFPA 252 –2008 NFPA 259 – 2008 NFPA 265 –
2011 NFPA 268 - 2007 NFPA 409 – 2011 NFPA 655 – 2007
NFPA 664 – 2012 NFPA 701 – 2010 NFPA 704 – 2012 NFPA
1124 – 2006 NFPA 2001 - 2012
713. International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2012 Edition
The following sections of International Existing Building Code are deleted, modified,
amended, or added:
713.1 Section 101.1 Insert “Village of Burr Ridge”.
713.2 Sections 1301.2 insert adopted January 23, 1957.
713.3 Section 1301.6 Add the following: When performing the compliance
alternative calculations, the provisions of this section will not supersede the
requirements in the Village of Burr Ridges’ amendments for fire sprinklers
or fire alarms.
713.4 Section 109.5 Court Review: Any person, whether or not a previous party
of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a
writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be
made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the
decision in the office of the chief administrative officer”. (Ord. 2000-O-34,
10-17-2000)
713.5 Chapter 15 - Change the following referenced standards
A. ICC - Delete the references to the International Plumbing Code in
any section and insert the Illinois Plumbing Code
B. NFPA - Change or add the standards with the edition listed in the
Article VII
Adoption of Regulations
33 VII
Fire Code
.
714. International Wildland-Urban Interface Code (IEBC), 2012 Edition
The following sections of International Wildland-Urban Interface Code are deleted,
modified, amended, or added:
714.1 Section 101.1 Insert “Village of Burr Ridge”.
714.2 Section 103.1 Insert “Village of Burr Ridge”.
714.3 Sections 109.7 Violation Penalties” - . Delete this section in its entirety and
replace with Article V, Section 501, of this Ordinance #860.
714.4 Section 114.4 “Enter $200.00 in the space provided for [Amount] and
delete the last part of the sentence “or more than [amount] dollars.”
714.5 Chapter 15 - Change the following referenced standards; Change or add the
standards with the edition listed in the Fire Code.
715. International Swimming Pool and Spa (ISPS, 2012 Edition
The following sections of the International Swimming and Spa Code are deleted,
modified, amended, or added.
715.1 Section 101.1 Title. Insert Village of Burr Ridge in space provided for [name
of jurisdiction].
715.2 Section 106.6.2 Fee Schedule. See Section 250 of this Ordinance.
715.3 Section 106.6.3 Fee Refunds. Delete this section.
715.4 Section 107.4 Violation Penalties. Delete this section in its entirety and
replace with Article V, Section 501, of this Ordinance #860.
715.5 Section 107.5 Stop Work Orders. Enter $200.00 in the space provided for
[Amount] and delete the last part of the sentence “or more than [amount]
dollars.”
VILLAGE OF BURR RIDGE
ZONING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NUMBER 834
ADOPTED AUGUST 11, 1997
AS AMENDED THROUGH March 1, 2019
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I TITLE I-1
II PURPOSE AND INTENT II-1
III INTERPRETATION AND SEPARABILITY
Interpretation III-1
Separability III-1
IV GENERAL REGULATIONS
Scope of Regulations IV-1
Allowable Use of Land, Buildings, or Structures IV-1
Control Over Bulk IV-2
Lots of Record in Residence Districts IV-2
Number of Buildings on a Lot IV-3
Lot Division IV-4
Yards, Courts and Other Open Areas IV-5
Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses IV-7
Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses –
Location & Regulation IV-12
Fences IV-23
Parking and Storage of Trailers, Mobile Homes, Motor Homes
Boats, Trucks, Commercial Vehicles and Buses IV-25
Sewer and Water Systems IV-27
Storm Water Detention & Retention Ponds and Flood-Plain Areas IV-27
Building Height and Permitted Roof Top Equipment Obstructions IV-28
Utility Exemptions IV-29
Temporary Model Residential Unit Regulations IV-30
Sign Control IV-30
Home Occupations IV-30
Satellite Dishes IV-32
Interpretation of Use Lists IV-32
Visual Obstructions on Corner Lots IV-33
Regulations for Personal Wireless Service Facilities IV-33
Performance Standards IV-36
Utilities and Mechanical Equipment IV-50
Table of Contents
Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance
V ZONING DISTRICTS
Establishing of Districts V-1
Zoning District Map and Boundaries of Districts V-1
Annexed Territory V-2
VI RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
General Requirements VI-1
R-1 Single Family Residence District VI-3
R-2 Single Family Residence District VI-15
R-2A Single Family Residence District VI-19
R-2B Single Family Residence District VI-23
R-3 Single Family Residence District VI-27
Prior R-4 Single-Family Residence District VI-31
R-5 Planned Residence District VI-33
Prior R-6 Residential & Congregate Care District VI-39
County Line Road Overlay Regulations VI-41
VII TRANSITIONAL DISTRICTS
Purpose VII-1
General Provisions VII-1
T-1 Transitional District VII-5
T-2 Transitional District VII-9
VIII BUSINESS DISTRICTS
General Provisions VIII-1
B-1 Retail Business District VIII-5
B-2 General Business District VIII-11
IX OFFICE DISTRICTS
Purpose IX-1
General Requirements IX-1
0-1 Small Scale Office District IX-3
0-2 Office and Hotel District IX-5
X MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
Preamble X-1
General Requirements X-1
Performance Standards X-4
RA Research Assembly District X-5
LI Light Industrial District X-7
GI General Industrial District X-10
Table of Contents
Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance
XI OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING
Scope of Regulations XI-1
Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities XI-1
Off-Street Parking XI-1
Off-Street Loading XI-13
XII NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
Statement of Purpose XII-1
Authority to Continue Nonconforming Buildings,
Structures and Uses XII-2
Restrictions on Nonconforming Buildings,
Structures and Uses XII-2
Elimination of Nonconforming Buildings
and Structures XII-5
Elimination of Nonconforming Uses XII-5
Special Use Provision for Elimination
of Nonconforming Uses XII-6
XIII ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Organization XIII-1
Community Development Director XIII-1
The Plan Commission XIII-2
Zoning Board of Appeals XIII-2
The Village Board of Trustees XIII-4
Zoning Certificates XIII-4
Zoning Certificates of Occupancy XIII-5
Variations XIII-6
Appeals XIII-8
Amendments XIII-9
Special Uses XIII-11
Planned Unit Developments XIII-15
XIV RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Rules XIV-1
Definitions XIV-1
XV VIOLATION, PENALTY, ENFORCEMENT
Violation and Penalty XV-1
Enforcement XV-1
Table of Contents
Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance
Appendix I Lot Diagram
Appendix II Fence Diagram
Appendix III Prior R-4 Single-Family Residence District
Appendix IV Prior R-6 Residential & Congregate Care District
Appendix V Minimum Standards for Parking Stalls, Aisles and Modules
Appendix VI Access Driveway from Streets to Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces
Appendix VII Parking Lot Landscape Islands
Appendix VIII Building Height
Appendix IX Front and Rear Lot Lines and Setback Applications
Appendix X Location of Air Conditioning Condensing Units
Appendix XI-A Floor Area Ratio
Appendix XI-B Floor Area Ratio
Appendix XI-C Walkout Basement Floor Area on a Sloping Site
Appendix XI-D Walkout Basement Floor Area on a Sloping Site
Appendix XII Patios and Driveway Seat Walls
I & II
This Ordi
A. P
T
1
2
3
4
B. IN
T
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
inance shall
PURPOSE
This Ordinanc
. Promo
and ge
. Securi
. Conse
. Enhan
NTENT
To those ends
. Dividi
therein
structu
specif
. Avoid
. Preven
bulk o
. Establ
streets
. Regul
determ
. Establ
. Prohib
reside
. Preven
structu
impos
. Provid
BURR
TIT
be known, ci
ce is adopted
oting and pr
eneral welfar
ing adequate
erving the tax
ncing aesthet
s this Ordinan
ing the entire
n the locatio
ures, and la
fied uses;
ding or lessen
nting the ove
of buildings h
lishing, regu
s, alleys, or p
lating and li
mining the ar
lishing stand
biting uses,
nce, busines
nting additio
ures in such
sed;
ding for the
R RIDGE Z
SECT
TLE, PUPR
SE
ited and refe
SE
d for the purp
rotecting the
re;
e natural light
xable value o
tic values gen
nce is intend
e Village of
on, construct
and, whethe
ning congesti
ercrowding o
hereafter erec
ulating, and
property lines
miting the i
rea of open sp
dards to which
buildings, o
s, or manufa
ons to, and
h a way as
gradual elim
ZONING
TIONS I &
ROPE AN
ECTION 1
erred to as the
ECTION II
pose of:
public heal
t, pure air, an
of land and bu
nerally throu
ded to accomp
Burr Ridge i
tion, reconst
er of residen
ion in the pu
of land throu
cted as relate
limiting the
s;
intensity of
paces within
h buildings o
or structures
acturing distri
alterations
to avoid th
mination of th
ORDINA
II
ND INTEN
e Burr Ridge
lth, safety, c
nd safety from
buildings; and
ughout the Vi
plish certain
into districts
truction, alte
ntial, busine
ublic streets;
ugh regulatin
ed to land are
e building o
the use of l
n and surroun
or structures
incompatib
ricts;
or remodeli
he restriction
hose uses, bu
ANCE
NT
e Zoning Ord
comfort, mor
m fire and ot
d
illage of Bur
standards an
and restricti
eration, and
ess, manufac
ng and limiti
ea;
or setback li
lot areas, an
nding such bu
therein shall
ble with the
ing of, exist
ns and limit
uildings and
dinance.
rals, conveni
ther dangers
rr Ridge.
nd objectives
ing and regul
use of build
cturing, or
ing the heigh
ines on or
nd regulating
uildings;
l conform;
character o
ting building
tations hereu
d structures w
1
ience,
;
s by:
lating
dings,
other
ht and
along
g and
of the
gs or
under
which
Sections
Title, Pu
2
1
1
I & II
urpose and In
are in
includ
a)
b)
c)
0. Defini
as her
1. Prescr
amend
ntent
ncompatible
ding, without
Eliminatio
rights of th
to which th
Eliminatio
they are ad
Eliminatio
damaged i
the normal
ing and limit
einafter prov
ribing penalt
dment thereto
with the ch
t being limite
n of such u
he persons in
hey are devot
n of uses to
doptable for p
n of such b
in major part
l useful life o
ted the powe
vided; and
ties for the v
o.
haracter of
ed thereto:
uses of unim
n possession
ted are disco
o which such
permitted use
buildings and
t, or when th
of such build
ers and dutie
iolation of th
the districts
mproved land
n thereof are
ontinued;
h buildings a
es; and
d structures
hey have rea
dings or struc
s of the adm
he provision
s in which t
ds or lots w
terminated,
and structure
when they
ached the ag
ctures;
ministrative of
ns of this Ord
they are loc
when the ex
or when the
es are devot
are destroy
ge fixed here
fficers and b
dinance, or o
I & II
cated,
xisting
e uses
ted, if
ed or
ein as
bodies
of any
III
A. IN
In
thm
1
2
3
B. S
It
th
1
2
NTERPRET
n their interp
he minimum
morals, and ge
. Where
of lan
requir
requir
less re
ordina
the re
requir
. This O
agreem
restric
coven
govern
. No bu
this O
this O
structu
structu
EPARABIL
t is hereby de
hat the severa
. If any
to be
not sp
. If any
provis
judgm
buildin
BURR
INTERPR
TATION
pretation and
m requiremen
eneral welfar
e the conditi
nd, buildings,
rements; (d)
rements; and
estrictive tha
ance or of an
egulations w
rements shall
Ordinance is
ment; provid
ctive or imp
nants, or oth
n.
uildings, stru
Ordinance sha
Ordinance; an
ure or use is
ure, or use sh
LITY
eclared to be
al provisions
y court of com
invalid, such
pecifically inc
y court of co
sion of this
ment shall no
ng, or structu
R RIDGE Z
SE
RETATIO
d application
nts for the pr
re.
ions imposed
, or structure
lot area and
(f) other pro
an comparab
ny other law,
which are mo
l govern.
not intended
ded, that w
mpose higher
er private ag
uctures, or us
all become o
nd to the exte
in conflict w
hall remain u
the intention
s of this Ordin
mpetent juris
h judgment s
cluded in sai
ompetent juri
Ordinance t
ot affect the
ure not speci
ZONING
CTION II
ON AND S
n, the provisi
romotion an
d by any pro
es; (b) heigh
d width requ
ovisions of th
ble condition
, ordinance, r
ore restrictiv
d to abrogate
where the re
r standards
greements, t
ses not lawfu
or be made l
ent that, and i
with the requ
unlawful here
n of the Boar
nance are sep
sdiction shall
shall not affe
d judgment;
isdiction sha
to a particul
application
fically includ
ORDINA
II
SEPARAB
ions of this O
nd protection
ovision of thi
ht of building
uirements; (e
his Ordinance
ns imposed b
resolution, ru
ve or which
e any easeme
egulations o
or requirem
the requirem
ully existing
awful solely
in any mann
uirements of
eunder.
rd of Trustee
parable, in a
l adjudge any
fect any othe
and
all adjudge i
lar property,
of said prov
ded in said ju
ANCE
BILITY
Ordinance sh
n of the pub
is Ordinance
gs or structur
e) yard and
e are either m
by any other
ule, or regula
h impose hig
ent, covenan
of this Ordi
ments than
ments of this
at the time o
y by reason o
er that said u
this Ordinan
es of the Villa
ccordance w
y provisions
er provision
invalid the a
, building, o
vision to an
udgment.
hall be held
lic health, s
e upon the (a
res; (c) floor
other open
more restricti
r provision o
ation of any
gher standar
nt, or other pr
inance are
such easem
s Ordinance
of the adopti
of the adopti
unlawful buil
nce, said buil
age of Burr R
with the follow
of this Ordin
of this Ordin
application o
or structure,
ny other prop
1
to be
afety,
a) use
r area
space
ive or
of this
kind,
rds or
rivate
more
ment,
shall
ion of
ion of
lding,
lding,
Ridge
wing:
nance
nance
of any
such
perty,
IV 1
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION IV
GENERAL REGULATIONS
A. SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
1. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure,
or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended,
enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for
the district in which it is located. No building or land shall be devoted to any use
other than one which is specified as a permitted or special use by the district
regulations applicable to the district in which such building or land is located as
herein set forth in Sections VI, VII, VIII, IX, and X. However, where a building
permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, and where construction has been begun prior to
such effective date and is being prosecuted to completion, said building or structure
may be completed in accordance with approved plans on the basis of which the
building permit was issued and further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a
certificate of occupancy for the use or uses originally designated, subject to the
provisions herein set forth in Section XIII of this Ordinance.
B. ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND, BUILDINGS, OR STRUCTURES
1. The following uses of land, buildings, or structures are allowed in the districts
indicated hereinafter in Sections VI, VII, VIII, IX, and X under the conditions herein
specified in this Ordinance.
2. Except as otherwise provided in Section XII, uses lawfully established and existing
on the effective date of this Ordinance, except uses lawfully established and existing
on the effective date of this Ordinance and rendered non-conforming by the
provisions herein shall be subject to the regulations of Section XII.
3. Permitted uses as designated in Sections VI, VII, VIII, IX, and X.
4. Special uses as designated in Sections VI, VII, VIII, IX, and X.; A classification of
special uses is hereby established to provide for such "special" uses hereinafter
specified that have a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use or enjoyment of
neighboring property. Due to the unique characteristics of the special uses, special
standards and other conditions for their locations and development are herein set
forth for each special use in the district regulations. A special use shall be granted
only upon evidence that such use meets standards established for such classification
in this Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances of the Village of Burr Ridge.
The granting of permission therefore may be subject to conditions reasonably
necessary to meet such standards. Additions or alterations to existing building or
land improvements or expansion for a use herein designated as a special use shall
conform with standards and other conditions governing the special use as herein set
forth for the district in which it is located.
Section IV
General Regulations
2 IV
C. CONTROL OVER BULK
1. All buildings existing as of the date of adoption of this 1996 Comprehensive
Amendment that were in lawful compliance with the provisions of the Burr Ridge
Zoning Ordinance at the date of their construction shall be construed to be in
compliance with this Comprehensive Amendment. If any such building is
subsequently destroyed in whole or in part, such shall then become subject to the
provisions of the "non-conforming building, structures and uses" section of this
Ordinance. All new buildings shall conform to the bulk regulations established
herein for the district in which each building is located. No modification or
alteration of any building, or any subdivision of any land, shall conflict or further
conflict with the bulk regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which such
existing building or land is located.
D. LOTS OF RECORD IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
1. Notwithstanding the requirements of the subsection above, in a Residence District a
lot of record in single-ownership which is located in a subdivision recorded prior to
the effective date of this Comprehensive Amendment or a parcel of land under
single-ownership which existed as of January 1, 1980, and which was not a part of
any other parcel as of that date, but which does not conform with the requirements of
this Comprehensive Amendment as to minimum lot area or lot width, may be used
for a single-family detached dwelling, provided there is conformance with all other
applicable regulations of this Comprehensive Amendment (except as may otherwise
be permitted by the Community Development Director as set forth in subsection 5
below) and the following requirements, provided however that as an exception to
these regulations, a lot that has been previously legally subdivided and recorded but
combined with another lot may be returned to the originally platted and recorded
dimensions provided that the majority of the lots on both sides of the street, on the
same block, and in the same rezoning district are equal or greater in area and width
to said lot may be used for a single-family detached dwelling: (Ord. A-834-07-05)
2. The applicant shall furnish with the application for a building permit a certified
survey of current date showing the following:
a. The lot or parcel upon which he proposes to erect a single-family detached
dwelling;
b. The lots or parcels on either side of the lot or parcel upon which he proposes
to erect a single-family detached dwelling, with all improvements thereon;
and
c. Widths of adjoining side yards, with any projections of buildings or
structures into the adjoining side yards duly spotted by the surveyor.
3. The applicant shall furnish with the application for a building permit an affidavit by
the owner of record of the lot or parcel described in the application, which shall state
the following:
a. That the owner is not holding title to any contiguous lot or lots or parcels
either in his or her own name, or jointly with anyone else, or in trust or for
the benefit of the owner or any other person, and that the owner has no
beneficial interest in any such contiguous lot or lots or parcels;
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 3
b. That neither the applicant nor any owner of, or beneficiary of any land trust
for the subject lot or parcel, nor any predecessor in the title for a period of
more than five years prior to the date of the application, has been the owner,
either directly or indirectly, or as a beneficiary of any trust, or through any
other person, of the contiguous lot or lots or parcels on either side of the
subject lot or parcel.
4. If there is additional land available from a contiguous vacant lot or parcel or if there
is a contiguous improved lot of record or parcel which has five feet or more of side
yard in excess of the minimum required side yard for the building or structure on the
said improved lot or parcel and which additional side yard could be added to the
subject lot or parcel, thereby increasing its area or width, then the applicant shall
furnish an affidavit, signed by the owner of record of the contiguous lot or parcel,
which states that the owner of the contiguous lot or parcel refuses to sell or refuses to
sell at a reasonable price the land needed to increase the width or area of the
applicant's lot or parcel.
5. The Community Development Director shall approve the issuance of a permit for
erecting a single-family detached dwelling on the subject lot or parcel upon
compliance with all of the foregoing provisions and all other applicable provisions
of this Comprehensive Amendment if the survey and affidavit show that there is no
land physically available on either side of the lot described in the application for a
building permit that could be added thereto to increase its width of area for the
following reasons:
a. That the said lot or parcel is not contiguous to a vacant lot or parcels;
b. That the owner, nor any predecessor in title for a period of more than five
years, does not have any ownership or beneficial interest in any contiguous
lot or parcel;
c. That the said lot or parcel is not contiguous to an improved lot of record or
parcel which has five feet or more of side yard in excess of the minimum
required side yard for the building or structure on the said improved lot or
parcel and which additional side yard could be added to the subject lot or
parcel, thereby increasing its area or width; and
d. That there is additional land available from a contiguous vacant lot or parcel
or a side yard as herein before stated, but the present owner refuses to sell, or
refuses to sell at a reasonable price.
6. For lots or parcels covered by these provisions, the Community Development
Director may, when requested by the applicant, approve in specific cases a reduction
in the side yard width requirements for lots or parcels not conforming with the lot
width requirements of the district where located. However, in no case shall either
such reduced side yard have a width of less than ten percent of the width of the lot or
four feet, whichever is the greater width.
E. NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A LOT
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and there
shall be not more than one such building on a lot except as follows:
1. Additional buildings on a lot may be approved in planned unit developments.
Section IV
General Regulations
4 IV
2. Permitted accessory buildings as per Sections IV.H and IV.I, herein, shall be
allowed on a lot with a principal building.
3. A permit for construction of a second single-family dwelling on a lot may be issued
for the purpose of allowing a property owner to continue residing in an existing
single-family dwelling while a new single-family dwelling is under construction.
Said permit shall be subject to the following:
a. The new dwelling shall be completed and a Building Certificate of
Occupancy issued within one year after issuance of the building permit.
b. The original dwelling shall be razed within 30 days after issuance of a
Building Certificate of Occupancy for the new dwelling. The grade and
landscape within and surrounding the original dwelling shall be restored and
all construction material, debris, etc. shall be totally removed within 60 days
after issuance of the Building Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Prior to issuance of the building permit for a new dwelling, the property
owner shall deposit funds in a cash escrow with the Village of Burr Ridge or
shall post a letter of credit drawn on a bank to be approved by the Village.
The cash escrow or letter of credit shall be in an amount sufficient to cover
all costs related to the demolition of the original dwelling. If a letter of credit
is used, such letter of credit shall be drawn for the benefit of the Village and
on such terms and conditions as shall be satisfactory to the Village. The cash
escrow or letter of credit shall be in an amount equal to 125% of the cost of
demolition of the existing dwelling. The estimated cost of demolition shall
be based on written estimates from qualified demolition companies and shall
be subject to the approval of the Community Development Director. The
Village of Burr Ridge shall use the funds for demolition of the original
dwelling if the property own fails to comply with the terms and conditions
herein. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-5-98)
F. LOT DIVISION
1. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance
No lot shall hereafter be divided in order to secure one or more additional lots for
transfer of ownership and establishment of a principal use thereon, unless each lot
resulting from such division shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance for the
district in which the lot is located.
2. Side Lot Lines for Lot Divisions
No lot shall hereafter be divided in any manner unless all new side lot lines created
by said lot division shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the street line.
Side lot lines cannot be made irregular for the purpose of establishing compliance
with the minimum lot size requirements of this Ordinance.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 5
G. YARDS, COURTS AND OTHER OPEN AREAS
1. Required Yards, Courts, and Open Areas
Yards, courts or other open areas required in district regulations shall be provided
for all new uses or additions or enlargements of existing uses. Such required yards,
courts and other open areas shall be located on the same lot that is designated, at the
time of issuance of the building permit, as the lot comprising the site for the new
principal use or the lot containing the existing use with additions or enlargements
thereto.
2. Through Lots
a. Front yards shall be provided along both lot lines adjoining streets;
provided, however, if either of said yards also will constitute the rear yard
of the lot, such yard shall conform to the larger of the two different (front
or rear) yard requirements. Any such combined yard which is both the
front and rear yard shall not contain obstructions which would otherwise
be permitted in rear yards. Provided, however, if the lot is in a subdivision
which has a recorded covenant prohibiting access from the adjoining
thoroughfare and the subdivision has constructed an approved subdivision
fence across the rear lot line, the obstructions that are allowed in rear yards
under this Ordinance shall be permitted on such through lot (the rear yard
shall be the yard with the fence).
(1) The subdivision has constructed an approved subdivision fence
across the rear lot line;
(2) A dedicated landscape easement along the rear lot line where the
use of a substantial berm and landscaping in accordance with
applicable Village regulations and a landscaping plan submitted to
and approved by the Community Development Director. All such
buffering shall be as close to 100 percent opacity as possible,
including during the dormant stage of such landscaping. (Amended
by Ordinance A-834-12-06)
b. Either of the lot lines adjoining a street may be established by the
Community Development Director as the front lot line; except where a front
lot line has been established by an existing use on one or more lots in a
block, the front lot line of the through lot shall be along such same street line.
Provided, however, in blocks containing two or more through lots having
front lot lines not established on the same street line, the front lot line on the
remaining lots shall be as designated by the Community Development
Director.
c. Vehicular access drives to a through lot shall be prohibited from the
thoroughfare, which abuts the rear property line. The Community
Development Director may require a covenant to be recorded, which
prohibits access via the street abutting the rear property line.
d. On a through lot which has its rear yard abutting a collector or arterial street
(as classified by the Village of Burr Ridge Comprehensive Plan) and does
not have an approved subdivision fence adjacent to or within the rear yard, a
berm and landscaping shall be provided in said rear yard for the purpose of
Section IV
General Regulations
6 IV
screening accessory structures and uses from the adjoining thoroughfare.
Said berm and landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the
Community Development Director and shall be provided at such time that a
principal or accessory building is constructed.
3. Corner Lots
In all Residence Districts, the front yard shall be along the lot line adjoining the
street that has the shortest dimension. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-19-01)
4. Yard Requirements Along District Boundary Lines
Yards, courts or other required open areas that abut or are across an alley or street
from a district having greater yard, court or other open area requirements, shall
comply with requirements of the adjacent district.
5. Building Setback Lines
a. Where 40 percent or more of the lots along the same side of the street in the
same block have front yard setback lines established by detached singlefamily
dwellings, the front setback line for each remaining detached singlefamily
dwelling shall be not less than the lessor setback of the two adjacent
detached single-family dwellings. If only one adjacent detached singlefamily
dwelling exists, the front yard setback shall be not less than the
minimum front yard setback otherwise required by the applicable district
requirements. Lots that have frontage on the turnaround of a cul de sac street
shall be excluded from this requirement. See figure IV.G.5 below for a
graphic example of the application of this section. (Amended by Ordinance
A-834-9-01, Ordinance A-834-21-01, Ordinance A-834-13-11).
Figure IV.G.5 Building Setback Lines
b. Along streets duly designated as thoroughfares on the Comprehensive Plan
and Official Map of the Village of Burr Ridge, the established future rightof-
way line of the thoroughfare shall be considered the front property line for
purposes of determining the required setbacks and permitted obstructions in
yards, courts, or other open areas.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 7
H. GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES
AND USES
Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall not be erected or altered in required yards,
courts or other open areas, except those that are herein permitted as obstructions in yards,
courts, or other open areas. All accessory buildings, structures and uses shall comply with
the following regulations and all other regulations of this Ordinance.
1. Accessory to Principal Building
Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be accessory to and compatible with
the principal use. Human occupancy of an accessory building or structure is
expressly prohibited except as may be specifically allowed herein.
2. No Construction Prior to Principal Building
No detached or attached garage or accessory building may be constructed on a lot
previous to the house being constructed except that a garage or approved accessory
building may be erected for tool and material storage after the foundation for the
house is completed and approved.
3. Keeping of Livestock, Chickens, and Bees as Accessory Uses in Residential
Districts
Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, accessory buildings or structures
shall not be used for the keeping of livestock, poultry or rabbits, whether for profit or
not, unless said buildings or structures meet the following requirements:
a. All livestock, poultry, and rabbits (except up to a maximum of two rabbits
kept as household pets and except for chickens and bees as regulated herein)
shall be kept only on lots or parcels of at least five acres in size. (Amended
by Ordinance A-834-05-14)
b. There shall be no more than one horse or other livestock, poultry, and rabbits
for each 20,000 square feet of lot area except for chickens and rabbits as
regulated herein.
c. Accessory buildings or structures for livestock shall be located at least 50
feet from the side or rear lot lines.
d. Chickens, also referred to herein as domestic hens or hens, are permitted on
properties of one acre or more and zoned for single-family residential use
subject to the following terms and conditions:
(1) A maximum of four domestic hens are permitted;
(2) The keeping of roosters and the slaughtering of any chickens is
prohibited;
(3) Hens shall be kept in an enclosure at all times and the enclosure shall
comply with the following:
(a) The area of the enclosure shall not exceed 150 square feet.
Section IV
General Regulations
8 IV
(b) The enclosure shall be designed for the specific purpose of
keeping chickens, to prevent access by wild animals, and to
prevent attraction of rodents.
(c) The enclosure shall include an open area enclosed with hardware
cloth that is buried at the perimeter at least six inches in the
ground.
(d) The enclosure shall be considered an accessory building for
purposes of zoning, shall comply with all zoning regulations for
accessory buildings not specifically modified herein, and shall be
subject to the issuance of permit.
(4) The enclosure shall be located in the rear buildable area of the
property with a minimum setback from the interior side and corner
side lot lines equal to the setback of the principal building and may
encroach into the required rear yard setback subject to a minimum
setback from the rear lot line of 10 feet.
(H.3.b,c,d amended by Ordinance A-834-23-12).
e. Bee colonies maintained as a hobby by a resident of the same property and
which is not for commercial purposes are permitted as within the R-1, R-2,
R-2A, R-2B, and R-3 Districts subject to the following terms and conditions:
(1) All bees shall be of the common domestic honey bees of the Apis
Mellifera species.
(2) All bee colonies and beekeepers shall be registered with the Illinois
Department of Agriculture as required by the Illinois Bees and
Apiaries Act (510 ILCS 20/1 et seq.) and shall comply with all
applicable regulations of said Department and legislation as may be
amended from time to time.
(3) All colonies must be kept in inspectable-type hives, with removable
combs, which shall be kept in sound, usable and sanitary condition.
(4) All colonies must be kept within the rear yard and rear buildable area
with a minimum setback from all lot lines of 15 feet.
(5) Bee hives shall be kept within one or more contiguous bee hive
structure(s) with a combined area not exceeding 8 square feet and 6
feet in height.
(6) Lots having 80,000 square feet of lot area or less shall not have more
than two colonies. Lots exceeding 80,000 square feet of lot area may
have a maximum of four colonies.
(7) In any instance where a bee colony exhibits unusually aggressive
characteristics by stinging of attempting to sting without due
provocation or exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming, it
shall be the duty of the beekeeper to re-queen the colony. Queens shall
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 9
be selected from a stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming
characteristics. (H.3.e Added by Ordinance A-834-05-14)
4. Setback and Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures
Accessory buildings and structures shall be setback a minimum of 10 feet from a
rear lot line and shall comply with the minimum interior side and corner side yard
setback of the zoning district in which the accessory building or structure is located
except as may otherwise be specifically permitted in Section IV.I of this Ordinance.
5. Rear Yard Setbacks on Corner Lots and Through Lots
a. On corner lots accessory buildings and structures shall be located not nearer
to the rear lot line than the distance of the required side yard for the lot
adjoining the rear lot line and not nearer to the side street line than the
distance required for a side yard adjoining a street, or in the case of a reverse
corner lot, this distance shall equal the required front yard on such lot
adjoining the rear lot line
b. On through lots that do not have a rear lot line adjoining a no-access strip
accessory buildings and structures shall be located not nearer to the rear lot
line adjoining a street than the distance required for a front yard.
6. Distance Between Buildings
Accessory buildings shall be separated by at least 10 feet from the principal building
and from all other accessory buildings on a lot.
7. Distance from a Corner Side Lot Line
No detached or attached accessory building hereafter erected or altered shall project
nearer to a lot line adjoining a street than the distance equivalent to the shortest
distance between such lot line and the nearest wall of the principal building.
8. Height of Accessory Buildings
The height of accessory buildings in residential districts shall comply with the
following;
a. In no case shall the roofline of an accessory building be higher than the
roofline of the principal building.
b. No accessory building shall exceed one story or 15 feet in height as defined
in Section XIV – Building Height of the Zoning Ordinance – whichever is
lower except as permitted herein for accessory buildings in an R-1 or R-2
District.
c. An accessory building in an R-1 Single-Family Residence District may be
two stories and may be 25 feet as defined in Section XIV – Building Height
of the Zoning Ordinance.
d. An accessory building with a gable, hip, or gambrel roof in an R-2 Single-
Family Residence District may have an absolute height to the peak of the
Section IV
General Regulations
10 IV
roof of 22 feet 6 inches or an average height of 15 feet as defined in Section
XIV – Building Height of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended by Ordinance
A-834-02-07)
e. Overhead Door Height (Residential): The vertical distance from the bottom
of the overhead door opening to the top of the overhead door opening shall
not exceed 9 feet in height. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-07-07).
9. Combined Horizontal Floor Area of Accessory Buildings and Structures
a. The combined horizontal area of all accessory buildings, structures, and uses
shall not exceed 30 percent of the area to the rear of the principal building.
b. The combined horizontal area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed
60% of the horizontal floor area of the principal building.
10. Number and Floor Area of Detached Accessory Buildings
For each lot of record in a residential district, the number and floor area of permitted
accessory buildings shall be as follows:
a. R-1 District: For a lot of record in an R-1 District that meets the minimum
lot area requirement as per Section VI.B of this Ordinance, accessory
buildings shall be permitted as follows:
i. Maximum Number: 2
Plus one additional building for every 2
acres that the property exceeds 5 acres.
ii. Maximum Floor Area Per Building: 3,000
square feet
b. R-2 District: For a lot of record in an R-2 District that meets the minimum
lot area requirement as per Section VI.C of this Ordinance, accessory
buildings shall be permitted as follows:
i. Maximum Number: 2
ii. Maximum Floor Area Per Building: 2,500
square feet
c. R-2A or R-2B District: For a lot of record in an R-2A or R-2B District
accessory buildings shall be permitted as follows:
i. Maximum Number: 2
Plus one additional building for every 2
acres that the property exceeds 5 acres.
ii. Maximum Floor Area For Building 1: 0.0475 (4.75%)
FAR & 2,500
square feet
Building 1 refers to the only accessory
building on a lot or the larger of two
accessory buildings on a lot. The maximum
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 11
floor area for Building 1 cannot exceed
0.0475 FAR and 2,500 square feet,
whichever is less. FAR, or floor area ratio, is
the total floor area of the accessory building
divided by the total lot area.
Maximum Floor Area For Building 2: 750
square feet
Building 2 refers to the smaller of two
accessory buildings on a lot.
d. R-3 or R-4 District: For a lot of record in an R-3 or R-4 District detached
accessory buildings shall be permitted as follows:
i. Maximum Number: 2
Plus one additional building for every 2
acres that the property exceeds 5 acres.
ii. Combined Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 0.0375 (3.75%)
Combined floor area ratio is the total floor
area of all accessory buildings divided by
the total lot area.
iii. Combined Maximum Gross Floor Area: 1,500
square feet
Combined maximum gross floor area is the
sum of all detached accessory building floor
areas on a lot of record.
iv. Minimum Permitted Floor Area: 750
square feet
For lots that are less than 20,000 square
feet, the maximum floor area for an
accessory building shall be 750 square feet
regardless of the FAR.
(Section IV.H.10 Amended by Ordinance A-834-20-06)
Section IV
General Regulations
12 IV
I. PERMITTED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES -
LOCATION & REGULATION
The buildings, structures, and uses listed below may be located in buildable areas on a lot
and may encroach into required yards as shown on the following graphics and as defined in
Section XIV of this Ordinance or as may otherwise be specified in this Ordinance.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-13-11)
Figure IV.I Required Yards and Buildable Areas
1. Detached Accessory Buildings in Residential Districts
Detached buildings accessory to permitted residential uses are permitted in
the rear buildable area and may also be located in a required rear yard but
not closer than 10 feet to the rear lot line. Detached buildings accessory to
residential uses are also subject to the regulations in Section IV.H above.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-20-06)
2. Access Driveways and Walks
Access driveways and walks are permitted in all buildable areas of a lot in
all districts and may also project into any required yard but not closer than
2 feet from the side lot line as extended to the street pavement except that
the radius of flare within the driveway apron (right-of-way) may encroach
into the 2 foot setback provided that it does not encroach beyond the
property line as extended to the street pavement (also see Appendix VI).
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-5-98)
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 13
3. Arbors or Trellises
Arbors or trellises, and trellises attached to the principal building are
permitted in a side or rear buildable area or within a court yard and may
also project not more than 3 feet into any required yard.
4. Air Conditioning Equipment and Shelters
Air conditioning equipment and shelters may be located within a court
yard or within the buildable area between the principal building and the
corner side lot line (but not in the buildable area between the principal
building and the front lot line) and may also project into the required side
yard and rear yard setbacks if said equipment or shelter is located not less
than 5 feet from the side or rear wall of the principal building. However,
under no circumstance may such units be located within 15 feet of the
façade of the principal building facing the front lot line nor shall any such
units encroach into a required side or rear setback by more than 5 feet. All
air conditioning units and shelters must be adequately screened with yearround
landscaping material. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-20-00)
5. Architectural Entrance Structures
Architectural entrance structures, on a lot not less than 40,000 square feet
in area, are permitted in a front, side or rear buildable area and are also
permitted in the required front yard. Architectural entrance features must
comply with the following terms and conditions:
a. Architectural entrance structures shall be located adjacent to
driveways and the number of structures shall not exceed two per
driveway; one on each side of the driveway.
b. Each architectural entrance structure may not exceed six feet in
height measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level
within five feet of either side of the structure. A light fixture may be
added above the six foot height limit not exceeding 18 inches.
c. The foot print of an architectural entrance structure shall not exceed
three feet by three feet except that wing walls not exceeding four
feet in height and three feet in length shall be permitted.
d. The primary materials for architectural entrance structures are
limited to masonry brick, natural stone, or similar materials.
e. Architectural entrance structures are subject to the issuance of a
permit and must be provided with a foundation and structural
elements as required by the Village building codes.
f. Architectural entrance features at an entrance to a subdivision are
permitted as regulated by the Village of Burr Ridge Subdivision
Ordinance.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00 and A-834-27-16)
Section IV
General Regulations
14 IV
6. Balconies
Balconies extending from and attached to the principal building may be
located in the front, side, or rear buildable area or within a court yard and
may also project not more than 6 feet into a required rear yard. (Amended
by Ordinance No. A-834-01-05)
7. Basketball and Similar Athletic Courts (not including driveways)
Basketball and similar athletic courts shall be permitted on single-family
residential properties in the rear buildable area and my encroach into the
required rear yard provided a 10-foot setback from the rear property line is
provided, that a setback from the side property line in compliance with the
interior or corner side yard setback of the district is provided, and that the
court complies with all other regulations for accessory structures in
residential areas. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-5-98).
8. . Bay Windows
Bay windows are permitted in the front, side or rear buildable area and in a
court yard and may also project not more than three feet into any required
yard.
9. Bridges (Open and Uncovered), Spillways, and Similar Architectural
Structures
Such structures may be located in the front, side, or rear buildable area of a
lot and within 10 feet of any lot line provided the lot exceeds five acres in
area. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-29-01)
10. Chimneys
Chimneys, attached to the principal building, are permitted in front, side,
and rear buildable areas and also may project not more than 24 inches into
any required yard.
11. Dog Runs
Dog runs shall be permitted in residential districts subject to the following:
a. No dog run shall be erected, placed or altered on a lot unless
approved by the Community Development Director and a permit is
issued for the same. For purposes of this section, a dog run shall be
defined as an enclosed area intended to contain one or more dogs.
b. Dog runs shall be obscured from view from neighboring properties
and adjacent streets by the planting of shrubbery according to a
landscape plan to be approved by the Community Development
Director prior to issuance of the permit.
c. All dog runs must be located in the buildable area directly behind
and adjacent to the principal building. In no event shall a dog run
encroach into a required setback or be located closer to a corner or
interior side property line than the principal building.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 15
d. Dog runs shall be situated on a lot so that the longest dimension of
the dog run is parallel with the principal building.
e. No dog run shall be in excess of 250 square feet in area, nor more
than six feet (6') in height above the surface of the ground, as
measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level within five
feet of either side thereof.
f. Fences enclosing a dog run may be constructed of any material
permitted for a residential fence as per Section IV.J herein or may
be constructed of a vinyl coated, chain link fence made of a color
compatible with the surrounding landscape.
12. Driveway Gates (Residence Districts)
Gates across private driveways shall be permitted on parcels in residential
districts that are a minimum of 2 acres in area and have a front or corner
side lot line with a minimum of 150 feet of street frontage (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-13-11). All driveway gates must comply with the
following terms and conditions:
a. Driveway gates are permitted in a front buildable area and are also
permitted in the required front and corner side yard but not closer to
the front or corner side lot line than 30 feet. However, for each 3
feet of lot frontage less than 220 feet, an additional one foot setback
shall be provided. For example, for a 2 acre lot with 160 feet of lot
frontage, the minimum required setback from the front lot line shall
be 50 feet [30+((220-160)/3) = 50]. (Amended by Ordinance A-
834-13-11).
b. One gate per driveway is permitted.
c Driveway gates and related architectural entrance structures may not
exceed six feet in height measured from the ground level at the
lowest grade level within five feet of either side of the fence.
d. The primary materials for driveway gates and related architectural
entrance structures are limited to natural stone, masonry, wrought
iron, or similar materials.
e. Driveway gates are subject to the issuance of a permit and are
subject to access requirements by the Fire District having
jurisdiction over the property. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-24-
07 and Ordinance A-834-26-08)
13. Eaves and Gutters
Eaves and gutters on principal buildings or detached accessory buildings
are permitted in all buildable areas and may also project not more than four
feet into the required front or rear yard and not more than two feet into a
required side yard. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-9-01)
Section IV
General Regulations
16 IV
14. Fallout Shelters
Fallout shelters (attached or detached) are permitted in the rear buildable
area, when conforming also to other codes and ordinances of the Village.
15. Fences – See Section IV.J
16. Fire Escapes and Fire Towers
Fire escapes, open or enclosed, or fire towers may be located in any
buildable area in business and manufacturing districts only and may
project into a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street by not
more than five feet and into a required interior side yard not more than
three and one-half feet.
17. Fireplaces and Grills, Outdoor
Masonry fireplaces including gas or wood grills may be located in the rear
buildable area and are also permitted in the required rear yard of a
residential property, but not closer than 10 feet to any principal or
accessory building, not closer than 10 feet to the rear lot line and not closer
than the required side yard setback to the interior side yard. Outdoor
fireplaces and grills may not exceed the maximum height of 15 feet and 20
square feet in area. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-07-12)
18, Flagpoles
Flagpoles may be located in any buildable area and are also permitted in
the required front or rear yard, but not closer than 10 feet to the lot line. A
maximum of three flag poles shall be permitted on a lot and flagpoles may
not exceed 25 feet in height in residential districts nor more than 40 feet in
height in non-residential districts. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-09-15)
19. Fountains, Related Water Features, and Related Equipment Shelters
Fountains and related water features, with water depths not exceeding 2
feet, are permitted in the front and rear buildable area and may also be
located in the required front and rear yards, but not closer than 10 feet to
the front and rear lot line. Related equipment shelters are not permitted in a
front buildable area or a required front yard and may be located in a rear
buildable area and a required year yard provided they are a minimum of 10
feet from the rear lot line. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-9-01)
20. Garden or Farm Crops
Garden (in the open) or gardens which are largely enclosed by bushes,
hedges, or trees and where the enclosure includes a freestanding
architectural wall or monument shall be permitted in the interior side and
rear buildable areas and are also permitted in the required rear yard but not
closer than 10 feet from a rear lot line. Any architectural wall or
monument built in conjunction with a garden shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
a. The façade of the wall or monument shall be limited to stone or
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 17
brick that replicates the façade of the principal dwelling and in no
case shall it include exposed concrete blocks.
b. There shall be no more than one such wall or monument and it shall
be no more than eight feet in height and cannot exceed 15 feet and
15 percent of the total length or surface area of the total perimeter
area of the garden enclosure, whichever is less.
c. The exterior side of any wall or monument used to enclose a garden
shall be screened with landscaping.
d. All such walls or monuments shall comply with the required side
yard setback of the underlying zoning district and shall be at least 10
feet from rear property lines.
e. Architectural wall or monument enclosing a garden shall only be
permitted on properties of two acres or greater. (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-11-06)
21. Generators – Residential
Natural gas or propane generators provided for standby electrical power
but not as a primary power source are permitted subject to the following
standards;
a. Generators may be located within a court yard, in an interior side,
corner side, or rear buildable area or within the buildable area between
the principal building and the corner side lot line and may also project
into the required interior side yard and rear yard setbacks if said
equipment or shelter is located within 5 feet from the side or rear wall
of the principal building. However, under no circumstance may such
units be located within 15 feet of the façade of the principal building
facing the front lot line nor shall any such units encroach into a
required side or rear setback by more than 5 feet.
b. Generators must be adequately screened with year-round landscaping
material.
c. Generators shall not generate noise exceeding 75 decibels measured 23
feet from the generator.
d. Generators must be enclosed by a sound attenuated box or cabinet that
shall not exceed 28 square feet in area or 5 feet in height. Any noise
reducing mufflers provided by the manufacturer shall be utilized.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00 and A-834-22-11)
22. Kitchens, Outdoor
Outdoor kitchens (typically being a masonry structure with a cook top
and oven, plumbing, cabinet storage areas, and counter top) may be
located in the rear buildable area and are also permitted in the required
rear yard of a residential property subject to the following:
a. Outdoor kitchens must be a minimum of 10 feet from the rear lot
line and not closer than the required side yard setback to the interior
Section IV
General Regulations
18 IV
side yard.
b. Outdoor cooking appliances shall maintain a minimum distance
from combustible materials as recommended by the appliance
manufacturer or a minimum distance of 10 feet. (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-10-13).
c. Outdoor kitchens may not exceed 5 feet in height and 60 square feet
in area except that a chimney provided for a stove or fireplace may
extend to 15 feet in height. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-19-12).
23. Lawn Furniture
Lawn furniture, such as benches, sun dials, bird baths, and similar
architectural features, may be located in any buildable area and are also
permitted in the required front or rear yard, but not closer than 10 feet to
the front, corner side or rear lot line.
24. Open Off-Street Loading – Non-Residential
Open off-street loading spaces may be located in the side or rear buildable
area and are also permitted in the required rear yard, subject to those
regulations set forth in Section XI of this Ordinance.
25. Open Off-Street Parking
Open off-street parking spaces may be located in the interior side or rear
buildable area and may also be located in a required interior side or rear
yard provided a minimum setback of 8 feet is provided from an interior or
rear lot line. Unless otherwise specifically allowed elsewhere in this
Ordinance, open off-street parking spaces shall be at least 10 feet from a
building wall.
In all Business Districts, open off-street parking spaces may also be in a
front buildable area or a required front yard or corner side yard provided a
minimum 15 foot setback is provided from the front and corner lot lines.
Open Off-Street Parking shall also comply with Section XI herein.
26. Ornamental Light Standards
Ornamental light standards, defined as light standards with a prefabricated,
monopole design, may be located in any buildable area and are also
permitted in the required front or rear yards, but not closer than 10 feet to
the lot line. Such ornamental light standards shall not exceed 10 feet in
height. However, the location of the light on the ornamental light standard
shall not be more than 8 feet above grade and all lighting shall comply
with the performance standards as per Section IV.W.7 herein. (Amended
by Ordinance A-834-6-99, A-834-07-12).
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 19
27. Playground and Laundry Drying Equipment
Playground and laundry-drying equipment may be located in the rear
buildable area and are also permitted in the required rear yard, but not
closer than 10 feet to the lot line.
28. Ponds (Private)
Ponds (private) and related features with water depths greater than 2 feet
may be located in the rear buildable area and are permitted in the required
rear yard, but not closer than 10 feet to the rear lot line. Ponds are subject
to issuance of a grading permit by the Village and shall meet the
regulations for Swimming Pools (Private) including the requirement for a
perimeter fences as adopted by the Village of Burr Ridge Building
Ordinance. Related equipment shelters may encroach into the required rear
yard but not closer than 10 ft. to the rear lot line.
29. Satellite Dishes, See Section IV.S
30. Sills, etc.
Sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features attached to the
principal building may be located in any buildable area and may project
not more than 18 inches into any required yard.
31. Steps (Open)
Steps (open), below or above grade and necessary for access to and from a
dwelling or an accessory building may be located in any buildable area and
are also permitted in the required yards not closer than 10 feet to a lot line,
provided there are no more than eight steps for access to and from a
principal or accessory building. Steps built at grade shall be considered a
walk and shall be regulated by Section IV.I.2 herein. (Amended by
Ordinances A-834-9-01 and A-834-23-06)
32. Swimming Pool Equipment
Equipment for swimming pools and spas are permitted subject to the
following standards;
a. Pool equipment may be located within a court yard, in an interior
side, corner side, or rear buildable area or within the buildable area
or within the buildable area between the principal building and the
corner side lot line and may also project into the required interior
side yard and rear yard setbacks if said equipment is located within
5 feet from the side or rear wall of the principal building.
However, under no circumstance may such equipment be located
within 15 feet of the façade of the principal building facing the
front lot line nor shall any such units encroach into a required side
or rear setback by more than 5 feet.
b. Pool equipment must be adequately screened with year-round
landscaping material.
Section IV
General Regulations
20 IV
c. Pool equipment shall not generate noise exceeding 75 decibels
measured 23 feet from the equipment pad.
d. Pool equipment shall not exceed 28 square feet in area or 5 feet in
height. (Added by Ordinance A-834-07-12).
33. Swimming Pools (Private)
Swimming pools (private) may be located in a rear buildable area and are
also permitted in the required rear yard, but not closer than 10 feet to the
rear lot line.
34. Terraces, Patios and Decks
Terraces, patios, and decks may be located in a side buildable area, a rear
buildable area or a court yard and are also permitted in the required rear
yard, but not closer than 10 feet to the lot line.
35. Tennis Courts (Private)
Tennis courts (private) may be located in the rear buildable area on
residential properties and are also permitted in the required rear yard but
not closer than 10 feet to the lot line. A fence may be located at the
perimeter of a tennis court subject to the following conditions:
a. No such fence shall exceed the height of 10 feet.
b. Materials for tennis court fences may include green vinyl coated
chain link or a comparable material as may be determined
appropriate by the Community Development Director.
c. The view of tennis court fences from adjacent properties shall be
obscured by the planting of shrubbery, evergreen trees, or
comparable plant materials subject to the approval of the
Community Development Director.
36. Trash Dumpsters – Non-Single-Family Residential
All facilities for the collection of garbage, refuse, ashes and similar waste
materials shall comply with Chapter 50 of the Village of Burr Ridge
Municipal Code. Dumpsters for the storage of such waste materials shall
be permitted to be located on non-residential properties subject to
compliance with the following conditions:
a. Dumpsters shall be located within a principal or accessory building
or adjacent to the rear wall of the principal building. If the property
is adjacent to a residential property, the Community Development
Director may approve an alternate location for the purpose of
ensuring that a dumpster is not located in proximity to the
residential property.
b. Dumpsters shall be enclosed on all sides with solid walls of a
material and color compatible with the principal building. Wall
enclosures for dumpsters may be masonry or solid wood subject to
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 21
the review and approval of the Community Development Director.
The access gate to a dumpster shall be properly maintained and kept
latched except when being used.
c. There shall be no more than one dumpster enclosure for a building
(or one per tenant for a multiple-tenant building) and said dumpster
enclosure shall be used only for the enclosure of a trash dumpster.
37. Trees, Shrubs and Flowers
Trees, shrubs, and flowers may be located in any buildable area and are
also permitted in any required yard.
38. Walls and Masonry Piers (Residence Districts)
In Residence Districts only, solid architectural walls of compatible
building material as the principal building shall be permitted as follows:
a. Wing Walls; Wing walls, not more than 4 feet in height, shall be
permitted in a front buildable area, an interior side buildable area or
court yard extending not more than 10 feet from the front two
corners of the principal building; and may also project up to 3 feet
into the required front or corner side yard.
b. Solid or open decorative walls; Solid or open decorative walls,
not more than 4 feet in height may be located in court yards.
c. Patio Seat Walls; Patio seat walls, not more than 24 inches in
height from patio floor to the top of wall and not more than 42
inches measured within 2 feet of the base of the wall shall be
permitted in association with patios in permitted locations as per
Section IV.I.32. Monuments in association with patio seat walls
shall be not more than 42 inches in height from the patio floor to
the top of the monument and shall be limited to not more than two
per patio. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-20-04)
d. Driveway Seat Walls; Driveway seat walls shall be permitted in
association with driveways in permitted locations as per Section
IV.I.2. and subject to the following terms and conditions:
i. Driveway seat walls may be located in a required front yard
or corner side yard provided they are at least 20 feet from a
front or corner side lot line.
ii. Driveway seat walls shall not exceed 24 inches in height
from drive floor to the top of wall and not more than 42
inches measured within 2 feet of the base of the wall except
that monuments located at the end of such walls may be 36
inches in height.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-20-04 and A-834-27-16)
Section IV
General Regulations
22 IV
Examples of Permitted Patio & Driveway Seat Walls
e. Decorative Estate Walls; For parcels that are a minimum of 2
acres in area and 220 feet in width, decorative estate walls shall be
permitted subject to the following terms and conditions:
i. Decorative estate walls shall not exceed 4 feet in height
measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level
within five feet of either side of the fence.
ii. Decorative estate walls shall not exceed 4 feet in height
measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level
within five feet of either side of the fence.
iii. Decorative estate walls may be located in any buildable
area and shall be permitted to encroach into the required
front, corner side, interior side, and rear yard setbacks but
shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from the front and
corner lot lines and 10 feet from the interior side and rear
lot lines.
iv. Decorative estate walls shall be constructed of natural
stone materials – synthetic or manufactured materials and
wood are prohibited.(Amended by Ordinances A-834-24-
07 and A-834-26-08).
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 23
f. Retaining Walls; Retaining walls may be located in any
buildable area and are also permitted in any required yard subject
to the following:
i. Retaining walls shall not exceed 42 inches in height
measured from the top of grade at the bottom of a wall to
the top of the wall.
ii. Terraced retaining walls shall be permitted where each
section of the wall does not exceed 42 inches in height and
a minimum of 36 inches is provided between each face of
the retaining walls. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-13-11)
g. Masonry Piers; A maximum of four masonry piers are permitted
in the rear buildable area of a residential lot and may encroach
into the required rear yard provided a 10-foot setback from the
rear lot line is provided and that they do not exceed 6 feet in
height and four square feet in area. (Amended by Ordinance A-
834-10-13)
39. Wine Cellars, Underground Basketball Courts, and Underground
Swimming Pools
Underground wine cellars, underground basketball courts, and
underground swimming pools may be located in any buildable area and are
also permitted to in a required rear yard provided that a minimum setback
of 25 feet is provided from the rear lot line. The horizontal area of
underground wine cellars, underground basketball courts, and underground
swimming pools – in combination with the horizontal area of all other
accessory buildings, structures and uses – shall not cover more than 30%
of the area to the rear of the principal building as per Section IV.H.4.c.2
herein. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-23-00 and A-834-14-15)
J. FENCES
Fences are permitted and may be obstructions in yards (for purposes of this Section the term
"yards" shall not be limited to the required yards set forth in this Zoning Ordinance but also
shall include all unobstructed open areas on a lot) or courts as regulated herein.
1. Fences, Open -- in residence districts only
a. Fences in residential districts shall be not more than five feet in height
measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level within five feet of
either side of the fence.
b. Such fences shall be permitted, unless otherwise provided herein, along the
rear lot line and along the side lot lines extending no further toward the front
of the lot than the rear wall of the principal building on the lot. Except,
however, on corner lots such fences shall extend not nearer to the corner side
lot line than the required corner side yard setback. (Amended by Ordinance
A-834-13-11)
Section IV
General Regulations
24 IV
Figure IV.J.1.b Permitted Residential Fence Locations
c. All fence posts and all supports must face the interior of the property on
which it is located.
d. Chain link, barbed wire and fences which are electrically charged to
produce a shock when touched are specifically prohibited. No fence shall
have any sharp, dangerous, or impaling members (Amended by Ordinance
A-834-18-18).
e. All fences in residential districts shall be open fences as defined by Section
XIV and as depicted below (Amended by Ordinances A-834-09-01 and A-
834-13-11). Open fences are defined as a fence, including gates, which has,
for each one foot wide segment extending over the entire length and height
of the fence, 50 percent of the surface area in open spaces which afford
direct views through the fence.
Figure IV.J.1.e Graphic Definition of Open Fence
“A” must be equal to or greater than “B”
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 25
1. Fences -- in non-residence districts
Fences in non-residential districts, unless specifically required by other provisions of
this Ordinance, may only be provided if they comply with the following provisions:
a. Fences in non-residential districts, unless otherwise required by this
Ordinance, shall be considered special uses and shall be subject to
compliance with Section XIII.K of this Ordinance except as modified herein.
b. The standards for consideration of a special use pertaining to a nonresidential
fence shall be limited to the standards referenced as b, c, d, and h
in Section XIII.K.7 of this Ordinance and reiterated as follows:
i. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use will
not be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, or general welfare.
ii. The special use will not be injurious to the uses and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted, nor substantially diminish or impair property values
within the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
iii. The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property
for uses permitted in the district.
iv. The special use shall, in other respects, conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified pursuant to the
recommendations of the Plan Commission or, if applicable, the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
c. The location, height, design, and type of fence shall comply with the
standards for residential fences contained in Section IV.J.1 above, except as
may be specifically authorized by conditions for approval of the special use.
2. Fences for Swimming Pools
As regulated in the other codes and ordinances of the Village.
K. PARKING AND STORAGE OF TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, MOTOR HOMES,
BOATS, TRUCKS, COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, AND BUSES
Trailers, mobile homes, motor homes, boats, trucks, commercial vehicles, and buses may be
parked on private property subject to the following regulations:
1. Trailers, Mobile Homes, Motor Homes, and Boats
For purposes of this section, trailers, mobile homes, motor homes, and boats shall be
hereinafter collectively referred to as trailers and shall comply with the following
regulations:
a. Trailers shall not be permitted to be used as dwelling units in any district as
principal or accessory uses on a lot.
Section IV
General Regulations
26 IV
b. Trailers shall not be parked or stored in the open on any lot, except one
trailer owned by the occupant of a dwelling on the same property may be
stored or parked in the rear buildable area or the required rear yard of a lot
containing a dwelling, provided that the trailer is no wider than 8.5 feet and
no longer than 35 feet, or when herein permitted in the operations of a
lawfully established trailer sales establishment. (Amended by Ordinances A-
834-4-02 and A-834-13-11)
c. Temporary parking and use of trailers shall be permitted when approved by
the Community Development Director for the following purposes:
i. Parking in the open and use of a trailer owned by the occupant of the
dwelling for lodging purposes on a lot containing a dwelling,
provided it is not parked or used thereon more than two days (or any
portion thereof) in any consecutive 30-day period.
ii. Parking in the open and use of a trailer for lodging purposes on a lot
during reconstruction of the dwelling on the lot when that dwelling
has been destroyed by fire, tornadoes, or other acts of nature or
otherwise beyond the control of the owner; provided that such use
shall only be allowed when such reconstruction commences within a
reasonable period of time after destruction of the original dwelling
and further provided such reconstruction continues without cessation
on a reasonable construction schedule.
iii. Parking and use of trailers for temporary office or storage uses
incidental to and only for the period of time of land development
and/or the construction of a building provided such trailers are
located on the same or contiguous lots as the building or land
development and are at such location as approved by the Community
Development Director.
d. One boat owned by the occupant of the dwelling may be stored or parked in
the rear yard of a lot containing a single-family detached dwelling, provided
no major repair, disassembly, or rebuilding operations are conducted
thereon.
2. Trucks, Commercial Vehicles, and Buses - Residential Districts
Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential uses shall be used principally for
the parking of passenger automobiles. Overnight, outside parking of commercial
vehicles, as defined herein, is prohibited but may be permitted in a fully enclosed
building or structure upon any lot or parcel of land in a residential district in
accordance with the following provisions:
a. Commercial vehicles may be stored and/or parked overnight only in a fully
enclosed building or structure.
b. No commercial vehicle shall be permanently affixed to the ground.
c. No more than a combined total of two (2) commercial vehicles may be
stored or parked overnight in a fully enclosed building or structure upon any
lot or parcel of land, except as hereinafter provided.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 27
d. Only one (1) commercial vehicle may be stored or parked overnight for each
unit in a duplex, two-family, multi-family, or townhouse structure, provided
it is in a fully enclosed building or structure.
e. For purposes of this section commercial vehicles shall be defined as follows:
i. Any vehicle exhibiting lettering or logos advertising a business
related enterprise (other than traditional bumper stickers).
ii. Any vehicle with attached auxiliary equipment including, but not
limited to plows, equipment, racks, storage boxes or lockers.
iii. Any vehicle requiring a vehicle license of Class D as regulated by
the State of Illinois including but not limited to trucks, cargo vans,
commercial limousines, and buses. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-
19-06)
iv. Any vehicle containing products, equipment, debris, or materials
intended for commercial or business use whether in the open, in a
cargo storage area, or covered by removable material or fabric.
v. Any van that does not have seating behind the driver’s seat and the
front passenger seat or without side windows adjacent to the rear
seating area such as panel vans. (Amended by Ord. A-834-03-03)
3. Semi-Tractors and Other Similar Vehicles – Residential Districts
Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential uses shall be used for the parking
of passenger automobiles only. Parking of any vehicle with a registered weight of
16,000 pounds or greater and requiring a vehicle license of Class F or greater as
regulated by the State of Illinois including but not limited to semi-tractors and other
heavy vehicles is prohibited in all residence districts. (Amended by Ordinance A-
834-12-07)
L. SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS
1. Connection to Public Sewer and Water Systems
Each use hereafter established which requires sewer and water facilities shall be
served by public or community sewer and water systems. However, such uses,
hereafter established on lots in areas that are not served with public sewers or water
systems may be served with individual sewage disposal systems or private wells,
provided the Board of Trustees shall (a) find, after receiving the recommendation of
the Plan Commission, that it is impractical to extend public or community sewer or
water lines to serve the area, and (b) there is an irrevocable commitment by the
owners of the lot that connections shall be made to a public or community sewer or
water system not less than six months after any such system has been installed or
extended to serve the lot.
2. Standards for Private Systems
Installation of individual sewage disposal systems and private wells or community
sewer and water systems shall be in accordance with standards and specifications set
Section IV
General Regulations
28 IV
forth in applicable laws of the Village, county, and state, or other applicable
governmental agencies.
3. Minimum Lot Size
Any lot or parcel which is to be used for a single-family detached dwelling served
with an individual sewage disposal system shall have an area of not less than one
acre and a width of not less than 150 feet or a greater area or width if required to
conform with regulations contained in Section IV.L.2 above; provided, however,
any lot or parcel containing, as of December 1, 1991, a single-family detached
dwelling served by an individual sewage disposal system can continue to be served
thereby (until a community sewer system becomes available) regardless of lot size or
lot width but only if it complies with all other applicable regulations and provided
further no such lot or parcel may be divided in any manner until such time as it is
served by a community sewer system.
M. STORM WATER DETENTION & RETENTION PONDS AND FLOOD-PLAIN
AREAS
Storm water detention and retention ponds shall be allowed in all districts when approved by
the Village either as a separate use or as accessory to a permitted use. Any development on
any lot or parcel which contains any flood-plain area (as defined by applicable Village,
county, state or federal rules, regulations, ordinances or laws) shall comply with all
applicable ordinances, laws, rules and regulations of all governmental authorities having
jurisdiction thereof. Specific attention must be given to the flood plain regulations set forth
in the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
N. BUILDING HEIGHT AND PERMITTED ROOF TOP EQUIPMENT
OBSTRUCTIONS
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which the building is located,
except as follows:
1. Exceptions in Non-Residential Districts
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building,
and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, radio and television antennas, wireless masts, water tanks, silos,
storage hoppers, elevators, or similar structures may be erected above the height
limits herein prescribed in any non-residential district. However, such rooftop
obstructions shall not exceed by more than ten (10) feet the height of the existing or
proposed building, on which the structure is located, except as otherwise indicated
below. The 10’ obstruction shall be measured as follows:
Figure IV.C.E.1
Rooftop Obstructions
in Non-Residential Districts
(Amended by
Ordinance A-834-13-11)
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 29
2. Exceptions in Residential Districts
Skylights, chimneys, radio and television antennas and wireless masts, and church
steeples may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed in any residential
district. However, such rooftop obstructions shall not exceed by more than ten (10)
feet the height of the existing or proposed building, on which the structure is located,
except as otherwise indicated below. Solar Collectors may be erected as rooftop
obstructions subject to the following (Amended by Ordinance A-834-17-08):
a. Appearance and Materials: Solar collectors should be neutral in color and
generally matching the roof color of the principle structure. All such devices
shall have the following characteristics:
i. Not be plastic or other non-UV stable material;
ii. Include factory finished aluminum frames;
iii. Where devices are encased with glass, the glass shall be nonreflective
tempered glass; and
iv. No accessory or ancillary equipment associated with solar collectors
located on front or corner side elevations shall be permitted to the
exterior of the home greater than twelve (12) inches at the base of the
solar collector before entering the roof;
v. Exterior accessory or ancillary equipment associated with solar
collectors may be permitted to the rear and side elevations only. No
such exterior equipment shall be permitted to extend over and around
the eaves, gutters, or soffit. The equipment shall be wrapped or
encased in pre-finished aluminum material or material of similar
quality to match the design and character of the single-family home;
and
vi. No accessory or ancillary equipment associated with solar collectors
for new residential construction shall be permitted to the exterior of
the home.
b. Solar collectors shall not extend beyond the edge of a roof and not extend
beyond the hip rafter on hip-roofed buildings. (Amended by Ordinance A-
834-03-14)
c. Height: Solar collectors shall be subject to the following height
requirements:
i. Sloped Roof: Solar collectors located on sloped-roof buildings may
not extend higher than the ridge, must be parallel to the pitch of the
roof, and extend no more than six (6) inches higher than the roof
surface on which they are located
Section IV
General Regulations
30 IV
ii. Flat Roof:
a. Solar collectors located on flat-roofed buildings may not
exceed the maximum building height by more than four feet
(4’).
b. Solar collectors located on flat-roofed buildings must not be
visible from any street-facing façade at the front or street side
property line.
d. Solar collectors integrated into the structure or building cladding: Solar
collectors integrated into the structure of building cladding shall be subject to
the bulk requirements of the zoning district in which the structure or building
is located.
O. UTILITY EXEMPTIONS
The following public utility uses are permitted in any district: poles, towers, wires, cables,
conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, and valves or other similar distributing equipment,
provided that the installation and location shall conform with the rules and regulations of
applicable administrative authorities, the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations
Ordinance of the Village, the requirements of this Ordinance and of Chapter 12, Article VIII
of the Village Code regulating the placement of personal wireless facilities in rights-of-way,
applicable height restrictions set forth in this Ordinance, and any other ordinances or
regulations of the Village, as well as any applicable franchise agreements or ordinances.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-05-17)
P. TEMPORARY MODEL RESIDENTIAL UNIT REGULATIONS
Temporary model residential units shall be used primarily to offer for sale or rental dwelling
units located within the same subdivision or planned unit development in which the model
unit is located. The following regulations shall govern the operation of a model unit (as well
as any other applicable rules, regulations and ordinances of the Village).
1. Upon request by the Village of Burr Ridge, the owners of the property shall provide
information relating to the use of the model unit, including but not limited to, a
record of sales or rentals made from the model unit.
2. Building materials shall not be stored upon the lot on which a model unit is situated.
3. Model units may only be shown to potential customers and realtors between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
4. Sales offices, rental offices, and construction offices may be contained in a model
unit provided that the appearance of the model unit is not substantially different from
that of the other dwelling units in the subdivision or planned unit development, and
further provided that the hours of operation of any such offices shall be restricted to
between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
5. A temporary off-street parking lot is required with the number of parking spaces to
be as approved by the Community Development Director.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 31
6. Exterior floodlights may be used to illuminate the model home, provided that lights
are sufficiently screened so that private dwelling units and nearby vehicular traffic
are not adversely affected by the floodlights.
Q. SIGN CONTROL
The regulations and standards contained within the Village of Burr Ridge Sign Ordinance,
Chapter 55 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code, shall regulate the construction, installation
and maintenance of all signs within the Village, including but not limited to location and
size. While such sign regulations and standards apply to any signs within the Village, the
provisions of such Sign Ordinance shall not be construed to also be provisions of this
Ordinance.
R. HOME OCCUPATIONS
In all Residence Districts and for all residential uses in non-residential districts (Amended
by Ordinance A-834-13-11), any customary home occupation shall be permitted provided
that:
1. It is conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of the family residing in
the dwelling and when such home occupation is incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
2. It is not conducted from a detached or attached accessory building or require internal
or external alteration, or involve construction features or use of equipment not
customary, either as to its use or size, in a dwelling (except one copying machine
and one FAX machine shall be allowed), and the entrance to the space devoted to
such occupation shall be from within the dwelling and not more than one-fourth of
the floor area of a story including also a cellar of the dwelling is devoted to such
home occupation.
3. There is no display or activity that will indicate from the exterior of the dwelling that
it is being used in whole or in part for any use other than a dwelling.
4. Only a member of the family residing on the premises, plus only one additional
person, whether or not a member of such family conducts it.
5. No mechanical equipment (except as provided above and except any personal
computer) is used, except such as is customarily used for purely domestic or
household purposes.
6. No stock in trade is kept or sold including also such as are made on the premises, or
services rendered on the premises that require receipt or delivery of merchandise,
goods or equipment by other than U.S. letter carrier mail service or the passenger
automobile of the person conducting the home occupation.
7. No home occupation shall be allowed which is of a nature that will necessitate
customers and/or personal deliveries to come to the dwelling either for goods,
services and/or the business product (either goods or written products), except home
day care as regulated herein.
8. A home occupation conducted by a professional person shall be only for
consultation or performance of religious rites, but not for the general practice of the
professional.
Section IV
General Regulations
32 IV
9. Teaching of musical instruments and dancing shall be conducted only in a singlefamily
detached dwelling and then to not more than two pupils at one time, and
academic or religious instruction may be given to not more than six pupils at one
time in a single-family detached dwelling, not more than one pupil at one time in
any other type dwelling unit.
10. Day care centers, subject to site plan review and the following provisions:
a. That no more than six (6) children are permitted, including the children of
the home day care operator aged 16 or under.
b. That the type and ages of children cared for and the provision of service
minimally conforms to the current limitations and requirements of the
Illinois Department of Children and Family Services and other applicable
law for this use.
c. That outside activity is permitted for this use. The outside activity area shall
be fenced, said fence to be otherwise in compliance with Village zoning
requirements, or if not fenced, then adult (18 or older) supervision is required
at all times.
d. That this use is permitted in single family detached dwellings only and not in
multi-family units such as condominiums or townhomes.
e. That the hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
f. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this subparagraph 10, all other
requirements related to home occupations shall apply to this use.
S. SATELLITE DISHES
Satellite dishes shall comply with the following regulations:
1. Satellite dishes and other signal receiving equipment shall comply with the
regulations set forth in the Burr Ridge Building Ordinance.
2. Satellite dishes with a diameter of one meter or less are permitted in residential
areas.
3. Satellite dishes with a diameter of two meters or less are permitted in non-residential
areas.
4. All other satellite dishes shall be considered special uses in all residential and nonresidential
districts and shall be subject to compliance with Section XIII.K of this
Ordinance. Satellite dishes also shall comply with the following:
a. Satellite dishes shall be mounted on the roof of a building unless it is
determined that a roof top location is impractical based on the design of the
building or the functioning of the dish. Rooftop dishes shall be screened
with materials architecturally compatible with the principal building.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 33
b. Ground mounted satellite dishes shall be located to the interior side or rear of
the principal building on a lot and shall be screened to ensure minimal
visibility from surrounding properties.
T. INTERPRETATION OF USES LISTS
The Community Development Director, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees
upon recommendation from the Plan Commission, may determine zoning compliance for
land uses which, though not contained by name in the zoning district lists of permitted and
special use, are deemed to be similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed uses.
All such non-listed uses shall require approval by the Board of Trustees upon
recommendation from the Plan Commission prior to issuance of a Zoning Certificate of
Occupancy. Consideration to classify a non-listed use shall not require a public hearing. All
such uses shall be added to the appropriate list of permitted or special uses upon periodic
updating of the Zoning Ordinance.
U. VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS ON CORNER LOTS
On corner lots within that part of any yard or court or
other open area located within a radius of 25 feet from
the point of intersection of the two street right-of-way
lines forming the lot corner, no buildings, structures, or
shrubs as herein permitted as obstructions in front yards
or side yards adjoining a street shall be erected, altered, or
planted which have a height more than 30 inches above
the ground grade in this area, and trees planted in such
areas shall be maintained in a manner that trees shall not
have branches lower than 8 feet above the ground grade
elevation in this area.(Amended by Ordinance A-834-13-
11)
Figure IV.L
V. REGULATIONS FOR PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
1. Permitted Locations
Placement of personal wireless service facilities in any right-of-way within the
Village limits is permitted subject to compliance with the requirements of Chapter
12, Article VIII of the Village Code, a special use is required and may be requested
for any public utility service use that satisfies the definition of personal wireless
service facility, as defined herein, provided that the proposed location satisfies any
one of the criteria listed below. Personal Wireless Service Facilities attached to
existing freestanding towers used for other Personal Wireless Services shall also
require a special use approval for the purpose of determining compliance with the
regulations herein. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-05-17)
a. The proposed location of the Personal Wireless Service Facilities is within a
manufacturing district and is not within 1000 feet of a residential district or is
separated from residential districts by a freeway or principal arterial as
defined by the Village of Burr Ridge Comprehensive Plan.
Section IV
General Regulations
34 IV
b. The proposed location of the Personal Wireless Service Facilities is attached
to an existing building or structure within a non-residential district.
c. The proposed location of the Personal Wireless Service Facilities is located
on a property owned by or used for municipal services.
2. Maximum Height for PersonalWireless Service Facilities
An applicant for approval of a Personal Wireless Facility shall demonstrate that the
Personal Wireless Facilities do not exceed the minimum height required to function
satisfactorily. Under any circumstances, Personal Wireless Facilities shall not
exceed the following height restrictions unless otherwise specifically approved by
grant of a special use permit as per Section IV.V.3, herein:
a. The maximum height of a freestanding tower shall not exceed 100 feet
provided, however, that an applicant requesting a freestanding tower shall
demonstrate that the tower/antenna is the minimum height required to
function satisfactorily.
b. If mounted on the roof of an existing building or structure, the height of an
antenna shall not exceed 10 feet above the height of the existing structure.
c. An antenna attached to the side of a building, structure, or tower, shall not
extend above the roof of the building, structure, or tower.
3. Screening and Site Location for Personal Wireless Service Facilities Attached
to Freestanding Towers
a. Support structures and antennas shall have a non-contrasting blue, gray or
similar color that minimizes their visibility and is compatible with the
surrounding landscape.
b. Personal Wireless Service Facilities should be architecturally compatible
with the surrounding buildings and land uses or otherwise integrated,
through location and design, to blend in with the existing characteristics of
the site to the extent practical.
c. Personal Wireless Service Facilities attached to a freestanding tower shall
not be located between a principal building and a street. Such freestanding
towers shall be located adjacent to the rear wall of the principal building
unless it is shown that an alternate location results in more effective
screening or blending of the tower into the surrounding landscape.
Freestanding towers shall be at least 20 feet from side and rear property
lines.
4. Screening and Site Location for Personal Wireless Service Facilities Attached
to Existing Buildings or Structures
a. Personal Wireless Facilities may be attached to the wall or roof of a building
subject to height restrictions herein. Such Facilities shall not be attached to
the front wall of a building unless it can be shown that other locations are not
feasible and that the Facilities shall be made to effectively blend into the
architecture of the building.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 35
b. Personal Wireless Facilities and their support structures attached to an
existing building or structure shall be of a color identical to the building or
that maximizes the blending of the Facilities and support structures into the
architecture of the building or structure.
c. Personal Wireless Facilities and their support structures attached to an
existing building or structure shall not extend more than 24 inches beyond
the wall of such building or structure.
5. Screening and Site Location for Ground Level Equipment and Buildings
a. Ground level equipment, buildings, and the tower base shall be located and
provided with screening to reduce visibility from public streets and
residentially zoned properties to the maximum extent possible and
reasonable.
b. Landscaping, consisting of shrubs and similar materials, shall be provided
surrounding the foundation of ground level buildings, structures, and fences
subject to the review and approval of the Community Development Director.
c. Ground level buildings and structures shall be designed and located to blend
with the existing architecture and landscaping of the subject property and the
surrounding area. Masonry facades shall be required for such buildings or
structures unless otherwise allowed as a condition of the special use
approval.
d. Fencing may be provided as a condition of the special use approval for the
purpose of enclosing and screening freestanding towers or antennas and their
support facilities. Such fencing shall comply with the requirements for
residential fences contained in Section IV.J.1, herein, except as specifically
authorized by conditions for approval of a special use.
6. Compliance with Governmental and other Safety Regulations
a. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antennas and support
structures are safe and that surrounding areas will not be negatively affected
by support structure failure, falling ice, or other debris. All support
structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by the
manufacturers.
b. All towers and antennas shall comply with the current standards and
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal
Aviation Administration, and any other agency of the federal government
with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
c. Upon application and approval, the Building Commissioner shall issue a
permit prior to construction of any tower or antenna. Said permit shall verify
that towers and antennas are constructed in compliance with applicable
Village building codes and any requirements of the Electronic Industries
Standards and the Federal Communications Commission, as well as the
provisions herein.
7. Co-Location and Location on Existing Structures Preferred
Section IV
General Regulations
36 IV
In order to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of
towers, co-location of antennas by more than one provider on existing or new towers
and location of antennas on existing buildings or structures, shall take precedence
over the construction of new, freestanding towers. If a new, freestanding tower is
proposed, special use approval shall not be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
compliance with the following:
a. A diligent effort has been made to locate the antenna on an existing structure
and that, due to valid considerations, including physical constraints and
economic or technological feasibility, no other appropriate location is
available.
b. Covenants shall be recorded which require that the applicant allow, on a
commercially reasonable basis, other providers of Personal Wireless Service
Facilities and other antennas to co-locate on the proposed freestanding tower,
where such co-location is technologically feasible.
c. The site plan for the construction of a new, freestanding tower shall delineate
an area near the base of the tower to be used for the placement of additional
equipment and buildings for other users.
8. Abandonment of Towers or Antennas
In the event the use of a tower or antenna is discontinued for a period of 60
consecutive day, the tower or antenna shall be deemed to be abandoned. The
Community Development Director shall determine the date of abandonment based
on documentation required from the tower owner/operator or other appropriate
sources. Upon abandonment, the tower owner/operator shall have an additional 60
days within which to:
a. Reactivate the use of the tower either by said owner/operator or transfer of
the tower to another owner/operator for such use within the aforesaid 60-day
period. Transfer of the tower to another owner/operator shall not require
special use approval provided use of the tower is re-activated within the 60-
day period and that the use of the tower complies with all conditions of the
original special use approval and the terms of this Ordinance.
b. Dismantle and remove the tower, at which time, any special use shall
become null and void.
c. Request approval from the Board of Trustees to allow the abandoned tower
or antenna to remain for a specified period of time. If said approval is
granted, the tower shall be reactivated or removed within the time period
approved by the Board of Trustees as per the regulations herein. (Amended
by Ordinance A-834-9-97)
W. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Any use established in any district shall be so operated as to comply with the
performance standards as set forth hereinafter. Established uses other than legal,
nonconforming uses subject to the regulations of Section XII may be altered, enlarged,
expanded or modified provided that the additions or changes comply with said
performance standards. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-5-10)
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 37
1. Noise
a. Definitions - (All definitions of acoustical terminology shall be in
conformance with those contained in ANSI S1.1-1994 (R2004) "Acoustical
Terminology" and the latest revisions thereof or any replacement thereto).
(1) A-weighted Sound Level: 10 times the logarithm to the base 10 of
the square of the ratio of the A-weighted (and time-averaged) sound
pressure, to the reference sound pressure of 20 micropascal. The
frequency and time weighting must be specified in accordance with
ANSI-S1.4-1983 (R2006) “American National Standard for Sound
Level Meters” and the latest revision thereof. The unit of sound level
is the decibel (dB) with the letter (A) appended to the decibel unit
symbol to indicate the frequency weighting and written dB(A).
(2) ANSI: American National Standards Institute, or its successor
bodies.
(3) Construction: On-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration,
demolition or removal of any building or structure, facility, or
addition thereto, including all related activities, including, but not
restricted to, clearing of land, earth-moving, blasting, and
landscaping.
(4) Daytime Hours: 7:00 A.M., to 7:00 P.M., local time.
(5) dB(A): See “A-weighted Sound Level” in decibels.
(6) Decibel (dB): A unit of measure, on a logarithmic scale to the base
10, of the ratio of the magnitude of a particular sound pressure to a
standard reference pressure, which, for purposes of this regulation,
shall be 20 micronewtons per square meter (µN/m2) or 20
micropascals (µPa).
(7) Discrete tone: a sound wave whose instantaneous sound pressure
varies essentially as a simple sinusoidal function of time.
(8) Fast Dynamic Characteristic: The dynamic characteristic specified
as “Fast” in ANSI S1.4-1983 (R2006) "American National
Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters" and the latest
revision thereof.
(9) Fast Meter Response: As specified in ANSI S1.4-1983 (R2006)
"American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters"
and the latest revision thereof.
(10) Highly Impulsive Sound: Either a single pressure peak or a single
burst (multiple pressure peaks) for a duration less than one second.
(11) Night Time Hours: 7:00 P.M., to 7:00 A.M., local time.
(12) Octave Band Sound Pressure Level: The sound pressure level for
Section IV
General Regulations
38 IV
the sound being measured contained within the specified octave
band. The reference pressure is 20 micronewtons per square meter.
(13) Pascal (Pa): A unit of pressure. One Pascal is equal to one Newton
per square meter.
(14) Preferred Frequencies: Those frequencies in Hertz preferred for
acoustical measurements which, for the purposes of this regulation,
consist of the following set of values: 20, 25, 31.5, 40, 50, 63, 80,
100, 125, 160, 200, 250, 315, 400, 500, 630, 800, 1000, 1250, 1600,
2000, 2500, 3150, 4000, 5000, 6300, 8000, 10,000, 12,500.
(15) Prominent Discrete Tone: Sound, having a one-third octave band
sound pressure level which, when measured in a one-third octave
band at the preferred frequencies, exceeds the arithmetic average of
the sound pressure levels of the two adjacent one-third octave bands
on either side of such one-third band by:
5 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency
from 500 Hertz to 10,000 Hertz, inclusive. Provided: such
one-third octave band sound pressure level exceeds the sound
pressure level of each adjacent one-third octave band, or;
8 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency
from 160 Hertz to 400 Hertz, inclusive. Provided: such onethird
octave band sound pressure level exceeds the sound
pressure level of each adjacent one-third octave band, or;
15 dB for such one-third octave band with a center frequency
from 25 Hertz to 125 Hertz, inclusive. Provided: such onethird
octave band sound pressure level exceeds the sound
pressure level of each adjacent one-third octave band.
(16) Slow Dynamic Characteristic: The dynamic characteristic specified
as “Slow” in ANSI S1.4-1983 (R2006) "American National Standard
Specification for Sound Level Meters" and the latest revision thereof.
(17) Sound: A physical disturbance causing an oscillation in pressure
in a medium (e.g., air) that is capable of being detected by the
human ear or a sound measuring instrument.
(18) Sound Level (Weighted Sound Pressure Level): 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the frequency-weighted
(and time-averaged) sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20
micropascals. The frequency weighting used shall be specified
explicitly (e.g., A, C, or octave band). The unit for sound level is
decibel (dB).
(19) Sound Pressure: the root mean square of the instantaneous sound
pressures during a specified time interval in a stated frequency band.
The unit for sound pressure is Pascal (Pa).
(20) Sound Pressure Level: 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of
the ratio of the particular sound pressure to the reference sound
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 39
pressure of 20 micropascals. ANSI S12.9- 1988 (R1998)
“American National Standard Quantities and Procedures for
Description and Measurement of Environmental Sound - Part 1,”
and the latest revision thereof, reserves the term sound pressure
level to denote the unweighted sound pressure. The unit for sound
pressure level is decibel (dB).
b. Prohibition of Noise Pollution
No person shall cause or allow the emission of sound beyond property
lines so as to cause noise pollution (violating any applicable standards
established by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency) or a
nuisance in Burr Ridge, or so as to violate any provisions of this
Ordinance.
c. Measurement Techniques
Test procedures to determine whether emission of sound is in conformance
with regulation shall be in substantial conformity with Standards and
Recommended Practices established by the ANSI and the latest revisions
thereof, including but not limited to:
- ANSI S1.4-1983 (R2006)/ANSI S1.4a-1985 (R2006)
- ANSI S1.6-1984 (R2006)
- ANSI/ASA S1.11-2004 (R2009)
- ANSI/ASA S1.13-2005 (R2010)
- ANSI S12.1-1983 (R2006)
- ANSI/ASA S12.9-1993/Part 3 (R2008)
- ANSI/ASA S12.18-1994 (R2009)
d. Sound Emitted Standards and Limitations for Noise Sources
(1) Sound Emitted to Residential (R) Districts During Daytime
Hours
Except as elsewhere provided in this regulation, no use shall cause
or allow the emission of sound during daytime hours from any
noise source located in a Manufacturing District or from any noise
source in any district by a use involving manufacturing,
fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning,
servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of materials, goods, or
products, to any receiving Residential Districts or developments
and any school buildings or sites (hereinafter collectively referred
to as R Districts) which exceeds the allowable octave band sound
pressure level specified in Table 1, when measured at any point
within such receiving R District, provided, however, that no
measurement of sound pressure levels shall be made less than 25
feet from such noise source.
Section IV
General Regulations
40 IV
TABLE 1
SOUND EMITTED TO ANY RECEIVING R DISTRICTS FROM A
MANUFACTURING DISTRICT DURING DAYTIME HOURS
Octave Band Center
Frequency (Hertz)
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure
Levels (dB) of Sound Emitted to any
Receiving R Districts from a Manufacturing
District (dB) during Daytime Hours
31.5 72
63 71
125 65
250 57
500 51
1000 45
2000 39
4000 34
8000 32
(2) Sound Emitted to Residential (R) Districts During Nighttime
Hours
Except as elsewhere provided in this regulation, no use shall cause
or allow the emission of sound during night time hours from any
noise source located in a Manufacturing District or from any noise
source in any district by a use involving manufacturing,
fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning,
servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of materials, goods, or
products, to any receiving R District which exceeds any allowable
octave band sound pressure level specified in Table 2, when
measured at any point within such receiving R District, provided,
however, that no measurement of sound pressure levels shall be
made less than 25 feet from such noise source. In addition, where
any such use in any district utilizes trucks or other vehicular
equipment, such as forklifts, outside in its operations and is
adjacent to residential properties, the back-up warning signals on
all such trucks or other vehicular equipment shall, to the extent
allowed by law, be turned off or otherwise muted during nighttime
hours so as to be inaudible to the adjacent residential properties.
Trucks and other vehicular equipment operated outside adjacent to
residential properties shall not idle outside during nighttime hours
for a period in excess of five minutes.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 41
TABLE 2
SOUND EMITTED TO ANY RECEIVING R DISTRICTS FROM A
MANUFACTURING DISTRICT DURING NIGHTTIME HOURS
Octave Band
Center
Frequency (Hertz)
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels
(dB) of Sound Emitted to any Receiving R
Districts from a Manufacturing District (dB)
during Nighttime Hours
31.5 63
63 61
125 55
250 47
500 40
1000 35
2000 30
4000 25
8000 25
(3) Sound Emitted to Business (B) Districts
Except as elsewhere provided in this regulation, no use shall cause
or allow the emission of sound from any noise source located in a
Manufacturing District to any receiving Business (B) District
(hereinafter referred to as B District) which exceeds any allowable
octave band sound pressure level specified in Table 3, when
measured at any point within such receiving B Districts, provided,
however, that no measurement of sound pressure levels shall be
made less than 25 feet from such noise source.
TABLE 3
SOUND EMITTED TO ANY RECEIVING B DISTRICTS FROM A
MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
Octave Band
Center
Frequency (Hertz)
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels
(dB) of Sound Emitted to any Receiving B
Districts from a Manufacturing District (dB)
31.5 79
63 78
125 72
250 64
500 58
1000 52
2000 46
4000 41
8000 39
Section IV
General Regulations
42 IV
(4) Sound Emitted to Research Assembly (RA), Light Industrial
(LI), and General Industrial (GI) Districts
Except as elsewhere provided in this regulation, no use shall cause
or allow the emission of sound from any noise source located in
the RA, LI, and GI Districts to any receiving neighboring lot in the
RA, LI, and GI Districts which exceeds any allowable octave band
sound pressure level specified in Table 4 when measured at any
point within such receiving lot, provided, however, that no
measurement of sound pressure levels shall be made less than 25
feet from such noise source.
TABLE 4
SOUND EMITTED TO ANY RECEIVING RA, LI, OR GI
DISTRICT FROM A MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
Octave Band
Center
Frequency (Hertz)
Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels
(dB) of Sound Emitted to any Receiving RA, LI,
or GI Districts from a Manufacturing District
(dB)
RA or LI Receiving
District
GI Receiving District
31.5 79 80
63 78 79
125 72 74
250 64 69
500 58 63
1000 52 57
2000 46 52
4000 41 48
8000 39 45
(5) Highly Impulsive Sound
No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulsive sound
from any noise source located in a Manufacturing District or from
any noise source in any district by a use involving manufacturing,
fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning,
servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of materials, goods, or
products, to any receiving R or B District or RA, LI or GI District
lots which exceeds the allowable dB (A) sound level specified in
Table 5, when measured at any point within such receiving R or B
District or RA, LI, GI District lot, provided, however, that no
measurement of sound levels shall be made less than 25 feet from
the noise source.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 43
TABLE 5
HIGHLY IMPULSIVE SOUND
Allowable (A-weighted) Sound Levels of Impulsive Sound Emitted
From Manufacturing Districts or from any noise source by a use in any
district involving manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly,
repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing
of materials, goods, or products, to designated classes for receiving uses
RA & LI
Districts
GI District B Districts R Districts
57 61 50 45
(6) Prominent Discrete Tones
(a) No use shall cause or allow the emission of any
prominent discrete tone from any noise source located in a
Manufacturing District or from any noise source in any
district by a use involving manufacturing, fabricating,
assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning,
servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of materials,
goods, or products, to any receiving R or B District or
neighboring RA, LI, or GI lot provided, however, that no
measurement of one-third octave band sound pressure
levels shall be made less than 25 feet from such noise
source.
(b) This rule shall not apply to prominent discrete tones
having a one-third octave band sound pressure level 10 or
more dB below the allowable octave band sound pressure
level specified in the applicable tables in subsection "d"
through subsection (1) through (4) of this subsection C.1
for the octave band which contains such one-third octave
band.
e. Exceptions
(1) Subsection "d" of this subsection C.1 inclusive shall not apply to
sound emitted from emergency warning devices and unregulated
safety relief valves.
(2) Subsection "d" of this subsection C.1 inclusive shall not apply to
sound emitted from lawn care maintenance equipment and snow
blowers and similar snow removal equipment used during daytime
hours.
(3) Subsection "d" inclusive shall not apply to sound emitted from
equipment being used for temporary construction between the
hours of 7:00 A.M., to 7:00 P.M., of each day or as otherwise
regulated under the provisions of the Building Ordinance of the
Village of Burr Ridge.
(4) Subsection "d" inclusive shall apply to sound emitted from trucks
Section IV
General Regulations
44 IV
and vehicles under the control of the property user and/or owner,
including vehicles entering and leaving the property. Trucks and
vehicles under the control of the property user and/or owner shall
include trucks that are on the property for purposes of loading or
unloading goods, whether such trucks are owned by the property
user and/or owner or not. Actionable noise violations include
violations caused by trucks hitting potholes or other obstacles on
the property, and the shifting of gears as trucks leave, enter or
drive upon the property, as well as violations caused by idling
engines and trailer mounted refrigeration units.
(5) Subsection "d" inclusive shall not apply to sound emitted from
railroad facilities.
2. Vibration
a. Definitions
(1) Amplitude: The maximum displacement of the earth from the
normal rest position during one period of oscillation.
(2) Cycle: A complete cycle of vibration occurs when the object
moves from one extreme position to the other extreme and back
again.
(3) Discrete Impulses: A ground transmitted vibration stemming
from a source where specific pulses do not exceed 60 per minute (or
one per second)
(4) Frequency: The number of cycles that a vibrating object
completes in one second. The unit of frequency is Hertz (Hz). One
Hertz equals one cycle per second.
(5) Impact: An earth borne vibration generally produced by two or
more objects striking each other so as to cause separate and distinct
pulses.
(6) Oscillation: a regular periodic variation in value about a mean.
(7) Particle Velocity: A characteristic of vibration that depends on both
amplitude displacement and frequency. Particle Velocity may be
measured directly or computed by multiplying the frequency by the
amplitude times the factor 6.28. The particle velocity will be in
inches per second. The maximum Particle Velocity shall be the
maximum vector sum of the three mutually perpendicular
components recorded simultaneously.
(8) Seismograph: An instrument which measures vibration
characteristics simultaneously in three mutually perpendicular
planes. The seismograph may measure displacement and frequency,
particle velocity, or acceleration.
(9) Steady State Vibration: A vibration which is continuous, as from a
fan, compressor, or motor.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 45
(10) Vibration: A reciprocating motion transmitted through the earth,
both in the horizontal and vertical planes.
b. Instrumentation
Ground-transmitted vibration shall be measured with a seismograph or
complement of instruments capable of recording vibration displacement,
particle velocity, or acceleration and frequency simultaneously in three
mutually perpendicular directions.
c. Maximum Permitted Vibration Levels
Table 6 designates the acceptable maximum permitted particle velocities of
vibration that apply on or beyond adjacent lot lines within the
manufacturing district or from any source in any district by a use
involving manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing,
storing, cleaning, servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of materials,
goods, or products, and on or beyond appropriate district boundaries.
Where more than one set of vibration levels apply, the most restrictive
shall govern. Readings may be made at points of maximum vibration
intensity.
TABLE 6
MAXIMUM PERMITTED PARTICLE VELOCITIES OF VIBRATION
Steady-state Vibration Limits for the Manufacturing District or for any use in
any district involving manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly,
repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of
materials, goods, or products.
Maximum Peak Particle Velocity (inches per second)
RA, LI & Lot Lines R. District
Day Night
0.06 0.03 0.01
d. Vibration Notes
(1) Night time limits shall be considered to prevail from 7:00 P.M., to
7:00 A.M., local time.
(2) For purposes of this regulation, steady-state vibrations are
vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses
more frequent than sixty (60) per minute. Discrete impulses which
do not exceed sixty (60) per minute, shall be considered impact
vibrations.
(3) Railroad facilities shall be exempt from vibration limitations.
3. Air Pollution
In all Districts, all uses shall comply with the State of Illinois Pollution Control Board
rules and regulations codified as Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code, Sub-Title B
and as may be amended from time to time.
Section IV
General Regulations
46 IV
4. Toxic Substances
a. Definition of Toxic Substances; Any gas, liquid, solid, semi-solid
substance or mixture of substances, which if discharged into the
environment could, alone or in combination with other substances likely to
be present in the environment, cause or threaten to cause bodily injury,
illness, or death to members of the general public through ingestion,
inhalation, or absorption through any body surface. In addition,
substances which are corrosives, irritants, strong sensitizers, or radioactive
substances shall be considered toxic substances for the purposes of this
regulation.
b. The use, storage, handling or transport of toxic substances shall comply
with applicable laws and regulations.
c. In the RA, LI and GI Districts, any toxic substance listed by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Development (Public Health Service,
Center for Disease Control, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health, "Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances"), as revised
from time to time, contained in one or more containers within the lot line
in quantities in excess of 100 gallons as a liquid, 1,000 pounds as a solid
or 100 pounds as a gas shall not be permitted.
d. In the RA, LI & GI Districts, the storage, utilization, manufacture or
handling of any toxic or radioactive substance shall be allowed only as a
conditional use and only after a conditional use permit is granted under the
standards set forth above.
5. Water Pollution
In all Districts, all uses shall comply with the State of Illinois Pollution Control
Board rules and regulations codified as Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative
Code, Sub-Title C and as may be amended from time to time.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 47
6. Fire and Explosive Hazards
a. In a Manufacturing District, activities involving the storage, handling,
utilization’s, or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by
detonation and which are classified by the Department of Transportation
as Explosive A (and/or by the United Nations as UN Class 1.1 or 1.2),
Explosive B (and/or by the United Nations as UN Class 1.3), or Explosive
C (and/or by the United Nations as UN Class 1.4), as such classes are
amended from time to time (See C.F.R. 49, Parts 100 to 177), shall be
permitted only as a conditional use, in accordance with the standards set
forth below, provided that such quantities do not exceed the limits set
forth in the following Table 7. Explosives categorized or classified by the
Department of Transportation as "Forbidden" or "Restricted" shall not be
permitted. Permitted explosives shall be stored, utilized, handled, and
manufactured in accordance with National Fire Protection Association -
National Fire Codes (as adopted by the Village) and all other applicable
Village regulations and ordinances. The storage and accountability of
permitted explosives shall comply with applicable Department of the
Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Regulations ("Your
Guide to Explosive Regulations as most recently amended and as amended
from time to time - ATF P5400.7). This includes the requirement of an
explosives permit (18 USC Chapter 40).
b. In a Manufacturing District, the storage, utilization, handling or
manufacture of radioactive isotopes (fissionable material) (regardless of
atomic mass) shall not be permitted except as a conditional use and only
after a conditional use permit is granted under the standards set forth in
this Ordinance, and also shall not be permitted unless the material is
contained in an approved (by the Village) shielded and fire resistant
container for which it is never removed. Radioactive isotopes (fissionable
materials) in such shielded and fire resistant containers which are granted
a Conditional use shall be classified for the purposes of the Manufacturing
Districts as Explosive A materials and shall comply with the quantity
limitations set forth in the following Table 7.
c. In the Manufacturing District, the storage, utilization, handling or
manufacture of highly reactive oxidizing or reducing agents, unstable or
pyroforic materials, or highly unstable materials which include but are not
confined to organic peroxides, organic nitrated, fluorine, liquid oxygen,
hydrazine, acetylides, tetrazoles, ozonides, percholoric acid,
perchalorated, chlorated, alkyaluminums, diborane, calcium trifluoride,
hydroxylamine and other similar materials shall be considered as
Explosive C materials and shall comply with the quantity limitations set
forth in the following Table 7. The storage utilization, handling or
manufacture of these materials shall be in accordance with The National
Fire Protection Association - National Fire Codes (as adopted by the
Village) and all other applicable Village regulations and ordinances.
d. In the Manufacturing District, the storage, utilization, handling or
manufacture of flammable liquids and gases shall be permitted in
accordance with the following Table 8, including the storage of finished
products. Flammable liquid and storage tanks shall not be less than fifty
(50) feet from all lot lines. The storage, utilization, handling or
manufacture of flammable liquids and gases shall be in accordance with
Section IV
General Regulations
48 IV
the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Codes (as adopted
by the Village) and all other applicable Village regulations and
ordinances.
d. No activities covered by this Subsection are allowed anywhere other than
in a Manufacturing District and in conformance with the requirements set
forth above.
TABLE 7:
TOTAL CAPACITY OF EXPLOSIVE AND
OTHER UNSTABLE OR HIGHLY REACTIVE MATERIALS
Materials Classification Total Quantity
Forbidden 0
Restricted 0
Explosive A 0.1 Pounds
Explosive B 1 Pounds
Explosive C 10 Pounds
(The Total Quantity of All Such Materials Shall Not Exceed Ten (10) Pounds).
TABLE 8:
TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED
(IN GALLONS)
For Material Having
an Open Cup Flash
Point…
Above Ground Underground
RA & LI
Districts
GI
Districts
RA & LI
Districts
GI
Districts
…at or above 140
degree F
5,000 30,000 20,000 100,000
…at or above 100
degree F., and below
140 degree F
2,000 10,000 20,000 100,000
…below 100 degree F 500 2,000 20,000 100,000
(When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in cubic feet,
the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure shall not exceed 30 times
the quantities listed in Table 8 above).
7. Glare
In all Districts, any activity or operation producing glare shall be conducted in
accordance with the following requirement: Exposed sources of light shall be
controlled so that direct and indirect illumination within the lot lines shall not
cause illumination in excess of 1/2 foot candle in any R District.
8. Other Nuisances
In addition to the performance standards specified above in subsection 1 through
subsection 7 above, the dissemination of noise, vibration, particulate matter, odor,
toxic substances, or fire or explosive materials in either such manner or quantity
as to be determined to endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be unlawful.
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 49
9. Landscaping
All required yards or other required open spaces shall be appropriately landscaped
in accordance with landscaping plans submitted to and approved by the
Community Development Director, and thereafter maintained in such a manner as
to retain at least the intended standards of the initial landscaping plan and to
conform to the landscaping requirements as set forth as follows:
a. Required Landscaping
All Manufacturing uses (uses established in any district involving
manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing,
cleaning, servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of materials, goods,
or products) must be buffered from adjacent residential uses and
residentially zoned properties through the use of substantial berming and
landscaping in accordance with applicable Village regulations and a
landscaping plan submitted to and approved by the Community
Development Director. All such buffering shall be as close to 100 percent
opacity as possible, including during the dormant stage of such
landscaping, and shall include a mix of the plant materials set forth in
EXHIBIT I. Approval of the landscaping plan or approval of the
landscaping plan with modification shall be based on the
recommendations of the Village Forester.
b. Building Setback
If landscaping complies with the requirements above, no buildings or
structure may be located within 50 feet of a residence district boundary
line. If landscaping does not comply with said requirements, no building
or structure shall be located within 150 feet of a residence district
boundary line.
c. Parking Lot Setback
No parking lot may be located within 30 feet of a residence district
boundary line. This setback area shall also be landscaped as set forth
above.
Section IV
General Regulations
50 IV
EXHIBIT I - PERMITTED PLANT MATERIAL
The plant material used in required landscaping in manufacturing districts and for any use
established in any district involving manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly,
repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of materials, goods, or
products, shall conform to the following plant list.
Plant Group A: Deciduous Shade Trees (Installation Size: min. 2.5 inch trunk diameter
measured 1 foot above ground level)
1. All street trees contained in the permitted species list of the Village of Burr Ridge
Subdivision Regulations Ordinance.
Plant Group B: Evergreen Trees (Installation Size: 8 ft. in height)
Spacing on Center
1. Scotch Pine 20 feet
2. Red Pine 20 feet
3. White Pine 30 feet
4. Douglas Fir 20 feet
5. Norway Spruce 18 feet
Plant Group C: Ornamental Deciduous Trees (Installation Size: 6 ft. in height) (All plants
shall be in shrub form)
Spacing on Center
1. Cockspur Hawthorn 15 feet
2. Washington Hawthorn 10 feet
3. Winter King Hawthorn 12 feet
4. Ironwood or American Hornbeam 12 feet
5. Amur Maple 12 feet
6. Cornelian Cherry 15 feet
Plant Group D - Deciduous and Evergreen Shrubs
Installed Size (Height) Spacing on Center
1. Winged Euonymus 4 feet 8 feet
2. Arrowwood Viburnum 4 feet 6 feet
3. Nannyberry 4 feet 8 feet
4. Mochican Viburnum 4 feet 6 feet
5. American Hazelnut 4 feet 6 feet
6. American Cranberry
Viburnum 4 feet 6 feet
7. Pfitzer Juniper 3 feet 6 feet
8. Hetzi Juniper 3 feet 6 feet
9. Mugo Pine 4 feet 8 feet
10. Dwarf Mugo Pine 3 feet 6 feet
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-05-10)
Section IV
General Regulations
IV 51
X. UTILITIES AND MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
For all buildings except detached single-family dwellings, utilities and mechanical
equipment shall comply with the following: (Amended by Ordinance A-834-13-11)
1. All utilities shall be placed underground.
2. Rooftop equipment, exclusive of flues, exhaust stacks and vents, shall be
completely screened from view from any adjacent private or public street or from
any point along an exterior property line. Screening shall be of permanent
construction material at least one foot (1') higher than the object being screened
and architecturally compatible with the principal building.
3. Ground-level mechanical equipment shall be completely screened from view from
any adjacent private or public street or from any point along an exterior property
line. The screen shall be of permanent construction material architecturally
compatible with the principal building or be screened by the use of landscape
material that affords a minimum of 80 percent opacity during the vegetation's
dormant season. Minimum height of screening shall be at least one foot (1')
higher than the object being screened.
4. Screening methods and materials to be utilized for both rooftop and ground-level
equipment shall be specified on the building permit application required for each
lot.
Y. ACCESS DRIVEWAY FROM STREETS TO OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING SPACES
1. WIDTH AND NUMBER OF DRIVEWAYS
a. Measurement of Driveway Width: The width of all driveways shall be
measured at the lot line adjoining a street.
b. Residential Uses
(1) The width of a driveway providing access to a residential use shall
not be less than 9 feet or more than 22 feet. However, for all singlefamily
residences existing as of November 11, 2013 that have front
loaded, thee-car garages also existing as of November 11, 2013, the
maximum width of a driveway shall not be more than 30 feet.
(Amended by A-834-11-13, A-834-34-13)
(2) The number of driveways providing access to a residential use from
a single street shall not exceed two. The number of driveways
providing access to a residential use on a corner lot shall not exceed
three.
(3) The combined width of all driveways accessing a residential property
shall not exceed 36 feet.
Section IV
General Regulations
52 IV
c. Non-Residential uses
(1) Not less than 14 feet wide or more than 20 feet wide for a one-way
driveway.
(2) Not less than 20 feet wide or more than 35 feet wide for a two-way
driveway serving two or fewer parking spaces and/or one loading
space.
(3) Not less than 24 feet wide or more than 35 feet wide for a two-story
driveway serving more than 20 parking spaces and/or two or more
loading spaces.
2. RADIUS CONNECTING STREET PAVEMENT EDGE AND DRIVEWAY
EDGE
a. In Residence Districts; A driveway flare or radius shall be provided that
does not exceed 5 feet and does not encroach beyond the side property line
as extended to the street pavement. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-5-98)
b. Business Districts
(1) Not less than 15 feet at the intersection of a driveway and street
pavement in a street having a right-of-way more than 66 feet wide.
(2) Not less than eight feet at the intersection of a driveway and a street
pavement in a street having a right-of-way of 66 feet or less in width.
3. ANGLE AT INTERSECTION OF A DRIVEWAY AND STREET
The acute angle formed at the intersection of driveway and street pavement edges
shall be not less than 60 degrees.
4. SPACING BETWEEN SEPARATE DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES ON A LOT
(measured at the lot line adjoining a street)
a. Not less than 20 feet on streets having rights-of-way more than 66 feet in
width.
b. Not less than ten feet on streets having rights-of-way 66 feet or less in width.
5. ON CORNER LOTS - SPACING BETWEEN DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE
AND RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF AN ADJACENT INTERSECTION
STREET (measured from the nearest edge of the driveway pavement at its
intersection with the street right-of-way line of an adjacent intersecting street)
a. Not less than 15 feet to an adjacent intersecting street having a right-of-way
more than 66 feet in width.
b. Not less than eight feet to an adjacent intersecting street having a right-ofway
66 feet or less in width.
V
A. E
In
is
In
pr
L pl
L
B. Z
1
ESTABLISH
n order to car
s hereby divi
R-1
R-2
R-2A
R-2B
R-3
R-4
R-5
R-6
T-1
T-2
B-1
B-2
O-1
O-2
RA
LI
GI
n addition, th
roperty adjoi
Line Road an
lanned unit d
Line Road Co
ZONING DI
. Zonin
The z
entitle
as am
and ot
ordina
amend
The o
BURR
HING OF DI
rry out the pu
ded into the
Single-Fam
Single-Fam
Single-Fam
Single-Fam
Single-Fam
Single-Fam
Planned Re
Residentia
Transitiona
Transitiona
Retail Bus
General Bu
Small Scal
Office and
Research A
Light Indu
General In
here is also es
ining County
nd whether
development
orridor Area.
STRICT M
ng District M
oning distric
ed Zoning Di
mended, whic
ther informat
ance, with t
dment, notati
original zonin
R RIDGE Z
SE
ZONIN
ISTRICTS
urposes and p
following di
mily Residen
mily Residen
mily Residen
mily Residen
mily Residen
mily Residen
esidence
al and Congre
al
al
iness
usiness
le Office
d Hotel
Assembly
ustrial
ndustrial
stablished th
y Line Road,
such proper
t uses. Separ
MAP AND BO
Map
cts and their
istrict Map, "
ch map and
tion shown th
the same fo
ions, referen
ng district m
ZONING
ECTION V
NG DISTR
provisions o
stricts:
nce
nce
nce
nce
nce
nce
egate Care
he County Lin
, regardless o
rty is zoned
rate regulatio
OUNDARIE
boundaries
Village of B
all amendme
hereon are he
orce and eff
nces, and oth
map, propert
ORDINA
RICTS
f this ordinan
ne Road Cor
of the depth
d to permit r
ons apply to t
ES OF DIST
are as show
Burr Ridge, I
ents thereto
ereby incorp
fect as if th
her informatio
ty attested to
ANCE
nce, the Villa
rridor Area, w
of such prop
residential, n
those proper
TRICTS
wn upon a zo
Illinois, dated
and all nota
porated and m
he said zon
on were fully
o, is on file
age of Burr R
which includ
perty from Co
non-residenti
rties in the Co
oning district
d March 8, 1
ations, refere
made a part o
ing district
y herein set
with the V
1
Ridge
des all
ounty
ial or
ounty
t map
965",
ences,
of this
map,
forth.
illage
Section V
Zoning D
2
2
C. A
LF
Districts
Clerk
. Bound
Where
shown
rules a
a.
b.
c.
d.
ANNEXED T
Land hereafte
amily Reside
of Burr Ridg
daries of Dis
e uncertainty
n on the zon
apply:
Where dis
extensions
said streets
Where the
property h
district bo
boundaries
property, t
accordance
Where a
regulations
discretion,
district bo
residential
residential
Questions
resolved by
TERRITOR
er annexed to
ence District
ge.
stricts
y exists with
ning district m
strict bounda
thereof, suc
s, alleys, or e
e district bou
has been or
oundaries sh
s are otherw
the district b
e with dimen
district bou
s of this ordi
apply to th
oundary line
uses (excep
district, exce
concerning
y the Board o
RY
o the Villag
t unless and u
h respect to
map and ma
aries are ind
ch boundarie
extensions th
undaries are
may hereaf
hall be con
wise indicat
boundary line
nsions as desi
undary line
inance for eit
e entire area
e, whichever
pt parking)
ept as otherw
the exact l
of Trustees.
e shall be au
until otherwi
the boundar
ade a part of
dicated as fo
es shall be co
hereof.
e not otherw
fter be divid
nstrued to b
ted on the
es on the zo
ignated on th
divides a l
ither portion
a of the lot o
r is the les
shall not be
wise provided
locations of
utomatically
ise classified
ries of the va
f this ordinan
following str
onstrued to b
wise indicated
ded into blo
be the lot l
map. With
oning district
he map.
lot in single
of the lot m
or 25 feet b
sser distance
e permitted
d herein.
f district bou
y classified in
d by amendm
arious distric
nce, the follo
reets or alley
be center lin
d, and wher
cks and lots
lines, unless
hin unsubdiv
t map shall
e ownership
may, at the ow
eyond the zo
e, provided
to extend i
undaries sha
n the R-1 Si
ment.
V
cts as
owing
ys or
nes of
re the
s, the
s the
vided
be in
p, the
wner's
oning
nonnto
a
all be
ingleVI
1
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Permitted Uses
No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted
hereinafter in the zoning district in which such building or tract of land shall be
located, with exception of the following:
a. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Ordinance.
b. Special uses as allowed in each district.
Uses already lawfully established on the effective date of this Ordinance and
rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations
of Section XII.
2. Bulk Requirements
Bulk requirements shall be as specified under each zoning district as described
herein, except as otherwise provided in Section XIII for a planned unit development.
In addition, no building shall be converted so as to conflict with, or further conflict
with, the bulk requirements of the district in which such building is located.
However, when recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board
of Trustees for the creation of new lots, lots of a lesser size will be permitted if the
total number of lots does not exceed the number which would be possible if all lots
were in compliance with the lot size requirements in the district in which they are
located and, further, if the reduction in size is not more than 25 percent.
3. Yard Requirements and Open Space
a. Yard requirements shall be as set forth under each zoning district, except as
otherwise provided in Section XIII for a planned unit development.
Required front, side, and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations hereinafter indicated and shall be unobstructed from the ground
level to the sky, except as allowed in Section IV.I.
b. All accessory buildings or structures which are attached to principal
buildings (e.g., attached garages) shall comply with the yard requirements of
the principal building.
4. Attached Garages – R-1, R-2l, and R-2A Districts
Accessory residential garages in the R-1, R-2, and R-2A Districts shall comply with
the following:
a. The combined floor area for all attached garages shall not exceed 1410
square feet or 35 percent of the floor area of the principle dwelling,
Section VI
Residence District
2 VI
whichever is greater. For purposes of this subsection, floor area shall be
defined as the floor area included in the calculation for floor area ratio.
b. Any floor area of an attached garage in excess of 1,000 square feet shall be
counted in computing the floor area for determining the floor area ratio
permitted on a lot.
c. Overhead Door Height: The vertical distance from the top of the garage
floor to the top of the garage door opening shall not exceed 9 feet in height.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-07-07).
5. Attached Garages – R-2B, R-3, and (former) R-4 Districts
Accessory residential garages in the R-2B, R-3, and (former) R-4 Districts shall
comply with the following: (Amended by Ordinance No. A-834-02-05)
a. The combined floor area of all attached garages shall not exceed 1410 square
feet and any area in excess of 1,000 square feet shall be counted in
computing the floor area for determining the floor area ratio permitted on a
lot.
b. The number of garage doors for an attached garage shall be limited to any
combination of single and double doors not to exceed a total of four with a
double door counting as two doors. A single door is defined as a door not
exceeding 10 feet in width and a double door is defined as a door exceeding
10 feet in width.
c. Overhead Door Height: The vertical distance from the top of the garage
floor to the top of the garage door opening shall not exceed 9 feet in height.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-07-07).
6. Signs
Signs shall be allowed in Residence Districts in accordance with the regulations
established in the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading facilities, accessory to uses allowed in Residence
Districts, shall be provided in accordance with the regulations established in Section
XI.
8. Determining Floor Area Ratio
a. Floor area ratio shall be determined by dividing the floor area by the gross
land area of the lot or parcel. Floor area shall be determined as defined in
section XIV herein and as described below.
b. For purposes of determining the floor area ratio, the floor area shall be
calculated as depicted in Appendices XI-A, XI-B, XI-C, XI-D (see below)
and including but not limited to the horizontal areas on each floor devoted to:
i. Elevator shafts and stairwells;
Section VI
Residence Districts
VI 3
ii. Mechanical equipment, except if located on the roof, when either
open or enclosed – i.e., bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers;
iii. Garages – if a garage is less than 1,000 square feet in area, it shall not
be included in the floor area for determining the floor area ratio; but
if a garage exceeds 1,000 square feet, then all that area of any garage
in excess of 1,000 square feet shall be included;
iv. Interior balconies and mezzanines;
v. Enclosed porches.
c. The horizontal area of a cellar floor and the horizontal area of attic space as
defined in Section XIV.B herein, shall not be included in the floor area.
d. Volume space such as cathedral ceilings and open staircases shall not be
included in the floor area.
e. Where the slope of the natural terrain results in a walkout basement, the
horizontal area below the footprint of the floor above shall not be included in
the floor area. (Added by Ord. A-834-4-02)
Section VI
Residence District
4 VI
Section VI
Residence Districts
VI 5
Section VI
Residence District
6 VI
Section VI
Residence Districts
VI 7
VI.B 1
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.B
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
B. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
The R-1 Single Family Residence District is intended to provide for a semi-rural environment with
dwellings on lots a minimum of five (5) acres in size. Because of the low level of development
intensity inherent in this district, R-1 lots are particularly appropriate in (but not limited to) areas
where the preservation of valuable environmental and/or aesthetic resources is desired.
1. Permitted Uses
a. Agriculture.
b. Single-family detached dwellings.
c. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
d. Public Parks and those uses and structures accessory to a public park
including but not limited to recreation and administration buildings,
gymnasiums, concession and rest room facilities, gazebos, picnic shelters,
playing fields, athletic courts, parking lots, fences, playgrounds and
playground equipment, and similar uses and structures.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
2. Special Uses
a. Accessory Buildings, Structures, and Uses located in the front and
side buildable area of a lot. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-29-01)
b. Accessory dwellings for non-gratuitous guests, domestic employees, or
extended family on a lot or parcel of five or more acres. (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-29-01)
c. Convents, monasteries and seminaries.
d. Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto.
e. Community centers, museums, libraries, and other cultural facilities.
f. Golf courses, standard or par 3.
g. Garden and plant nursery plots not including retail sales.
h. Hospitals.
i. Outdoor recreation uses, private, public, or semi-public of a non-intensive
nature, specifically excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf
courses, water slides, batting cages and similar uses.
j. Planned unit developments as governed by Section XIII and the specific
ordinance approving each such planned unit development.
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
2 VI.B
k. Schools, public or private.
l. Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas and widths
as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Police stations.
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Railroad rights-of-way.
(5) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs.
(6) Municipal Administration Offices
(7) Village owned public works facility or garage
m. Churches, temples, or synagogues (including accessory day care and preschool
programs).
n. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above special uses.
o. Sheltered/skilled care facility (italics added for distinction from other bulk
regulations)- not less than 25 acres in area. For the purposes of this
District, a sheltered/skilled care facility shall be construed to mean a single
building with resident rooms for healthy elderly adults, and assisted living
for elderly adults who require limited supervision in performing daily
activities or attention to medical needs, together with related uses within
such building, including but not limited to licensed nursing facilities and
geriatric clinic and staff living quarters for employees of the facility.
(1) Permitted Related Uses
(a) Cottage Homes
Single family semi-detached, attached and multi-family
dwellings (not to exceed a maximum of 4 units per building),
which collectively comprise an area occupying not more than
35 percent of the area devoted to this cottage home use,
including parking, roads and other impervious surfaces,
except that when additional open space or unusual amenity
features which increase the stability and value of the
neighborhood are provided, the Village Board, after
receiving the recommendation of the Plan Commission, may
increase the area devoted to such use provided that the gross
density shall not exceed 2.5 dwelling units per acre based on
that area of the total site devoted to this cottage home use
and provided further that the area of the total site to be
devoted solely to the sheltered/skilled care facility and
accessory uses shall not be less than ten (10) acres. The
development of such cottage homes shall only be allowed in
coordination with and to serve a sheltered/skilled care
facility where property is composed of one or more lots
under unified ownership, use or control, and is located
immediately adjacent to a not-for-profit sheltered/skilled care
facility, when specifically so recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees.
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
VI.B 3
(b) Any accessory buildings or structures to serve the
sheltered/skilled care facility, including maintenance and
support facilities and staff living quarters, shall be as
approved by the Board of Trustees, following
recommendation by the Plan Commission.
(2) The development of any facility, use or structure hereunder shall be
subject to the following regulations:
(a) Bulk Regulations
(i) Lot Width
Cottage homes - No minimum or uniform lot width
shall be required. Lot width may vary in order to
achieve creative lot design and to best accomplish the
purposes herein set forth. Lot area and lot width
shall be as approved by the Board of Trustees after
receiving the recommendations of the Plan
Commission.
Sheltered/skilled care facility - Not less than 300 feet.
If cottage homes are approved, that area required to
be devoted to the sheltered/skilled care facility shall
be not less than 300 feet in width.
(ii) Floor Area Ratio
Cottage homes - Not to exceed .15.
Sheltered/skilled care facility - Not to exceed .1. If
cottages homes are approved, the sheltered care
facility and accessory uses shall be subject to a
maximum floor area ratio of .1.
(iii) Yards
Yards are required at the exterior boundaries of the
development and at other locations and shall be as
approved by the Board of Trustees after receiving the
recommendation of the Plan Commission. The yards
at the exterior of the development shall at minimum
meet the requirements of this R-1 zoning district and
other applicable zoning regulations.
(iv) Space Between Structures
The space between structures shall be not less than
25 feet between each cluster of attached, semidetached
or multi-family dwellings and as otherwise
approved by the Board of Trustees after receiving the
recommendations of the Plan Commission.
(v) Building Height
-a- For single family semi-detached, attached
and multi-family dwellings, not more than one
story or 15 feet, whichever is lower.
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
4 VI.B
-b- For the sheltered/skilled care facility not
more than three and one-half (3½) stories or
45 feet, whichever is lower, unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Trustees after
receiving the recommendations of the Plan
Commission based upon unique
topographical conditions that serve to
minimize the view of the building from
adjoining properties or if such facility is set
back a greater distance than required for this
zoning district (and such setback is all open
space) to a maximum height of four (4)
stories.
(b) Open Space
Open space, unencumbered by buildings, structures, or
impervious surfaces (including parking areas and driveways)
shall be provided in an amount not less than seventy percent
(70%) of the total area of the site.
All open space shall be maintained in a clean and sightly
condition and shall be landscaped in accordance with
approved (by the Village) landscaping plans and maintained
in such a manner as to retain at least the intended standards
of the initial plan.
(c) Use/Occupancy
The primary use or occupancy of any cottage homes
approved hereunder by the Board of Trustees shall be limited
to no more than two persons aged 60 and over, except for
temporary service personnel.
(d) Off-street parking
As required by Section XI of this Ordinance, provided that
for each cottage home there shall be one attached garage
with space to accommodate at least one car. Visitor parking
shall be provided in groupings of not more than five (5)
contiguous spaces for the cottage homes unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Trustees following the
recommendation of the Plan Commission and shall be
properly screened by landscaping so as to be compatible with
the area and minimize the parking lot appearance.
(e) Deed/Transfer Documents
The Village must be provided with a copy of the contract or
transfer document granting a life estate interest to cottage
home residents providing for the permanent ownership
interest to be retained by that entity or association which
owns the sheltered/skilled care facility or entity under unified
ownership, use or control with the entity which owns the
sheltered/skilled care facility.
(f) Declaration of Covenants
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
VI.B 5
Declaration of covenants to be in such form and substance as
approved by the Village and to be recorded against the total
area of the site, incorporating this special use and indicating
and requiring the common ownership, use or control of any
approved cottage homes with the adjacent sheltered/skilled
care facility. Said declaration shall also provide for
maintenance of the exterior of the property as required
herein with any amendment to such declaration to be subject
to the prior written approval of the Village.
(g) If not otherwise specifically provided for hereunder, the
minimum standards of this R-1 Zoning District shall apply.
(3) Site Plan Review
No special use shall be granted hereunder without approval of a site
plan. In addition to the requirements required under XIII.K of this
Ordinance, the site plan shall include at a minimum the following
and any other data required by the Village Engineer in order to
determine that the proposed development conforms with the intent of
this and other applicable Village ordinances:
(a) An accurate topographic and boundary line map of the
project area, including contours at vertical intervals of not
more than two feet, and a location map showing its
relationship to surrounding properties, water courses and
other significant features.
(b) That area devoted solely to the sheltered/skilled care facility
and accessory uses and that area devoted to cottage homes, if
applicable.
(c) The location of open space areas and areas for recreational
use for the residents of this development.
(d) Statistical data on total size of project area, area of Useable
Open Space, area devoted to sheltered/skilled care facility
and that area devoted to cottage homes density computation
and proposed number of units and specific uses by type,
including the units within the sheltered/skilled care facility
and accessory uses, and any other similar data pertinent to a
comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development.
(e) The sign requirements, fence requirements, landscaping
requirements, and other utilities, and parking requirements.
(f) Such site plan shall not be limited to the above requirements,
but shall include all aspects of development of the subject
property.
(4) Design Standards
The following standards shall be used as a framework for evaluating
the Site Plan:
(a) Topography
The topography of the site shall be preserved, wherever
possible, in its natural state by minimizing grade changes
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
6 VI.B
and alterations. Building sites and street locations should
conform to existing land contours, to the extent possible.
(b) Streets
The streets shall be curved, wherever possible, to provide
gentle curvilinear street patterns. Streets shall be located,
wherever possible, to preserve the natural elements of the
site, as well as those of surrounding properties.
Further, the number of new intersections with existing and
proposed major or secondary arterial and collector streets
shall be kept to a minimum. The use of cul-de-sacs or
comparable design to provide access to the cottage homes is
encouraged so as to provide privacy for the units, more
variety in site planning and views oriented away from
neighbors' yards and units.
(c) Preservation of Landscape
The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar
as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, so that
the resulting development will be in keeping with the general
appearance of neighboring developed areas and will not
adversely affect the ecology of the area. Wherever the
natural landscape is not preserved or no vegetation existed,
mature landscape materials shall be installed in accordance
with a plan approved by the Board of Trustees after receiving
the recommendations of the Plan Commission.
(d) Relation to Environment and Existing Development
The architectural style of proposed buildings and structures
shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing
buildings and structures, to the extent possible, that have
visual relationship to the proposed buildings and structures
with an emphasis designed to diminish the apparent size of
buildings. The density should be compatible with adjoining
properties. All attempts shall be made to preserve natural
wooded areas and topography. A creative approach to land
development is encouraged if overall densities from the
development may be reduced as a result of special
circumstances and sensitivity to the existing landscape.
(e) Utility Services
Electric and telephone lines shall be underground.
(5) Village Board Approval or Denial
The Board of Trustees may grant the proposed special use, grant
conditional approval or deny the special use in accordance with
statute or may refer it back to the Plan Commission for further
consideration. Such approval shall not constitute subdivision
approval. If such development is not expressly subject to the
subdivision ordinance of the Village, said development shall meet
those standards for improvements set forth in said ordinance as
required by the Board of Trustees following the recommendation of
the Plan Commission.
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
VI.B 7
The Plan Commission shall recommend approval of, and the Board
of Trustees shall approve, a site plan submitted pursuant to this
subsection on the basis of specific written findings. In addition to the
findings required under Section XIII of this Ordinance, no special
use may be granted hereunder unless findings are made that:
(a) The development will enhance the appearance of the area by
preservation of natural features of the property.
(b) The site plan must meet specified standards required by this
Ordinance with respect to the proposed development or use.
(c) The proposed site plan must be designed in a manner that
will not interfere with easements, roadways, rail lines or
public or private rights-of-way.
(d) The proposed site plan must be designed in a manner that
will not unreasonably destroy, damage, detrimentally modify
or interfere with the enjoyment of significant natural,
topographical or physical features of the site which can be
preserved consistent with the development of the site for
permitted uses.
(e) The proposed site plan must be designed so as not to
dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the
development, use and enjoyment of neighboring property.
(f) The screening of the site and tree preservation must provide
adequate shielding from or for nearby uses.
(g) Individual buildings and units must be arranged and situated
to relate to surrounding properties and to improve the view
from and the view of buildings.
(h) The proposed site plan must make adequate provision for the
creation or preservation of open space and its continued
maintenance.
(i) The proposed site plan must be designed in a manner which
will not create drainage or erosion problems.
(j) The proposed site plan must be designed in a manner which
will not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon
adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic
conditions, parking, utility facilities and other matters
affecting the public health, safety and general welfare.
(6) Modification of Requirements - Site Plan Review
Modification of specific requirements of this Subsection VI,B,2,n
shall be permitted consistent with the intent of this Subsection
VI,B,2,n to permit greater flexibility in design standards so as to
encourage more innovative and imaginative site design.
Modification of specific requirements of this Subsection VI,B,2,n
shall also be permitted to allow development for such use, but only if
developed in a manner consistent with the overall intent of such lot
and bulk regulation standards. The specific standards herein before
set forth may be modified on the basis of a specific site plan which
demonstrably achieves the basic purposes of such standards such as
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
8 VI.B
insuring appropriate relationships between buildings and structures,
preventing overcrowding and providing a safe and attractive living
environment. Any such modifications, however, shall not increase
the permitted density. If any such modifications are requested by
formal application and by submission of a specific site plan to
control development of the area, after review and consideration of
such application and such specific site plan, the Plan Commission
may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees such modifications
as it deems appropriate without further public hearings, and the
Village Board of Trustees shall then make such decision on the
proposed modifications as it deems appropriate. There is no specific
right to any such modifications hereunder, and, therefore, the
decision of the Village Board, whether to grant or deny any
requested modification, shall be final. If the decision is to grant any
such modifications, then the applicant shall be bound to develop the
land in accordance with such decision and the approved site plan.
3. Lot Size Requirements
a. Permitted Uses Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
(1) Single-family - lots
of record existing on
August 11, 1997 5 acres 220 feet
(2) Single-family - lots
of record created
after August 11, 1997 5 acres 300 feet
(3) Agriculture 20 acres 700 feet
(4) Public Parks Same as minimum required
without completely for single-family
enclosed buildings detached dwellings
(5) Public Parks with 300 feet 5 acres
completely enclosed
buildings
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
b. Special Uses
(1) Convents, monasteries
and seminaries 5 acres 300 feet
(2) Colleges and
Universities 20 acres 800 feet
(3) Garden and plant
nursery plots 5 acres 300 feet
(4) Hospitals 25 acres 800 feet
(5) Outdoor recreational
uses 5 acres 300 feet
(6) Planned unit 40 acres 800 feet
developments
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
VI.B 9
Except for Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1,
1995, which will be regulated solely by the ordinance granting the
special use permit for the planned unit development and any other
related zoning provisions in existence on that date.
(7) Schools, public and
private
(a) Elementary school 5 acres 300 feet
(b) Junior high school 10 acres 300 feet
(c) High school 20 acres 800 feet
(8) Public utility and (As established by
governmental facilities Special Use Approval)
(9) Churches, temples, or
synagogues (including
accessory day care and
pre-school programs) 5 acres 300 feet
(10) Community centers, (As established by
museums, libraries, Special Use Approval)
and other cultural
facilities
4. Floor Area Ratio
Not to exceed 0.1.
5. Building Height
a. Residential Use - not more than two and one half stories or 35 feet,
whichever is lower. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-29-01)
b. Non-Residential Use - not more than 45 feet.
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling
a. One-story dwellings -- not less than 1,800 square feet.
b. Dwellings having more than one story.
(1) not less than 1,200 square feet for a one and one-half story dwelling.
(2) not less than 950 square feet for a two story or two and one-half story
dwelling.
7. Yard Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Front Interior Corner Rear
Yard Side Yard Side Yard Yard
(1) Single-family
detached
dwelling 50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet
(2) Other
Permitted
Section VI.B
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
10 VI.B
Uses 50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall
be increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building
height.
(3) Public Parks
without Same as minimum required for
completely single-family detached dwellings
enclosed
buildings
(4) Public Parks 100 feet 40 feet 100 feet 100 ft
with
completely
enclosed buildings
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
b. Special Uses 100 feet 40 feet 100 feet 100 ft
Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1, 1995, shall be regulated
solely by the ordinance granting the special use permit for the planned unit
development and any other related zoning provisions in existence on that
date.
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall be
increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building height.
8. Off Street Parking and Loading
In accordance with applicable regulations set forth in Section XI.
VI.C 1
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.C
R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
C. R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
The R-2 Single Family Residence District is intended to provide a low density single family
residential environment of suburban estate character.
1. Permitted Uses
a. Agriculture.
b. Single-family detached dwellings.
c. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
d. Public Parks and those uses and structures accessory to a public park
including but not limited to recreation and administration buildings,
gymnasiums, concession and rest room facilities, gazebos, picnic shelters,
playing fields, athletic courts, parking lots, fences, playgrounds and
playground equipment, and similar uses and structures.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
2. Special Uses
a. Accessory dwellings for non-gratuitous guests, domestic employees, or
extended family. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-03-13)
b. Convents, monasteries and seminaries.
c. Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto.
d. Community centers, museums, libraries, and other cultural facilities.
e. Golf courses, standard or par 3.
f. Garden and plant nursery plots not including retail sales.
g. Hospitals.
h. Outdoor recreation uses, private, public, or semi-public of a non-intensive
nature, specifically excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf
courses, water slides, batting cages and similar uses.
i. Planned unit developments as governed by Section XIII and the specific
ordinance approving each such planned unit development.
j. Schools, public or private.
k. Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas and widths
as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(1) Utility substations.
Section VI.C
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
2 VI.C
(2) Police stations.
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Railroad rights-of-way.
(5) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs.
(6) Municipal Administration Offices
(7) Village owned public works facility or garage
k. Churches, temples, or synagogues (including accessory day care and preschool
programs).
l. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above special uses.
m. Sheltered/skilled care facility as regulated in the R-1 District.
3. Lot Size Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
(1) S ingle-family detached
dwellings
2.0 acres
200 feet
(2) Agriculture 20 acres 700 feet
(3) Public Parks without
completely enclosed
buildings
Same as minimum required
for single-family detached
dwellings
(4) Public Parks with completely
enclosed buildings
300 feet 5 acres
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-10-04)
b. Special Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
(1) Convents, monasteries and
seminaries
5 Acres 300 feet
(2) Colleges and Universities 20 Acres 800 feet
(3) Garden and Plant Nursery
Plots
Section VI.C
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
VI.C 3
(4) Hospitals 25 Acres 800 feet
(5) Outdoor recreational uses 5 Acres 300 feet
(6) Planned Unit Developments 40 Acres 800 feet
Except for Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1,
1995, which will be regulated solely by the ordinance granting the
special use permit for the planned unit development and any other
related zoning provisions in existence on that date.
(7) Schools, public and
private
(a) Elementary School 5 Acres 300
feet
(b) Junior High School 10 Acres 300
feet
(c) High School 20 Acres 800
Feet
(8) Public Utility and
Governmental Facilities
As established by
Special Use Approval
(9) Churhes, temples, or
synagogues (including
accessory day care and
pre-school programs)
5 Acres 300
feet
(10) Community Centers,
Museums, Libraries, and
other cultural facilities
As established by
Special Use Ordinance
4. Floor Area Ratio
Not to exceed 0.1.
5. Building Height
a. Single-family detached dwellings -- not more than two and one-half stories
or 30 feet, whichever is lower.
b. Non-residential uses -- not more than 45 feet.
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling
a. One-story dwellings -- not less than 1,800 square feet.
b. Dwellings having more than one story:
(1) not less than 1,200 square feet for a one and one-half story dwelling.
(2) not less than 950 square feet for a two story or two and one-half story
dwelling.
Section VI.C
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
4 VI.C
7. Yard Requirements
a. Peram. itted Uses Front
Yard
Interior
Side
Yard
Corner
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
(1) Si ngle-family
detached
dwellings
50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet
(2) Agriculture 100 feet 50 feet 100 feet 60 feet
(3) Other
Permitted
Uses
50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height,
each side yard shall be increased by two feet for
each additional one foot in building height.
(4) Public Parks
without
completely
enclosed
buildings
50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet
Same as minimum for single-family detached
dwellings
(5) Public Parks
with
completely
enclosed
buildings
100 feet 40 feet 100 feet 100 feet
(Am ended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
a. Speac. ial Uses Front
Yard
Interior
Side
Yard
Corner
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
100 feet 40 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1, 1995, shall be
regulated solely by the ordinance granting the special use permit for
the planned unit development and any other related zoning provisions
in existence on that date.
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall be
increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building height.
8. Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
In accordance with applicable regulations set forth in Section XI.
VI.D 1
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.D
R-2A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
D. R-2A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
The R-2A Single Family Residence District is intended to create large lot residential areas offering
generous yards and setbacks within the context of a residential subdivision environment.
1. Permitted Uses
a. Agriculture.
b. Single-family detached dwellings.
c. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
d. Public Parks and those uses and structures accessory to a public park
including but not limited to recreation and administration buildings,
gymnasiums, concession and rest room facilities, gazebos, picnic shelters,
playing fields, athletic courts, parking lots, fences, playgrounds and
playground equipment, and similar uses and structures.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
2. Special Uses
a. Convents, monasteries and seminaries.
b. Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto.
c. Community centers, museums, libraries, and other cultural facilities.
d. Golf courses, standard or par 3.
e. Garden and plant nursery plots not including retail sales.
f. Hospitals.
g. Outdoor recreation uses, private, public, or semi-public of a non-intensive
nature, specifically excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf
courses, water slides, batting cages and similar uses.
h. Planned unit developments as governed by Section XIII and the specific
ordinance approving each such planned unit development.
i. Schools, public or private.
j. Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas and widths
as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Police stations.
Section VI.D
R-2A Single-Family Residential District
2 VI.D
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Railroad rights-of-way.
(5) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs.
(6) Municipal Administration Offices
(7) Village owned public works facility or garage
k. Churches, temples, or synagogues (including accessory day care and preschool
programs).
l. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above special uses.
m. Sheltered/skilled care facility as regulated in the R-1 District.
3. Lot Size Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
(1) Single-family
detached dwellings 40,000 sq. ft. 130 feet
(2) Agriculture 20 acres 700 feet
(3) Public Parks Same as minimum required
without completely for single-family
enclosed buildings detached dwellings
(4) Public Parks with 300 feet 5 acres
completely enclosed buildings
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
b. Special Uses
(1) Convents, monasteries
and seminaries 5 acres 300 feet
(2) Colleges and
Universities 20 acres 800 feet
(3) Garden and plant
nursery plots 5 acres 300 feet
(4) Hospitals 25 acres 800 feet
(5) Outdoor recreational
uses 5 acres 300 feet
(6) Planned unit 40 acres 800 feet
developments
Except for Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1,
1995, which will be regulated solely by the ordinance granting the
special use permit for the planned unit development and any other
related zoning provisions in existence on that date.
(7) Schools, public and
Section VI.D
R-2A Single-Family Residential District
VI.D 3
private
(a) Elementary school 5 acres 300 feet
(b) Junior high school 10 acres 300 feet
(c) High school 20 acres 800 feet
(8) Public utility and (As established by
governmental facilities Special Use Approval)
(9) Churches, temples, or
synagogues (including 5 acres 300 feet
accessory day care and
pre-school programs)
(10) Community centers, (As established by
museums, libraries, Special Use Approval)
and other cultural
facilities
4. Floor Area Ratio
Not to exceed 0.20.
5. Building Height
a. Single-family detached dwellings -- not more than two and one-half stories
or 30 feet, whichever is lower.
b. Non-residential uses -- not more than 45 feet.
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling
a. One-story dwellings -- not less than 1,800 square feet.
b. Dwellings having more than one story:
(1) not less than 1,200 square feet for a one and one-half story dwelling.
(2) not less than 950 square feet for a two story or two and one-half story
dwelling.
7. Yard Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Front Interior Corner Rear
Yard Side Yard Side Yard Yard
(1) Single-family
detached
dwellings 50 feet 15 feet 40 feet 60 feet
(2) Agricultural 100 feet 50 feet 100 feet 60 feet
(3) Other
permitted
uses 50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet
Section VI.D
R-2A Single-Family Residential District
4 VI.D
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall
be increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building
height.
(4) Public Parks
without Same as minimum required for
completely single-family detached dwellings
enclosed
buildings
(5) Public Parks 100 ft 40 ft 100 ft 100 ft
with
completely
enclosed buildings
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
b. Special Uses 100 ft 40 ft 100 ft 100 ft
Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1, 1995, shall be regulated
solely by the ordinance granting the special use permit for the planned unit
development and any other related zoning provisions in existence on that
date. In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall be
increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building height.
8. Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
In accordance with applicable regulations set forth in Section XI.
1 VI.E
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.E
R-2B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
E. R-2B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
The R-2B Single Family Residence District is intended to create a residential environment
offering adequate lot area for the typical new home size in the Village while maintaining the
open feeling of a large lot zoning district.
1. Permitted Uses
a. Agriculture.
b. Single-family detached dwellings.
c. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
d. Public Parks and those uses and structures accessory to a public park
including but not limited to recreation and administration buildings,
gymnasiums, concession and rest room facilities, gazebos, picnic shelters,
playing fields, athletic courts, parking lots, fences, playgrounds and
playground equipment, and similar uses and structures.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
2. Special Uses
a. Convents, monasteries and seminaries.
b. Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto.
c. Community centers, museums, libraries, and other cultural facilities.
d. Golf courses, standard or par 3.
e. Garden and plant nursery plots not including retail sales.
f. Hospitals.
g. Outdoor recreation uses, private, public, or semi-public of a non-intensive
nature, specifically excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf
courses, water slides, batting cages and similar uses.
h. Planned unit developments as governed by Section XIII and the specific
ordinance approving each such planned unit development.
i. Schools, public or private.
j. Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas and widths
as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Police stations.
Section VI.E
R-2B Single-Family Residential District
VI.E 2
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Railroad rights-of-way.
(5) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs.
(6) Municipal Administration Offices
(7) Village owned public works facility or garage
k. Churches, temples, or synagogues (including accessory day care and preschool
programs).
l. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above special uses.
m. Sheltered/skilled care facility as regulated in the R-1 District.
3. Lot Size Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
(1) Single-family
detached dwellings 30,000 sq. ft 125 feet
(2) Agriculture 20 acres 700 feet
(3) Public Parks Same as minimum required
without completely for single-family
enclosed buildings detached dwellings
(4) Public Parks with 300 feet 5 acres
completely enclosed
buildings
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
b. Special Uses
(1) Convents, monasteries
and seminaries 5 acres 300 feet
(2) Colleges and
Universities 20 acres 800 feet
(3) Garden and plant
nursery plots 5 acres 300 feet
(4) Hospitals 25 acres 800 feet
(5) Outdoor recreational
uses 5 acres 300 feet
(6) Planned unit
developments 40 acres 800 feet
Except for Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1,
1995, which will be regulated solely by the ordinance granting the
Section VI.E
R-2B Single-Family Residential District
3 VI.E
special use permit for the planned unit development and any other
related zoning provisions in existence on that date.
(7) Schools, public and
private
(a) Elementary school 5 acres 300 feet
(b) Junior high school 10 acres 300 feet
(c) High school 20 acres 800 feet
(8) Public utility and (As established by
governmental facilities Special Use Approval)
(9) Churches, temples, or
synagogues (including 5 acres 300 feet
accessory day care and
pre-school programs)
(10) Community centers, (As established by
museums, libraries, Special Use Approval)
and other cultural
facilities
4. Floor Area Ratio
Not to exceed 0.20.
5. Building Height
a. Single-family detached dwellings -- not more than two and one-half stories
or 30 feet, whichever is lower.
b. Non-residential uses -- not more than 45 feet.
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling
a. One-story dwellings -- not less than 1,800 square feet.
b. Dwellings having more than one story:
(1) not less than 1,200 square feet for a one and one-half story dwelling.
(2) not less than 950 square feet for a two story or two and one-half story
dwelling.
7. Yard Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Front Interior Corner Rear
Yard Side Yard Side Yard Yard
(1) Single-family
detached
dwellings 40 feet 17 feet 40 feet 55 feet
(2) Agricultural 100 feet 50 feet 100 feet 60 feet
Section VI.E
R-2B Single-Family Residential District
VI.E 4
(3) Other
permitted
uses 50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall
be increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building
height.
(4) Public Parks
without Same as minimum required for
completely single-family detached dwellings
enclosed
buildings
(5) Public Parks 100 40 feet 100 feet 100
with feet feet
completely
enclosed buildings
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
b. Special Uses 100 40 feet 100 feet 100
feet feet
Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1, 1995, shall be regulated
solely by the ordinance granting the special use permit for the planned unit
development and any other related zoning provisions in existence on that
date.
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall be
increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building height.
8. Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
In accordance with applicable regulations set forth in Section XI.
1 VI.F
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.F
R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
F. R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
The R-3 Single Family Residence District is intended to provide for moderate density single
family development on lots at least 20,000 square feet in size.
1. Permitted Uses
a. Agriculture.
b. Single-family detached dwellings.
c. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
d. Public Parks and those uses and structures accessory to a public park
including but not limited to recreation and administration buildings,
gymnasiums, concession and rest room facilities, gazebos, picnic shelters,
playing fields, athletic courts, parking lots, fences, playgrounds and
playground equipment, and similar uses and structures.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
2. Special Uses
a. Convents, monasteries and seminaries.
b. Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto.
c. Community centers, museums, libraries, and other cultural facilities.
d. Golf courses, standard or par 3.
e. Garden and plant nursery plots not including retail sales.
f. Hospitals.
g. Outdoor recreation uses, private, public, or semi-public of a non-intensive
nature, specifically excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf
courses, water slides, batting cages and similar uses.
h. Planned unit developments as governed by Section XIII and the specific
ordinance approving each such planned unit development.
i. Schools, public or private.
j. Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas and widths
as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Police stations.
Section VI.F
R-3 Single-Family Residential District
VI.F 2
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Railroad rights-of-way.
(5) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs.
(6) Municipal Administration Offices
(7) Village owned public works facility or garage
k. Churches, temples, or synagogues (including accessory day care and preschool
programs).
l. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above special uses.
m. Sheltered/skilled care facility as regulated in the R-1 District.
3. Lot Size Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
(1) Single-family detached
dwellings
20,000 square
feet
100 feet
(2) Agriculture 20 Acres 700 feet
(3) Public Parks without
completely enclosed buildings
Same as minimum required for
single-family detached dwellings
(4) Public Parks with completely
enclosed buildings
5 Acres 300 feet
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
b. Special Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
(1) Convents, monasteries, and
seminaries
5 Acres 300 feet
(2) Colleges and Universities 20 Acres 800 feet
(3) Garden and plant nursery
plots
5 Acres 300 feet
(4) Hospitals 25 Acres 800 feet
Section VI.F
R-3 Single-Family Residential District
3 VI.F
(5) Outdoor recreational uses 5 Acres 300 feet
(6) Planned Unit Developments 40 Acres 800 feet
Except for Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1, 1995,
which will be regulated solely by the ordinance granting the special
use permit for the planned unit development and any other related
zoning provisions in existence on that date.
(7) Schools, public and private:
(a) Elementary School 5 Acres 300 feet
(b) Junior High School 10 Acres 300 feet
(c) High School 20 Acres 800 feet
(8) Public Utility and
governmental facilities
(As established by Special Use
Approval)
(9) Churches, temples, or
synagogues (including
accessory day care and preschool
programs)
5 Acres 300 feet
(10) Community centers,
museums, libraries, and other
cultural facilities
(As established by Special Use
Approval)
4. Floor Area Ratio
Not to exceed 0.2.
5. Building Height
a. Single-family detached dwellings -- not more than two and one-half stories
or 30 feet, whichever is lower.
b. Non-residential uses -- not more than 45 feet.
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling
a. One-story dwellings -- not less than 1,500 square feet.
b. Dwellings having more than one story:
(1) not less than 1,125 square feet for a one and one-half story dwelling.
(2) not less than 750 square feet for a two story or two and one-half story
dwelling.
Section VI.F
R-3 Single-Family Residential District
VI.F 4
7. Yard Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Front
Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Rear
Yard
(1) Single-family
detached dwellings
30 feet 10 feet 30 feet 50 feet
(2) Agriculture 100 feet 50 feet 100 feet 60 feet
(3) Other Permitted
Uses
50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall
be increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building
height.
(4) Public Parks
without completely
enclosed buildings
Same as minimum required for single-family
dwellings (Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-
00)
(5) Public Parks with
completely
enclosed buildings
100 feet 40 feet 100 feet 100 feet
b. Special Uses
Front
Yard
Interior
Side Yard
Corner
Side Yard
Rear
Yard
(1) All Special Uses 100 feet 40 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1, 1995, shall be
regulated solely by the ordinance granting the special use permit for
the planned unit development and any other related zoning provisions
in existence on that date.
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall
be increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building
height.
8. Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
In accordance with applicable regulations set forth in Section XI.
1 VI.G
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.G
R-4 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
G. PRIOR R-4 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT - APPENDIX III
Prior to the adoption of this 1996 Comprehensive Amendment, there existed a residential
zoning classification known as the R-4 Single-Family Residence District. It is hereby found
and determined that the regulations provided for therein are not in keeping with the Official
Comprehensive Plan of the Village nor in keeping with the trend of development within the
Village. Moreover, the areas surrounding that portion of the Village which was zoned under
such classification have been developed in a more restrictive manner than such R-4 District
regulations. Therefore, it has been hereby found and determined that the prior R-4 Single-
Family Residence District classification, and all regulations thereunder, be and are hereby
declared of no further force and effect; provided, however, any property which was zoned
under said R-4 Single-Family Residence District classification prior to July 1, 1991, shall be
governed by the regulations set forth in Appendix III attached hereto and made a part hereof
and any specific special use (either a planned unit development or otherwise) issued prior to
July 1, 1991, and any such property shall not be considered as a non-conforming use, either
lawful or unlawful.
1 VI.H
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.H
R-5 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
H. R-5 PLANNED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
The R-5 Planned Residence District is intended to accommodate a variety of dwelling types
within a development of not less than 20 acres and is intended only for areas where higher
residential density already exists and there is a mix of land use types in the immediate area.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-19-16)
1. Permitted Uses
a. Agriculture.
b. Single-family detached dwellings.
c. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses.
d. Single-family clustered dwellings
c. Single-family attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings occupying
not more than forty (40%) percent of the gross site area zoned R-5, provided
that the gross density of the said total contiguous area shall not exceed 4.20
dwelling units per acre.
d. Public Parks and those uses and structures accessory to a public park
including but not limited to recreation and administration buildings,
gymnasiums, concession and rest room facilities, gazebos, picnic shelters,
playing fields, athletic courts, parking lots, fences, playgrounds and
playground equipment, and similar uses and structures.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
2. Special Uses
a. Convents, monasteries and seminaries.
b. Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto.
c. Community centers, museums, libraries, and other cultural facilities.
d. Golf courses, standard or par 3.
e. Garden and plant nursery plots not including retail sales.
f. Hospitals.
g. Outdoor recreation uses, private, public, or semi-public of a non-intensive
nature, specifically excluding commercial driving ranges, miniature golf
courses, water slides, batting cages and similar uses.
h. Planned unit developments as governed by Section XIII and the specific
ordinance approving each such planned unit development.
Section VI.H
R-5 Planned Residence District
VI.H 2
i. Schools, public or private.
j. Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas and widths
as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(1) Utility substations.
(2) Police stations.
(3) Fire stations.
(4) Railroad rights-of-way.
(5) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs.
(6) Municipal Administration Offices
(7) Village owned public works facility or garage
k. Churches, temples, or synagogues (including accessory day care and preschool
programs).
l. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above special uses.
m. Sheltered/skilled care facility as regulated in the R-1 District.
3. Minimum Site Area
The minimum area to which this R-5 classification may be applied (i.e. minimum
size of a parcel for rezoning to the R-5 District) is 80 contiguous acres.
4. Lot Size Requirements
a. Permitted Uses
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
(1) Single-family detached
dwellings 12,000 sq. ft 80 feet
(2) Single-family
clustered dwellings 5,000 sq. feet 50 feet
(3) Single-family attached
& multi-family 3,000 sq. feet
dwellings per unit 100 feet
(4) Agriculture 20 acres 700 feet
(5) Public Parks Same as minimum required
without completely for single-family
enclosed buildings detached dwellings
(6) Public Parks with 300 feet 5 acres
completely enclosed
buildings
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
Section VI.H
R-5 Planned Residence District
3 VI.H
b. Special Uses
(1) Convents, monasteries
and seminaries 5 acres 300 feet
(2) Colleges and
Universities 20 acres 800 feet
(3) Garden and plant
nursery plots 5 acres 300 feet
(4) Hospitals 25 acres 800 feet
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
(5) Outdoor recreational
uses 5 acres 300 feet
6) Planned unit 20 acres 800 feet
Developments (Amended by Ordinance A-834-19-16)
Except for Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1,
1995, which will be regulated solely by the ordinance granting the
special use permit for the planned unit development and any other
related zoning provisions in existence on that date.
(7) Schools, public and
private
(a) Elementary school 5 acres 300 feet
(b) Junior high school 10 acres 300 feet
(c) High school 20 acres 800 feet
(8) Public utility and (As established by
governmental facilities Special Use Approval)
(9) Churches, temples, or
synagogues (including 5 acres 300 feet
accessory day care and
pre-school programs)
(10) Community centers, (As established by
museums, libraries, Special Use Approval)
and cultural facilities
5. Maximum Floor Area Ratio Not to exceed .5.
6. Maximum Building Height
a. Single-family attached dwellings, single-family detached dwellings and
single-family clustered dwellings -- not more than two and one-half stories
or 30 feet, whichever is lower.
b. Multiple-family dwellings -- not more than two and one-half stories or 30
feet (measured to the peak of the roof), whichever is lower.
c. Flat roofs are prohibited.
7. Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit
a. Single-family detached dwellings:
Section VI.H
R-5 Planned Residence District
VI.H 4
(1) One-story dwellings -- not less than 1,500 square feet.
(2) Dwellings having more than one story:
(a) not less than 1,125 square feet for a one and one-half story
dwelling.
(b) not less than 750 square feet for a two story or two and onehalf
story dwelling.
b. Single-family clustered dwellings -- 1,200 square feet;
c. Single-family attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings -- excluding
garages, balconies, basements, utility rooms, and areas common to the
operation and maintenance of the entire building, 900 square feet, except
such dwelling units containing more than one bedroom shall be as follows:
(1) two-bedroom dwelling units -- 1,200 square feet;
(2) three-bedroom dwelling units -- 1,600 square feet;
(3) units with over three bedrooms -- 200 additional square feet for each
bedroom.
8. Yard Requirements
a. Permitted Uses:
Minimum yards shall be provided in compliance with the following
regulations:
Front Interior Corner Rear
Yard Side Yard Side Yard Yard
(1) Single-family
detached
dwellings 30 feet 10 feet 30 feet 50 feet
(1) Single-family
clustered
dwellings 40 feet 10 feet* 40 feet 30 feet
(2) Single-family
semi-detached,
attached and
multiple-family
dwellings 30 feet 15 feet 30 feet 30 feet
(4) *Interior side yards for single-family clustered dwellings on interior
lots may be less than 10 feet provided the side yards shall have a
combined width of 10 feet and the separation between buildings on
adjoining lots shall be 10 feet.
(5) *The interior side yard for single-family clustered dwellings on
corners lots may be eliminated provided the minimum separation
from buildings on adjoining lots shall be 10 feet.
Section VI.H
R-5 Planned Residence District
5 VI.H
(6) In addition to setbacks from property lines, the minimum yard
requirements for single-family attached and multiple-family
dwellings shall be provided around the perimeter of each building.
The yard requirements for a principal building shall not encroach
into the yard requirements for any other principal building.
(7) All permitted uses not listed above shall comply with the setback
requirements of the R-1 Single-Family Residence District.
(8) Public Parks
without Same as minimum required for
completely single-family detached dwellings
enclosed buildings
(9) Public Parks 100 40 feet 100 feet 100 ft
with feet
completely enclosed
buildings
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
b. Special Uses
Front Interior Corner Rear
Yard Side Yard Side Yard Yard
100 feet 40 feet 100 feet 100 ft
Planned Unit Developments existing as of August 1, 1995, shall be regulated
solely by the ordinance granting the special use permit for the planned unit
development and any other related zoning provisions in existence on that
date.
In addition, for buildings over 30 feet in height, each side yard shall be
increased by two feet for each additional one foot in building height.
c. Transitional Yards
All interior side yards and rear yards abutting property in another zoning
district and subdivision shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
9. Minimum Open Space
Areas of single-family clustered, single-family attached, and multiple-family
development shall be provided with open space area equal to 1.0 times the floor area
of the residential buildings.
10. Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
Off-street parking and loading in accordance with the applicable regulations set forth
in Section XI.
1 VI.I
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.I
R-6 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
I. PRIOR R-6 RESIDENTIAL & CONGREGATE CARE DISTRICT – APPENDIX IV
Prior to the adoption of this 1997 Comprehensive Amendment, there existed a residential
zoning classification known as the R-6 Residential and Congregate Care District. It is
hereby found and determined that the regulations provided for therein are not in keeping
with the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village nor in keeping with the trend of
development within the Village. Moreover, the areas surrounding that portion of the Village
which was zoned under such classification have been developed in a more restrictive
manner than such R-6 District regulations. Therefore, it has been hereby found and
determined that the prior R-6 Residential and Congregate Care District classification, and all
regulations thereunder, be and are hereby declared of no further force and effect; provided,
however, any property which was zoned under said R-6 Residential and Congregate Care
District classification prior to July 1, 1991, shall be governed by the regulations set forth in
Appendix IV attached hereto and made a part hereof and any specific special use (either a
planned unit development or otherwise) issued prior to July 1, 1991, and any such property
shall not be considered as a non-conforming use, either lawful or unlawful.
1 VI.J
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VI.J
COUNTY LINE ROAD OVERLAY
DISTRICT
J. COUNTY LINE ROAD OVERLAY REGULATIONS
1. Findings
a. The area adjoining County Line Road is a unique area with special
significance and character different from other properties in the Village,
since it is the main entryway to the Village and serves as the focal point for
the Village and there exists currently estate-like development along such
Road. Thus, development along County Line Road has a unique impact on
the entire Village and its residents, sets the tone for the Village, and, if
properly developed with high quality residential development of an estatelike
character will enhance and increase property values not only for land
along said Road but for the entire Village as well.
b. The Village of Burr Ridge is convinced that the preservation and
development of this area requires additional rules and regulations
supplementing existing ordinances in order to specifically address the unique
character of the area.
c. The County Line Road Corridor Area includes and affects all that property
adjoining County Line Road.
d. A public hearing and continued public hearings have been held by the Plan
commission of the Village pursuant to published and mailed notice to
property owners in the County Line Road Corridor Area.
e. The creation of the County Line Road Corridor Area and the following rules
and regulations regarding development therein is consistent with and fosters
the purposes and intent of this Zoning Ordinance as set forth in Section II
hereof.
f. The creation of the County Line Road Corridor Area and the following rules
and regulations regarding development therein will promote and enhance
orderly development within both the Corridor Area and the Village as a
whole, and will preserve and enhance property values within both the
Corridor Area and the Village as a whole.
2. Definitions
a. The "County Line Road Corridor Area" shall include all property adjoining
County Line Road, regardless of the depth of such property from County
Line Road and whether such property is zoned to permit residential, nonresidential
or planned unit development uses. Non-residential property
within the County Line Road Corridor Area which is divided after
August 10, 1987, may be developed with higher densities than those set forth
in Section VI,J,5 and VI,J,6 of this Ordinance with the approval of the Board
of Trustees.
b. "Property adjoining County Line Road" shall include all lots, parcels, or
tracts of land which have frontage on County Line Road as of August 10,
Section VI.J
County Line Road Overlay District
VI.J 2
1987, and shall include all of such lot, parcel or tract as the same exists as of
August 10, 1987, regardless of any future division or subdivision thereof.
3. Intent and Purpose
The provisions of this Section are intended to order and control growth within the
area described as the County Line Road Corridor Area, hereinafter sometimes
referred to as "Area", and for the following additional purposes:
a. To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of
the citizens of said Area and of the Village.
b. To enhance the values of property throughout the said Area and the Village.
c. To encourage and foster development in the Area of a high quality
residential nature and to preserve and promote an estate-like atmosphere in
the Area.
d. To encourage and promote the attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility
of new buildings and development so as to maintain and improve established
standards of property values within the Area consistent with its character.
e. To otherwise foster and promote the purposes and spirit of this Burr Ridge
Zoning Ordinance as set forth in Section II hereof.
4. Establishment of County Line Road Corridor Area
The County Line Road Corridor Area is hereby established. The provisions of this
Section shall be in addition to existing zoning restrictions which shall continue to
apply to the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure
and the development of any property in the Area and no building permits shall be
issued nor shall any development be approved except as provided herein. When
restrictions herein are inconsistent with existing restrictions in other sections of this
Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance, then these regulations shall apply and govern any
development in the Area.
5. Regulations
a. Lot Area - the minimum lot area for those lots adjoining County Line Road
shall be 40,000 square feet per unit. Provided, however, for all property
adjoining County Line Road between 77th Street and 79th Street, such
properties shall be required to meet all of the bulk requirements (including
lot area, lot width, floor area ratio and yards) of the R-3 Single Family
Residence District.
b. Lot Width - the minimum lot width or frontage for those lots adjoining
County Line Road shall be 130 feet.
c. Floor Area Ratio - the maximum floor area ratio for those lots adjoining
County Line Road shall be 0.20.
d. Yards for Those Lots Adjoining County Line Road
(1) Yards adjoining County Line Road, whether a front or corner
side yard - not less than 80 feet from the nearest street right-of-way
boundary line of County Line Road; provided, however, that such
yard may be reduced to not less than 60 feet provided that the
property is landscaped in accordance with a landscaping plan
approved by the Village and provided that a Declaration of
Covenants or landscape easement be recorded to ensure the
Section VI.J
County Line Road Overlay District
3 VI.J
maintenance of said landscaping in such a manner as to retain at least
the intended standards of the approved landscaping plan.
(2) Side yards - each side yard for a lot which has its narrowest
dimension along the County Line Road frontage of the lot shall have a
width of 25 feet.
(3) Corner side yards - on corner lots, the side yard adjoining a street
intersecting with County Line Road shall be not less than 50 feet.
(1) Any yard in B-1 Retail Business District - for any yard adjoining
County Line Road the yard in a B-1 Retail Business District shall be
not less than 100 feet from the nearest street right-of-way boundary
line of County Line Road.
6. Subsequent Divisions
If any lot, parcel, or tract adjoining County Line Road existing as of August 10,
1987, is subsequently subdivided or divided in any manner whatsoever, the above
requirements shall be applicable only to those lots, after subdivision or division,
which then adjoin County Line Road, and the remainder of the original lot, parcel or
tract may be developed with higher densities provided that no such future lots,
parcels or tracts shall be less than the then existing requirements of the underlying
zoning for the land or the R-5 Single Family Residence District classification,
whichever is less dense, under the Burr Ridge Zoning Ordinance. The applicable lot
area, lot width, floor area ratio and yard requirements shall be as approved by the
Corporate Authorities of the Village after a public hearing thereon before the Plan
Commission of this Village and after said Corporate Authorities have received the
recommendation of the Plan Commission.
7. Interpretation of Provisions
The provisions of this Section shall be in addition to the existing provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance; provided, however, that where any provision of said Zoning
Ordinance of the Village may conflict with a provision of this Section, the
provisions of this Section VI,J shall apply and govern.
1 VII
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VII
TRANSITIONAL DISTRICTS
A. PURPOSE
The Transitional District is designed to promote orderly and sound planning between
residential and non-residential districts by providing for graduated uses from the less intense
residential areas to the more intense non-residential areas without encroaching upon or
negatively affecting residential areas of the Village. The districts are designed to prevent
incompatible uses from being located adjacent or in near vicinity to each other. The purpose
of these districts shall be to provide for a reasonable and orderly transition from, and buffer
between, residential and non-residential uses; to plan for future growth of non-residential
uses in a manner which will protect and preserve the integrity and land values of residential
areas; to provide a location for certain services needed now or in the future by Village
residents; to provide for such non-residential uses in certain locations which are compatible
to, but not identical to, both adjacent non-residential and residential uses through
maintenance of the residential architectural character of the buildings; and to maintain the
quality of life and environment currently enjoyed in the Village.
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Location
All land or areas to be zoned under the provisions of this Section shall be situated
adjacent to major thoroughfares (herein defined as a main or heavily traveled street
or road with a high degree of continuity and serving as a trafficway between the
various districts of Burr Ridge and/or its environs, such as Madison Street, County
Line Road, South Frontage Road, and 79th and 91st Streets) or adjacent to existing
industrial, commercial or multi-family zoned areas or uses and shall be as designated
on the Village's comprehensive land use (master) plan. The Plan Commission and
Village Board must satisfy themselves as to the adequacy of the thoroughfares to
accommodate any additional traffic and that any additional traffic will not adversely
affect the adjacent residential areas.
2. Nuisances
The activities permitted within such districts shall not generate undue noise,
vibration, heat, light, glare, fumes, odors, particulate matter, or smoke perceptible at
the district boundary lines beyond that which exists generally in the adjacent
residential zone, and if they do, such shall constitute a common law nuisance and a
nuisance under the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
3. Hours of Operation
Hours of operation for any use shall be restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. unless a special use is approved by the Board of Trustees upon
recommendation of Plan Commission.
4. Operation Within Enclosed Buildings
All activities, except for an enclosed trash dumpster in compliance with Section
IV.I.31, permitted within such zones shall be conducted completely within enclosed
buildings, except upon prior application and the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, the Board may give prior approval to limited outside activities which,
Section VII
Transitional Districts
VII 2
in the judgment of the Village Board, will not hinder the enjoyment of adjoining
residential properties.
5. Signs
All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the sign regulations of the
Burr Ridge Municipal Code, and it is intended that there be limited outdoor signage.
6. Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Subsection
IV,I,20 and in accordance with the provisions of Section XI of this Ordinance. In no
case shall such off-street parking be permitted anywhere in front of the building,
whether in the front yard, the interior side yard, the corner side yard or any buildable
area in front of the building. Off-street parking shall be prohibited anywhere in the
corner side yard or within a buildable area located between the building and the
corner side lot line. In addition, off-street parking must comply with the following:
a. The parking area setback from the rear lot line must be landscaped and may
not include drives or other paved areas.
b. Parking lot lights shall be no more than 15 feet high and shall be limited by
the following factors: an average lighting level of 1.0 foot candle with a
minimum of 0.75 foot candle; a uniformity ratio of not greater than 4 - to - 1,
and lighting distribution shall be provided by cut-off type fixtures located in
such a manner that light will not spill onto adjoining properties. All such
parking lot lighting shall be extinguished or reduced in intensity to an
average of 0.5 foot candles no later than 30 minutes after the close of
business. Provided, however, for land which has received zoning and site
plan approval prior to May 29, 1984, the requirements regarding parking lot
lights shall be as previously approved.
7. Land Coverage
Except for land which has, prior to May 29, 1984, already received zoning and site
plan approval, maximum land coverage, including building, parking areas, drives
and other paved areas, shall not exceed 66 percent of the total site. For land which
previously received approval, maximum land coverage shall be as approved and
indicated in the prior approved site plan.
8. Site Plan Review
No building or occupancy permits shall be issued for any land or use without an
approved site plan for such land or use. Any building and site development must
comply strictly with the approved site plan, and any building or occupancy permit
will not be issued, or will be revoked if already issued, if the approved site plan is
not strictly complied with. Any site plan shall indicate the locations of proposed and
existing buildings and structures and any proposed new additions to the existing
buildings and structures, properly arranged facilities, water detention and drainage
facilities, landscaping, buffering to the adjacent residential areas, and such other
buffering or features as are necessary or appropriate to maintain the residential
character of the premises and to fit harmoniously with the character, use and zoning
of adjoining and surrounding properties and to avoid any appreciable adverse effect
upon such properties. Such site plan shall also include and/or be accompanied by
the documents and information required under Section XIII of this Ordinance. The
Plan Commission in its discretion may waive the requirement of submitting any or
all such information in connection with applications for approval of site plans for
permitted uses in these districts.
Section VII
Transitional Districts
3 VII
Such site plan, and any accompanying documents or information, shall be filed with
the Community Development Director, who shall then refer such site plan and
documents to the Plan Commission and the Village Engineer, Village Forester and
Building Commissioner for review. The Plan Commission shall review the findings
of the Village Engineer, Village Forester and Building Commissioner at the first
meeting following receipt of a report of their findings. After such review, the Plan
Commission shall submit its recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees, who
shall either approve or disapprove the proposed site plan, or approve it with
modification, or shall refer the site plan back to the Plan Commission for
reconsideration or modification. The Board's approval of a site plan may be
conditioned on future approval of revised landscaping plans or engineering, as may
be needed due to required site plan modifications.
9. Design of Buildings and Structures
a. All buildings and structures located within the transitional districts, except
for churches and schools, which by their very nature have unique
architectural designs, shall be so designed and constructed so that their
exterior appearance is in conformance with the general appearance of
residential architecture in this Village and so that their appearance is
residential in character. All buildings and structures must be scaled to that
which reflects a residential character with regard to size, roof slope and
window placement, so as to fit harmoniously with the character and use of
adjacent residential areas and so as to avoid any appreciable adverse effect
upon such residential areas. All buildings and structures shall also comply
with the requirements for building height, setbacks, lot size and lot width set
forth in this Section.
b. All exterior building facades in the Transitional Districts shall be of high
quality materials that may include but are not limited to brick, natural stone,
precast stone, architectural pre-cast panels, or glass. The use of plastic
siding, vinyl siding, or aluminum siding and the use of engineered stucco
systems, including but not limited to those commonly known as “Dryvit” or
exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) are discouraged as exterior
building façade materials for all buildings in the Transitional Districts.
Traditional cement based stucco may be used as an exterior building material
subject to the following restrictions:
1. The majority of the building’s façade should be brick, natural stone,
precast stone, architectural pre-cast panels, or glass.
2. The first 8 feet from the top of the building’s foundation should be
brick, natural stone, pre-cast stone, or architectural pre-cast panels
with the intent of creating the appearance of a strong building
foundation.
3. Stucco shall be installed as per the manufacturer’s specifications.
(9b added by Ordinance A-834-01-12).
10. Landscape Review
As part of Subsection 8, Site Plan Review will include the review of proposed
landscape design and improvements. All land and uses must be landscaped in
accordance with the general appearance in the residential areas of the Village.
Further, all such land and uses must be buffered from adjacent residential uses and
residentially zoned properties, except schools and churches, through the use of
substantial berming and landscaping in accordance with applicable Village
regulations and a landscaping plan to be submitted to and approved by the Village.
Section VII
Transitional Districts
VII 4
All such buffering shall be as close to 100 percent opacity as possible, including
during the dormant stage of such landscaping; provided, however, cyclone and
chain-link fences and concrete block walls are prohibited. Land adjoining schools or
churches, where substantial boundary berming and landscaping is not required, shall
provide one landscaped island for each 10 parking spaces within the parking area.
The proposed buffering or parking lot landscaping plan shall be filed with the
Community Development Director who shall then refer it to the Plan Commission
and the Village Forester for review. The Plan Commission shall review the findings
of the Village Forester at the first meeting following receipt of a report of his
findings. After such review, the Plan Commission shall submit its recommendation
to the Village Board of Trustees, who shall either approve or disapprove the
proposed plan, or approve it with modifications, or shall refer the plan back to the
Plan Commission for reconsideration or modification.
No occupancy permit shall be issued until the buffering has been completed in strict
accordance with the approved plan.
11. Uses in a Building or Structure
Residential uses shall not be permitted in the same structure or building as nonresidential
uses.
12. One Building on a Lot
Except as otherwise provided herein (e.g., a church and a school on the same lot),
there shall be only one building or structure on any lot.
13. Prohibited Use
Single-family detached residences are prohibited.
14. Lots of Record
If a lot was so designated on a subdivision or re-subdivision plan duly recorded in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of either DuPage County or Cook County,
Illinois, or registered with the Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois, prior to
May 15, 1983, and if such lot does not meet the minimum lot area and/or lot width
requirements set out in Section VII,C or Section VII,D below (whichever is
applicable), such lot may be used for the purposes permitted in the transitional
districts, provided there is conformance with all the other requirements of this
Section VII; provided further, however, if any such designated lot which does not
comply with such minimum lot area and/or lot width requirements is under the same
ownership as any one or more adjacent lots, then the requirements as to lot area and
lot width shall nevertheless apply from and after the date of such common
ownership to the extent that compliance may be or was possible through the relocation
of lot lines or the re-subdivision or combination of such two or more lots by
any such owner into a fewer number of lots.
1 VII.C
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VII.C
T-1 TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
C. T-1 TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
1. Permitted Uses
a. Municipal administrative facilities including a detached garage as an
accessory use which garage shall be to the rear of the principal building, be
of compatible architecture and have a maximum floor area of 2,400 square
feet.
b. Parks
c. Churches, temples, or synagogues (including accessory day care and preschool
programs)
d. Multi-family and single-family attached dwelling units not exceeding 3
residential dwelling units per acre.
e. Schools
f. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses shall be
allowed, provided that such accessory uses are shown on the proposed site
plan and have been subject to the site plan review process.
2. Special Uses
a. Cultural institutions and museums
b. Funeral homes
c. Nursing homes
d. Retirement centers or homes
e. Dance, music and art studios, but the sale of tangible personal property shall
not be allowed if such is the principal use
f. Libraries
g. Communities centers
h. Day care centers
i. Offices, including medical and dental
j. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above special uses shall be
allowed, provided that such accessory uses are shown on the proposed site
plan and have been subject to the site plan review process.
Section VII.C
T-1 Transitional District
VII.C 2
3. Lot Size Requirements
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
a. Permitted Uses
(1) All uses except those 40,000 sq.ft. 125 ft.
listed below
(2) Churches, temples and 5 acres 300 ft.
synagogues (including
accessory day care or
nursery schools, but not
including elementary,
junior high or high schools)
(3) Churches, temples and
synagogues with an
elementary and/or
high schools--not
less than the combination
of the acreage required
for churches above plus
the acreage required for
a school below
(4) Schools, public and private
(a) elementary schools 5 acres 300 ft.
(b) junior high schools 10 acres 300 ft.
(c) high schools 20 acres 800 ft.
(5) Multi-family and 3 acres 200 ft.
single-family attached
dwelling units
b. Special Uses
(1) All uses except those 40,000 sq.ft. 125 ft.
listed below
(2) Cultural institutions 5 acres 300 ft.
and museums
(3) Nursing homes 3 acres 300 ft.
(4) Retirement centers 3 acres 300 ft.
or homes
(5) Community centers 2 acres 300 ft.
(6) Child care centers Minimum Lot Area
and Minimum Lot Width
shall be as approved
by the Corporate
Authorities based on the
number of children to be
served, after receiving
the recommendation of the
Section VII.C
T-1 Transitional District
3 VII.C
Plan Commission.
4. Building Height
Not more than two stories of rentable space or 30 feet, whichever is lower, provided,
however, that a building or structure may be 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is
lower, when the lowest story is only used for underground parking or storage; and
further provided, however, a church may be not more than 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is lower, and a church steeple shall be allowed to a maximum of 25 feet
above the building height of the church.
5. Yard Requirements
a. Transitional Yards
If a lot line within the T-1 District is adjacent to or faces a residential
district(s), the required yard of the transitional use which is adjacent to or so
faces the residential district(s) shall be equal to the adjacent required yard of
said residential district or as follows, whichever is greater:
(1) Front yard 100 feet
(2) Corner side yard 50 feet
(3) Interior side yard 20 feet
(4) Rear yard 60 feet
b. Non-Transitional Yards
If a lot line of a permitted or special use within the T-1 District is adjacent to
or faces a non- residential district(s), the required yard of the transitional use
which is adjacent to or faces the non-residential district(s) shall be
established as follows:
(1) Front yard and corner side yard 50 feet
(2) Interior side yard 20 feet
(3) Rear yard 40 feet
6. Floor Area Ratio
Not to exceed 0.24.
1 VII.D
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VII.D
T-2 TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
D. T-2 TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
1. Permitted Uses
a. Professional offices
b. Multi-family and single-family attached dwelling units not exceeding 3
dwelling units per acre
c. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses shall be
allowed, provided that such accessory uses are shown on the proposed site
plan and have been subject to the site plan review process.
2. Special Uses
a. Administrative and executive offices
b. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above special uses shall be
allowed, provided that such accessory uses are shown on the proposed site
plan and have been subject to the site plan review process.
3. Lot Size Requirements
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
a. Permitted Uses
(1) Professional offices 40,000 sq.ft. 125 ft.
(2) Multi-family and
single-family attached
dwelling units 3 acres 200 ft
b. Special Uses
(1) Administrative and
executive offices 40,000 sq.ft 125 ft.
4. Building Height
Not more than two stories of rentable space or 30 feet, whichever is lower, provided,
however, that a building or structure may be 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is
lower, when the lowest story is only used for underground parking or storage; and
further provided, however, a church may be not more than 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is lower, and a church steeple shall be allowed to a maximum of 25 feet
above the building height of the church.
Section VII.D
T-2 Transitional District
VII.D 2
5. Yard Requirements
a. Transitional Yards
If a lot line within the T-1 District is adjacent to or faces a residential
district(s), the required yard of the transitional use which is adjacent to or so
faces the residential district(s) shall be equal to the adjacent required yard of
said residential district or as follows, whichever is greater:
(1) Front yard 100 feet
(2) Corner side yard 50 feet
(3) Interior side yard 20 feet
(4) Rear yard - 60 feet
b. Non-Transitional Yards
If a lot line of a permitted or special use within the T-1 District is adjacent to
or faces a non- residential district(s), the required yard of the transitional use
which is adjacent to or faces the non-residential district(s) shall be
established as follows:
(1) Front yard and corner side yard 50 feet
(2) Interior side yard 20 feet
(3) Rear yard 40 feet
8. Floor Area Ratio
Not to exceed 0.24.
1 VIII
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VIII
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Permitted Uses
a. No building, structure, or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than
a use permitted hereinafter in the zoning district in which such building,
structure, or tract of land shall be located, with the exception of the
following:
(1) Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Ordinance.
Uses already lawfully established on the effective date of this
Ordinance and rendered non-conforming by the provisions shall be
subject to the regulations of Section XII.
(2) Special uses as allowed in each district.
b. All business establishments shall be retail trade, office or service
establishments dealing directly with consumers and all goods produced on
the premises shall be sold on the premises where produced; provided,
however, if the premises are less than 3,000 square feet in size and both sells
and produces such goods on the premises, such goods may also be sold offpremises
as well.
2. Bulk Requirements
Bulk requirements shall be as specified under each zoning district as described
herein, except as otherwise specifically approved for a planned unit development. In
addition, no building or structure shall be converted so as to conflict with, or further
conflict with, the bulk requirements of the district in which such building or
structure is located.
3. Yard Requirements
Yard requirements shall be as specified under each zoning district as described
herein, except as otherwise specifically approved for a planned unit development.
4. Operation Within Enclosed Buildings
All business, service, storage, merchandise display, repair, and processing, where
allowed, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, except as
follows:
a. Outdoor activities are permitted for uses which by definition require outdoor
activities such as parking and loading areas, automobile service stations, car
washes, or recreation areas for child care centers and nurseries.
b. Outdoor activities listed as special uses, such as outdoor dining areas, drivethrough
windows, and outdoor displays of merchandise, may be approved by
the Board of Trustees upon recommendation from the Plan Commission
subject to Section XIII, herein.
Section VIII
Business Districts
VIII 2
c. Temporary (for a limited duration of time) outdoor activities may be
permitted subject to written approval by the Community Development
Director. Such activities shall not include any permanent improvements,
buildings, or structures. Outdoor activities which may be permitted include
festivals, tent sales, or seasonal sidewalk sales.
5. Outdoor Dining
Restaurant outdoor dining areas, when permitted as a special use, shall be subject, at
a minimum, to the following:
a. The dining area shall be enclosed by an open fence of approved design
preventing access to the outdoor dining area except by a doorway from the
interior of the restaurant;
b. Door to the dining area shall be self-closing;
c. Tables shall be cleaned promptly following use;
d. Furniture and umbrellas shall be weighted to prevent their movement in the
wind;
e. Seating shall not exceed one chair for every 10 square feet devoted to
outdoor dining and shall be counted in determining restroom and parking
requirements;
f. No outdoor dining area shall be located so as to impede pedestrian traffic or
proper access to and from the restaurant;
g. No public sidewalks or public area may be used for a private restaurant's
outdoor dining unless specifically approved by the Village;
h. Outdoor food preparation, storage or display is prohibited;
i. Hours of operation of an outdoor dining area shall be as specifically
approved by the Village.
6. Nuisances
Processes and equipment employed, and goods processed or sold, shall be limited to
those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas,
noise, vibration, refuse matter or water-carried waste, or any other environmental
reason. All activities involving the production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, or repair of materials, goods, or products, shall conform with the
performance standards established in this Ordinance for Manufacturing Districts,
provided that performance standards shall in every case be applied at the boundaries
of the lot on which such activity takes place.
7. Parking and Loading
a. With the exception stated below regarding delivery trucks of a business
establishment, parking of trucks in the open shall be prohibited. Trucks
making deliveries to the business premises shall make deliveries only at
loading docks where provided and, if there is no loading dock, such trucks
may park only for such time as is necessary to complete the delivery.
b. Delivery trucks for a business establishment may be parked overnight on a
property within the B-1 or B-2 Districts subject to the following:
1. Parking of delivery trucks shall be limited to two per business
Section VIII
Business Districts
3 VIII
establishment.
2. A delivery truck as defined for purposes of these regulations shall not
exceed 24,000 pounds.
3. Delivery trucks shall be parked in an employee parking lot
designated at the time of the site plan approval or in the rear of the
business establishment. However, if the rear of the business
establishment adjoins a residential district, said delivery trucks shall
be screened from view from the residential district or parked to the
side of the principal building. Under no circumstances shall a
delivery truck be parked between the principal building and the front
or corner side property line.
c. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations established in Section XI of this Ordinance.
8. Signs
All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the sign regulations of the
Burr Ridge Municipal Code (such Sign Ordinance shall not be construed as being
incorporated herein).
9. Building and Site Plan Review
a. Due to the need to protect valued natural resources and the integrity and
environment of the Village's residential neighborhoods, traffic congestion
and safety conditions and the land-use character of key intersections, areas
containing unique natural features, transition areas adjacent to residential
districts and areas at or near major intersections are identified as being of
significant impact to the Village. Therefore, all petitions for rezoning to the
B-1 or B-2 Districts, all requests for special use approval pursuant to
Sections VIII.B.2 and VIII.C.2 herein, and all applications for building
permits for the construction of new buildings, building additions, structures,
parking lots, and fences within the B-1 or B-2 Districts, shall be subject to
building and site plan review and approval. Any building, structure, and site
development must comply strictly with the approved site plan, and any
building or occupancy permit will not be issued, or will be revoked if already
issued, if the development does not strictly comply with the approved site
plan.
b. The site plan shall indicate the locations of proposed and existing buildings
and structures and any proposed new additions to the existing buildings and
structures, properly arranged facilities, water detention and drainage
facilities, landscaping, buffering to adjacent residential areas, and such other
buffering or features as are necessary or appropriate to fit harmoniously with
the character, use and zoning of adjoining and surrounding properties and to
avoid any appreciable adverse effect upon such properties. Such site plan
shall also include and/or be accompanied by the documents and information
required under Section XIII of this Ordinance. The Plan Commission, in its
discretion, may waive the requirement of submitting any or all such
information in connection with applications for approval of site plans for
uses in the Business Districts.
c. Such building and site plan and any accompanying documents or
information, shall be filed with the Community Development Director. The
Community Development Director shall schedule the building and site plan
for review by the Plan Commission and shall provide notice of the Plan
Commission's scheduled review in compliance with established procedures
Section VIII
Business Districts
VIII 4
for notice of Plan Commission public hearings.
d. The Community Development Director shall refer such building and site
plan and documents to the Plan Commission and the Village Engineer,
Village Forester, and Building Commissioner for review. The Plan
Commission shall review the report of the Community Development
Director and the findings of the Village Engineer, Village Forester and
Building Commissioner at the first meeting following receipt of a report of
their findings. After such review, the Plan Commission shall submit its
recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees, who shall either approve
or disapprove the proposed site plan, or approve it with modification, or shall
refer the site plan back to the Plan Commission for reconsideration or
modification. The Plan Commission's recommendation to approve and the
Board's approval of building and site plans may be conditioned on future
approval of revised landscaping plans or engineering, as may be needed due
to required site plan modification.
e. All exterior building facades in the Business Districts shall be of high quality
materials that may include but are not limited to brick, natural stone, precast
stone, architectural pre-cast panels, or glass. The use of plastic siding, vinyl
siding, or aluminum siding and the use of engineered stucco systems,
including but not limited to those commonly known as “Dryvit” or exterior
insulation and finish systems (EIFS) are discouraged as exterior building
façade materials for all buildings in the Business Districts. Traditional
cement based stucco may be used as an exterior building material subject to
the following restrictions:
1. The majority of a building’s façade should be brick, natural stone,
pre-cast stone architectural pre-cast panels, or glass.
2. The first 8 feet from the top of the building’s foundation should be
brick, natural stone, pre-cast stone, or architectural pre-cast panels
with the intent of creating the appearance of a strong building
foundation.
3. Stucco shall be installed as per the manufacturer’s specifications.
(9e added by Ordinance A-834-01-12).
10. Landscaping and Buffering
a. All required parking areas, yards or other required open spaces shall be
appropriately landscaped in accordance with Section XI.C.11 and with
landscaping plans submitted to and approved by the Village, and thereafter
shall be maintained in such a manner as to retain the intended standards of
the approved landscaping plan and to conform to the landscaping
requirements of the Village. As part of Subsection VIII.A.9, Site Plan
Review will include the review of proposed landscape design and
improvements. The proposed landscaping plan shall be filed with the
Community Development Director, who shall then refer it to the Plan
Commission and the Village Forester for review. The Plan Commission
shall review the report of the Community Development Director and the
findings of the Village Forester at the first meeting following receipt of said
report and findings. After such review, the Plan Commission shall submit its
recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees, who shall either approve
or disapprove the proposed plan, or approve it with modifications, or shall
refer the plan back to the Plan Commission for reconsideration or
modification.
Section VIII
Business Districts
5 VIII
b. For any development of a property within a Business District which adjoins
or is across the street from a Residential District, a fence or wall of
architectural design approved by the Village and not less than five nor more
than six feet in height, or a densely planted tree or shrub hedge, initially not
less than five feet in height, shall be provided along the entire length of the
property line which adjoins or is across the street from the Residential
District. The proposed method of buffering shall be considered as part of the
site plan review process herein set forth. The decision whether to require a
wall, fence, trees, or shrub hedge shall be made by the Village based on site
considerations. No occupancy permit shall be issued until the required
screening has been completed in strict accordance with the approved plan.
11. Hours of Operation for Business Uses
a. The hours of operation for all uses within the B-1 and B-2 Districts shall not
exceed 7 A.M. to 10 P.M. except as otherwise allowed herein.
b. Any business use in the B-1 or B-2 District may request special use approval in
accordance with the procedures and requirements outlined in Section XIII of this
Ordinance.
c. The hours of operation for restaurants with liquor licenses shall be as follows
and subject to the terms and conditions as follows:
1) The closing time for restaurants with liquor licenses shall be 12:00
Midnight on Sundays, Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays; 1:00 AM
on Thursdays (i.e. Friday at 1:00 AM); and 2:00 AM on Fridays and
Saturdays (i.e. Saturday and Sunday at 2:00 AM). Except however, on
December 31 of each year the permitted closing time shall be extended
to 2:00 AM regardless of the day of the week (i.e. 2:00 AM on January
1).
2) Restaurants with liquor licenses shall provide service of food prepared
on-site up to a minimum of one hour before closing.
3) Nothing herein shall supersede the requirements for such uses to obtain
special use approval as required by Sections VIII.B.2 and VIII.C.2,
herein.
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-03-12).
1 VIII.B
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VIII.B
B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICT
B. B-1 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
The B-1 District is intended to provide a location suitable to accommodate a combination of
retail, service, and office uses in a commercial and business district.
1. Permitted Uses
No building, structure, or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected,
altered, or enlarged which is arranged, intended, or designed for other than any of the
following uses:
a. Antique shops with less than 7000 square feet of floor area
b. Art galleries
c. Art and school supplies
d. Bakeries (retail sales and not more than 70 percent of the floor area may be devoted
to the production or processing of bakery goods)
e. Barber shops
f. Beauty and Health Services
g. Bicycle sales, including rental and repair and service functions where incidental to
retail sales or rentals
h. Book stores and stationery shops
i. Camera and photographic supply stores
j. Candy stores
k. Card and gift shops
l. Carpet and rug stores (retail only)
m. China, glassware and household goods stores
n. Clothing, clothing rental, and clothing accessory stores
o. Coin and philatelic stores
p. Computer, business machine and office equipment stores, including repair and
service functions where incidental to retail sales and with less than 7,000 square feet
of floor area
q. Craft, fabric, and sewing stores
Section VIII.B
B-1 Business District
VIII.B 2
r. Delicatessens (packaged and/or prepared food for consumption on or off premises)
s. Dry cleaning or laundry receiving establishment (processing to be done off-site)
t. Florist shops
u. Food Stores, including grocery stores, supermarkets, meat markets, health food
stores, fruit and vegetable stores, bulk food stores, and other similar establishments
v. Furniture stores with less than 7,000 square feet of floor area
w. Furrier shops
x. Hardware stores with less than 7,000 square feet of floor area
y. Health and Athletic Club with less than 7,000 square feet of floor area (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-25-15)
z. Hobby shops (not including video game parlors or arcades)
aa. Interior decorating shops
bb. Jewelry stores, including watch repairs, design and production of custom jewelry
cc. Leather goods and luggage stores
dd. Locksmith shops
ee. Music stores including sheet music, recorded music, and musical instrument sales
and repair
ff. Office supply and service stores including copying and package delivery services
with less than 7000 square feet of floor area
gg. Paint and wallpaper stores with less than 7,000 square feet of floor area
hh. Pharmacies and Drug Stores
ii. Photography studios
jj. Picture framing, when conducted for retail sales on the premises only
kk. Post Offices accessory to a permitted or special use
ll. Restaurants in multi-tenant buildings (including specialty restaurants such as donut
shops and ice cream shops) and without any of the following: live entertainment,
dancing, or sales of alcoholic beverages
mm. Studios for teaching of art, martial arts, music, dance, and gymnastics
nn. Shoe sales and shoe repair stores with less than 7,000 square feet of floor area
oo. Sporting goods stores with less than 7,000 square feet of floor area
pp. Tailor and dressmaking shops
qq. Toy stores with less than 7,000 square feet of floor area
rr. Video rental stores
Section VIII.B
B-1 Business District
3 VIII.B
ss. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above including but not limited to offstreet
parking and loading as regulated in Section XI of this Ordinance
2. Special Uses
The following special uses may be permitted in specific situations in accordance
with the procedures outlined in Section XIII of this Ordinance, as appropriate:
a. Antique shops with more than 7000 square feet of floor area
b. Banks and Financial Institutions (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
c. Banquet Halls
d. Catering establishments
e. Child care centers and nursery schools
f. Clubs or Lodges, private, fraternal, or religious
g. Computer, business machine and office equipment stores, including repair
and service functions where incidental to retail sales, with more than 7,000
square feet of floor area
h. Convenience Food Stores
i. Custom art studio (Amended by Ordinance A-834-08-18)
j. Department Stores
k. Drive through facilities accessory to a permitted or special use
l. Dry cleaners with on-site equipment for dry cleaning
m. Financial Services Offices (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
n. Funeral parlors
o. Furniture stores with more than 7,000 square feet of floor area
p. Gun sales and gun clubs (Amended by Ordinance A-834-18-18)
q. Hardware stores with more than 7,000 square feet of floor area
r. Hours of operation exceeding 7 A.M. to 10 P.M. for any business listed as a
permitted or special use except as otherwise permitted by Section VIII.A.11
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-03-12).
s. Household appliance and electronics stores including repair and service
functions where incidental to retail sales
t. Insurance Offices (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
u. Laundromats
v. Liquor stores (package goods sales only)
w. Medical, Dental, and Optical Offices and Clinics (Amended by Ordinance
A-834-06-09)
x. Office Supply and Service Stores including copying and package delivery
services, with more than 7000 square feet of floor area
Section VIII.B
B-1 Business District
VIII.B 4
w. Orthopedic and Medical Appliance Stores
x. Outside dining area for a restaurant subject to compliance with Section
VIII.A.5 herein
y. Outside sales display accessory to a permitted or special use
z. Paint and wallpaper stores with more than 7,000 square feet of floor area
aa. Parking lots and structures where such uses are the principal use on a lot
bb. Pet shops and pet service stores
cc. Planned unit developments
dd. Post offices, Federal Government
ee. Real Estate Offices (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
ff. Restaurants in single tenant buildings or with any one of the following: live
entertainment, dancing, or sales of alcoholic beverages (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-6-99).
gg. Shoe sales and shoe repair stores with more than 7,000 square feet of floor
area
hh. Shopping centers (containing stores listed as permitted or special uses in this
B-1 District) with less than 100,000 square feet of floor area
ii. Sporting goods stores with more than 7,000 square feet of floor area
jj. Theaters, performing arts, indoor only
kk. Toy stores with more than 7,000 square feet of floor area
ll. Travel Agencies (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
mm. Tutoring center for pre-school, primary, and secondary education (Amended
by Ordinance A-834-31-11).
nn. Wine boutique with ancillary service of wine and beer by the glass and with
service of pre-packaged food for consumption on-site (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-01-11)
3. Lot Size Requirements:
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
a. Permitted Uses 10,000
square feet
80 feet
b. Special Uses
(1) All special uses except those listed below 10,000
square feet
80 feet
Section VIII.B
B-1 Business District
5 VIII.B
(2) Convents, monasteries, and theological
schools
10 Acres 500 feet
(3) Child care centers and nursery schools As approved by the Village
(4) Funeral Parlors 30,000
square feet
150 feet
(5) Parking lots or Structures (as principal use) 10,000
square feet
100 feet
(6) Planned Unit Developments 6 acres 350 feet
(7) Post Offices 10,000
square feet
150 feet
(8) Shopping Centers 3 acres 250 feet
4. Floor Area Ratio:
Not to exceed 0.40.
5. Building Height:
Not to exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet, whichever is less.
6. Yard Requirements:
a. Front yard: 40 feet. The area extending from the front building line to
within 15 feet of the front property line may be occupied by drives, vehicular
parking, sidewalks, landscaping and similar facilities (all of the area between
the front property line and the front building line which is not occupied by
such facilities, including the 15 feet adjoining the street, shall be landscaped
in accordance with Subsection VIII.A.10).
b. Corner side yard: 40 feet. The area extending from the front building line to
within 15 feet of the front property line may be occupied by drives, vehicular
parking, sidewalks, landscaping and similar facilities (all of the area between
the front property line and the front building line which is not occupied by
such facilities, including the 15 feet adjoining the street, shall be landscaped
in accordance with Subsection VIII.A.10).
c. Interior side yard: None required, however, if a yard is provided, it must be
at least 20 feet in width.
d. Rear yard: 40 feet
e. Transitional rear and side yards: all lots with rear or side lot lines abutting a
residential district shall provide a 50 foot yard along such abutting lot line,
with landscaping in accordance with Subsection VIII.A.10.
1 VIII.C
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION VIII.C
B-2 BUSINESS DISTRICT
C. B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
The intent of the B-2 District is to accommodate those uses which require substantial land
area, are major travel destinations, require substantial support parking and draw their
clientele or employees from the regional market. Many such uses require a high degree of
access and roadside visibility or exposure from major thoroughfares.
1. Permitted Uses:
No building, structure, or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be
erected, altered, or enlarged which is arranged, intended, or designed for other than
any of the following uses:
a. Antique shops with less than 7000 square feet of floor area
b. Art Galleries
c. Art and School Supply Stores
d. Automobile parts and accessory stores
e. Bakeries (retail sales and not more than 70 percent of the floor area may be
devoted to the production or processing of bakery goods)
f. Barber Shops
g. Beauty and Health Services
h. Bicycle sales, including rental and repair and service functions where
incidental to retail sales or rentals
i. Book stores and stationery shops
j. Camera and photographic supply stores
k. Candy stores
l. Card and gift shops
m. Carpet and rug stores (retail only)
n. Catalogue Sales
o. Catering Establishments
p. China, glassware and household goods stores
q. Clothing, clothing rental, and clothing accessory stores
r. Coin and philatelic stores
Section VIII.C
B-2 Business District
VIII.C 2
s. Computer, business machine and office equipment stores, including repair
and service functions where incidental to retail sales
t. Craft, fabric, and sewing stores
u. Delicatessens (packaged and/or prepared food for consumption on or off
premises)
v. Dry cleaning or laundry receiving establishment (processing to be done offsite)
w. Florist shops
x. Food Stores, including grocery stores, supermarkets, meat markets, health
food stores, fruit and vegetable stores, bulk food stores, and other similar
establishments
y. Furniture stores
z. Furrier shops
aa. Garden, landscape, and patio stores
bb. Hardware and home improvements stores
cc. Hobby shops (not including video game parlors or arcades)
dd. Household appliance stores (including repair and service functions where
such activities are incidental to the retail sales function)
ee. Interior decorating shops
ff. Jewelry stores, including watch repairs, design and production of custom
jewelry
gg. Leather goods and luggage stores
hh. Locksmith shops
ii. Music stores including sheet music, recorded music, and musical instrument
sales and repair
jj. Office supply and service stores including copying and package delivery
services with less than 7000 square feet of floor area
kk. Orthopedic and Medical Appliance Stores
ll. Paint and wallpaper stores
mm. Pharmacies and Drug Stores
nn. Photography studios
oo. Picture framing, when conducted for retail sales on the premises only
pp. Playground equipment sales with indoor display
qq. Post Offices, federal government, freestanding or accessory to a permitted or
special use
Section VIII.C
B-2 Business District
3 VIII.C
rr. Restaurants in multi-tenant buildings (including specialty restaurants such as
donut shops and ice cream shops) and without any of the following: live
entertainment, dancing, or sales of alcoholic beverages
ss. Studios for teaching of art, martial arts, music, dance, and gymnastics
tt. Shoe sales and shoe repair stores
uu. Sporting goods stores
vv. Tailor and dressmaking shops
ww. Toy stores
xx. Video rental stores
yy. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above including but not limited
to off-street parking and loading as regulated in Section XI of this Ordinance
2. Special Uses:
The following special uses may be permitted in specific situations in accordance
with the procedures outlined in Section XIII of this Ordinance, as appropriate:
a. Amusement establishments, indoor and outdoor, including golf courses and
ranges, miniature golf, batting cages, bowling alleys, tennis, racquetball,
gymnasiums, swimming pools, and ice skating rinks but excluding arcades
b. Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics
c. Antique shops with more than 7000 square feet of floor area
d. Automobile sales, new or used and including trucks
e. Automobile gasoline sales stations
f. Automobile service and repair
g. Banks and financial institutions (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
h. Banquet halls
i. Building material sales
j. Car washes, automatic, self-service, or hand wash
k. Clubs or lodges, private, fraternal, or religious
l. Colleges, universities, or business vocational schools
m. Convents, monasteries, and theological schools
n. Convenience Food Stores
o. Child Care Centers and Nursery Schools
p. Department Stores
q. Drive through facilities accessory to any permitted or special use
Section VIII.C
B-2 Business District
VIII.C 4
r. Dry cleaners with on-site equipment for dry cleaning
s. Financial Services Offices (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
t. Funeral parlors
u. Golf Simulation Facility with Sales of Alcoholic and non-Alcoholic
Beverages and pre-packaged food and snacks (Amended by Ordinance A-
834-23-16)
v. Greenhouses, retail sales only
w. Health and athletic clubs and gymnasiums
x. Hotels and motels (including dining and meeting rooms)
y. Hours of operation exceeding 7 A.M. to 10 P.M. for any business listed as a
permitted or special use except as otherwise permitted by Section VIII.A.11 herein
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-03-12).
z. Insurance Offices (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
aa. Irrigation installation business, with no customers on premises (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-04-18)
aa. Kennels
bb. Laundromats
cc. Liquor Stores (packaged goods sales only)
dd. Medical, Dental, and Optical Offices and Clinics (Amended by Ordinance
A-834-06-09)
ee. Office supply and service stores including copying and package delivery
services with more than 7000 square feet of floor area
ff. Outside dining area for a restaurant subject to compliance with Section
VIII.A.5 herein
gg. Outside sales display accessory to a permitted or special use
hh. Parking lots and structures where such uses are the principal use on a lot
ii. Pet shops and pet service stores
jj. Planned unit developments
kk. Plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and lighting stores (retail sales and
service only)
ll. Real Estate Offices (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
mm. Restaurants in single tenant buildings or with any one of the following: live
entertainment, dancing, or sales of alcoholic beverages
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-6-99)
nn. Running Store/Fitness Apparel Store with Sales of Craft Beer or Wine
(Amended by Ordinance A-834-14-16)
Section VIII.C
B-2 Business District
5 VIII.C
pp. Theaters, indoor movie, not to exceed 4 screens or 800 seats, whichever is
less, with no screen having more than 250 seats, and not located within 2500
feet (measured from property line to property line) of another theater
facility.” Amended Ordinance A-834-7-97
qq. Theaters, performing arts, indoor
rr. Tobacco Shops
ss. Travel Agencies (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-09)
tt. Tutoring center for pre-school, primary, and secondary education (Amended
by Ordinance A-834-31-11)
uu. Multiple buildings on a single lot if said building and lot are under common
ownership and that all necessary infrastructure is provided for each of the
buildings consistent with the Village’s subdivision regulations. (Amended
Ordinance A-834-03-08)
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
20,000
square feet
120 feet
20,000
square feet
120 feet
80 Acres 1,000 feet
40,000
square feet
200 feet
1 acre 200 feet
30,000
square feet
150 feet
1 acre 200 feet
2 acres 250 feet
5 acres 250 feet
3. Lot Size Requirements:
a. Permitted Uses
b. Special Uses
(1) All special uses except those listed
below
(2) Colleges, universities
(3) Restaurants with drive-thru facilities
(4) Banks and Financial Institutions with
drive-through facilities
(5) Funeral parlors
(6) Greenhouse, retail sales only
(7) Hotels and motels
(8) Planned Unit Developments
(9) Shopping Centers
5 acres 250 feet
Shopping centers (containing stores listed as permitted or special uses in this
B-2 District
oo.
Section VIII.C
B-2 Business District
VIII.C 6
4. Floor Area Ratio:
Not to exceed 0.40.
5. Maximum Building Height:
Not to exceed 35 feet.
6. Yard Requirements:
a. Front yard: 40 feet. The area extending from the front building line to
within 15 feet of the front property line may be occupied by drives, vehicular
parking, sidewalks, landscaping and similar facilities (all of the area between
the front property line and the front building line which is not occupied by
such facilities, including the 15 feet adjoining the street, shall be landscaped
in accordance with Subsection VIII.A.10).
b. Corner side yard: 40 feet. The area extending from the front building line to
within 15 feet of the front property line may be occupied by drives, vehicular
parking, sidewalks, landscaping and similar facilities (all of the area between
the front property line and the front building line which is not occupied by
such facilities, including the 15 feet adjoining the street, shall be landscaped
in accordance with Subsection VIII.A.10).
c. Interior side yard: None required, however, if a yard is provided it must be
at least 20 feet in width.
d. Rear yard: 40 feet.
e. Transitional rear and side yards: all lots with rear or side lot lines abutting a
residential district shall provide a 50 foot yard along such abutting lot line,
with landscaping in accordance with Subsection VIII.A.10.
1 IX
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION IX
OFFICE DISTRICTS
A. PURPOSE
The Office Districts are designed to promote orderly and sound planning for those areas
which are appropriate for office uses or a combination of office and hotel uses. These
districts are designed to plan for future growth of non-residential uses in a manner which
will protect and preserve the integrity and land values of adjoining uses; to provide a
location for certain services needed now or in the future by Village residents.
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Building and Site Plan Approval
Areas containing unique natural features, transition areas near to residential districts
and areas at or near major intersections are identified as being of significant impact
to the Village. Therefore, due to the need to protect valued natural resources, the
integrity and environment of the Village's residential neighborhoods, traffic
congestion and safety conditions, and the land-use character of key intersections, the
development and construction of all permitted or special uses within the Office
Districts shall be subject to building and site plan review and approval as specified
in Section XIII of this Ordinance. (amended by Ordinance A-834-01-12)
2. Permitted Uses
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be
erected, altered, or enlarged which is arranged, intended, or designed for other than a
use permitted hereinafter in the zoning district in which such building or tract of land
shall be located, with the exception of the following:
a. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Ordinance.
b. Special uses as allowed in each district.
3. Bulk Requirements
Bulk requirements shall be as specified under each zoning district as described
herein, except as otherwise specifically approved for a planned unit development.
4. Yard Requirements
Yard requirements shall be as specified under each zoning district as described
herein, except as otherwise specifically approved for a planned unit development.
5. Landscaping
All required yards, open space, green space or other required open areas shall be
landscaped in accordance with landscaping plans approved by the Village, and
thereafter shall be maintained in such a manner as to retain at least the intended
standards of the initial landscaping plan and to conform to the landscaping
requirements set forth in the Village's approval of a specific use.
Section IX
Office Districts
IX 2
6. Signs
The regulations and standards contained in the Village of Burr Ridge Sign
Ordinance, Chapter 55 of the Municipal Code, shall regulate the installation and use
of signs within the Office District, except as otherwise approved by the Plan
Commission for a planned unit development in the O-2 District. Nothing herein
shall be construed to make such sign regulations and standards a part of this
Ordinance even though all uses must comply with such standards and regulations.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Section XI
of this Ordinance, except as otherwise provided herein for uses in the O-2 District.
1 IV.C
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION IV.C
OFFICE DISTRICTS
C. O-1 SMALL SCALE OFFICE DISTRICT
The O-1 Small Scale Office District is intended to provide low density office uses in areas
that are near to or may influence single-family residential areas. This district is designed to
attract the user who desires spacious surroundings, lands endowed with unique natural
features or residential settings, as opposed to more intensely developed business centers.
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Office, professional and business, but excluding medical and dental
clinics
b. Parks and forest preserves
c. Museums, libraries or performing art centers (under 400 seats)
2. Special Uses:
a. Medical or dental clinics (but not including facilities devoted primarily to
emergency medical services)
b. Churches, temples and synagogues
c. Dwelling units accessory to an office use
d. Private recreational clubs
e. Financial institutions (no drive-thru facilities)
f. Schools; private or public
g. Restaurants; table service only (no drive-thru facilities)
h. Planned unit developments
3. Lot Size Requirements:
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
a. Permitted Uses
(1) 1 to 1-1/2 story 30,000 sq.ft. 125 ft.
buildings
(2) 2 story buildings 37,500 sq.ft. 150 ft.
(3) 2-1/2 story 45,000 sq.ft. 175 ft.
buildings
Section IV.C
O-1 Office District
IV.C 2
b. Special Uses
Minimum Minimum
Lot Area Lot Width
(1) Medical or dental 60,000 sq.ft 200 ft.
clinics
(2) Churches, temples 2 acres 200 ft.
and synagogues
(3) Private recreational 40,000 sq.ft 200 ft.
clubs
(4) Financial 10,000 sq.ft 125 ft.
institutions
(5) Schools; public or 10 acres 500 ft.
private
(6) Table service 1 acre 150 ft.
restaurants
(7) Planned unit 5 acres 300 ft.
developments
4. Yard Requirements:
Minimum yard requirements are established for all uses in the O-1 District as set
forth below, except as otherwise specifically approved for a planned unit
development. In addition, for any building or structure which exceeds a building
height of one and one-half stories, an additional setback shall be required as set forth
below.
Minimum Additional
Setback Setback
a. Front Yard 50 feet Plus 10 feet
b. Corner Side Yard 50 feet Plus 10 feet
c. Interior Side Yard 25 feet Plus 5 feet
d. Rear Yard 40 feet Plus 10 feet
5. Building Height:
The maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories or 30 feet (including
rooftop equipment), whichever is lower.
6. Floor Area Ratio:
The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.25, except as otherwise approved by the
Board of Trustees for planned unit developments.
7. Land Coverage:
The maximum impervious surface coverage on any individual zoning lot in the O-1
District shall be no greater than 66 percent of the total lot area. All other areas on
any zoning lot in the O-1 District shall be landscaped and maintained as open space.
1 IX.D
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION IX.D
O-2 OFFICE DISTRICT
D. O-2 OFFICE AND HOTEL DISTRICT
The O-2 Office and Hotel District is intended to provide higher density office and hotel uses
in locations at or near major intersections of the Village where there are natural features or
other transition areas which will offset the impact of the uses included in the District.
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Banks and financial institutions without drive-thru facilities
b. Civic buildings
c. Museums, libraries or performing art centers (under 500 seats) and other
cultural institutions, but excluding motion picture theaters)
d. Offices, professional and business, including medical and dental clinics
e. Parks, playgrounds and forest preserves
2. Special Uses:
a. Business Vocational School (Amended by Ordinance A-834-04-15)
b. Day care centers, if accessory to office use
c. Dwelling units accessory to an office use
d. Event Center, Meeting Hall, Banquet Room (Amended by Ordinance A-834-
08-16)
e. General retail as approved by the Board of Trustees within an office or hotel
and if providing goods or services primarily to the tenants of the office
building or guests of the hotel
f. Hotels, which may include restaurants, lounges and other accessory uses
g. Parking decks or garages, accessory to a principal building or structure, and
aesthetically compatible with the principal building or structure, both as to
architecture and building materials
h. Planned unit developments
i. Private recreational clubs, excluding gun clubs and clubs requiring lighting for
outdoor activities
j. Public and private utility facilities
k. Restaurants, but excluding drive-thru facilities
Section IX.D
O-2 Office District
IX.D 2
l. Senior Housing with independent living units, assisted living units, or skilled
care facilities (Amended by Ordinances A-834-04-01, A-834-08-14)
m. Services accessory to office or hotel uses including, but not limited to, barber
shops, beauty shops, laundries, clothes cleaning and laundry pick-up stations,
shoe repair, tailor shops, and other similar stores or shops
3. Lot Size Requirements:
a. Permitted Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Lot Depth
(1) All uses 3 Acres 250 feet 2 times lot width
(2) The maximum lot depth shall not exceed twice the lot's width except
as otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees for a specific use.
b. Special Uses
(1) All uses
except PUDs
3 Acres 250 feet 2 times lot width
(2) Planned Unit
Developments
3 Acres 250 feet 2 times lot width
(2) The minimum lot width shall be 250 feet except as otherwise
approved by the Board of Trustees in a planned unit development.
4. Yard Requirements:
Minimum yard requirements are established for all uses in the O-2 District as set forth
below, except as otherwise specifically approved for a planned unit development. In
addition, for any building or structure which exceeds a height of forty (40) feet, an
additional setback shall be required as set forth below.
Minimum
Setback
Additional
Setback
(a) Front Yard 40 feet Plus 2 feet for each 1
foot a building or
structure exceeds 40 feet
(b) Corner Side Yard 40 feet Plus 2 feet for each 1
foot a building or
structure exceeds 40 feet
(c) Front Yard in County Line Road
Corridor
100 feet
Section IX.D
O-2 Office District
3 IX.D
(1) Front yards located in the County Line Road Corridor (including in
planned unit developments) shall contain no impervious surfaces
except landscape features, access drives and sidewalks.
(2) For purposes of this Section, the term "landscape features" shall include
only live plantings and any outdoor furniture as approved by the Board
of Trustees.
(d) Interior Side Yard 40 feet
(e) Interior Side Yard adjacent to lake
or pond
10 feet
(f) Rear Yard 40 feet
(g) Rear Yard adjacent to lake or pond 10 feet
5. Building & Parking Deck Height:
The maximum building height shall be three (3) stories or 40 feet, whichever is lower,
except as otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees in a planned unit development.
If a parking deck is permitted or required by the Board of Trustees, the height of such
parking deck shall not exceed three (3) levels or 20 feet in height, whichever is lower.
a. Rooftop equipment shall be excluded from the calculation of building height.
However, all rooftop equipment shall be completely enclosed, and such
enclosure shall be compatible in material and color with the main building.
b. For purposes of computing the maximum building height, enclosed below
grade parking shall be excluded, but enclosed above grade or at grade parking
shall be included.
c. Within a planned unit development, the maximum building height shall not
exceed five (5) stories or 65 feet, whichever is lower, for office uses and six
(6) stories or 77.5 feet, whichever is lower, for hotel uses.
6. Floor Area Ratio:
The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.25, except as otherwise approved by the
Board of Trustees in a planned unit development.
a. Any area of a building used for enclosed parking shall not be included in the
total building area for purposes of floor area ratio calculations, but all other
areas as provided in Section XIV.B of this Ordinance shall be included.
b. Within a planned unit development, the maximum floor area ratio shall not
exceed 0.60 for office buildings and 0.70 for hotel buildings.
7. Building, Surface Parking and Parking Deck Envelopes for Planned Unit
Developments
Except as otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees, a building envelope, surface
parking envelope or parking deck envelope shall be maintained along the entire
perimeter of each lot in a planned unit development.
Section IX.D
O-2 Office District
IX.D 4
a. No building for occupation or the conducting of business shall be built outside
of the building envelope.
b. No surface parking area or parking deck shall be built outside of the applicable
surface parking envelope or parking deck envelope.
c. The width of the building, surface parking or parking deck envelope (as
measured inward from the perimeter lot lines of each lot in a planned unit
development) shall be as approved by the Board of Trustees.
8. Required Open Space:
Green space unencumbered by buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces
(including parking areas and driveways) shall be provided in an amount not less than
20 percent of the total lot area, except as otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees
in a planned unit development.
a. For purposes of this Section, "green space" shall consist of landscaped areas
in accordance with the provisions of Section X.B.9 of this Zoning Ordinance,
and such green space must be in addition to all required building setbacks and
yards, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees in a planned unit
development.
b. For a planned unit development in which parking decks are permitted or
required, the minimum green space shall be increased for any lot which is
improved with a parking deck in accordance with the following requirements:
Minimum Required
Green Space
(1) Lots which include two (2) levels of parking: 30% of Total Lot Area
(2) Lots which include three (3) levels of parking: 40% of Total Lot Area
9. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements:
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Section XI of
this Ordinance, except as follows:
a. For office uses, a minimum of one parking space per 250 square feet of gross
area is required unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees in a
planned unit development.
b. For hotel uses the following requirements shall apply unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Trustees in a planned until development (either by
approving some shared parking or by accepting a different standard if the
applicant can justify the use of the different standard to the satisfaction of the
Board of Trustees):
(1) a minimum of one parking space for each lodging room,
(2) plus one-half (1/2) parking space for each two (2) employees,
(3) plus one parking space for each 250 square feet of retail sales
contained in such hotel,
(4) and plus 14 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of restaurant space
contained in such hotel.
Section IX.D
O-2 Office District
5 IX.D
c. Parking in decks for permitted uses may be permitted by the Board of Trustees
provided such decks shall not exceed three (3) levels or 20 feet in height,
whichever is lower.
d. Setbacks for surface parking spaces and deck parking structures shall be as
approved by the Board of Trustees.
1 X
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION X
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
A. PREAMBLE
The regulations for manufacturing districts and for manufacturing or industrial type-uses
established in any district involving manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly,
repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, warehousing, shipping or testing of materials,
goods, or products, are designed to provide for the establishment of a limited range of
industrial and allied activities and to govern their operations in a manner that will not
have a deleterious effect on residential and business areas. It is essential that there be
adequate provision for the expansion and diversification of industry -- both those existing
today and for the attraction of new industry. Adequate well located industrial sites and
room for expansion of established plants will encourage industrial growth and expansion
of the Village's economic base. It will also open new opportunities for a variety of
employment for its labor force. (See Section XIII.F.1 relative to certification required as
to compliance with the Performance Standards of these districts).
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Permitted Uses
a. Permitted uses of land, buildings, and structures, as hereinafter listed, shall
be permitted in the districts indicated under the conditions specified. No
building, structure, or lot shall be devoted to any use other than a use
permitted hereinafter in the zoning district in which such building,
structure, or lot shall be located, with the exception of the following:
(1) Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Ordinance.
Uses already lawfully established on the effective date of this
Ordinance and rendered nonconforming by the provisions thereof,
shall be subject to the regulations of Section XII.
(2) Special uses as allowed in each district.
b. Dwelling units are not permitted unless specifically permitted otherwise in
this Ordinance.
2. Prohibited Uses
No lot, parcel, or tract of land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be
erected, altered, or remodeled for any of the following uses: abattoirs; arsenals;
blast furnaces; coke ovens; crematories; creosote treatment or manufacture dumps
Section X
Manufacturing Districts
X 2
and slag piles; fat rendering; drop forges and forge plants; fertilizer manufacture;
fireworks or explosive manufacture or storage; dumping, reduction or other
processing of garbage; pulp or paper mills; dead animals, offal or refuse, except
as customarily incidental to a permitted principal use; foundries; ore reduction;
petroleum processing or refining; pyroxylin manufacture; manufacturing natural
or synthetic rubber; caoutchouc or gutta percha manufacture or treatment; meat
packing plants; rock excavation and crushing; salt works; sauerkraut manufacture;
soap manufacture; smelters; stock yard or slaughter of animals or fowl;
processing of fish oil, tallow or grease; lard manufacture or treatment; tanning
curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; tar distillation or manufacture; cement,
concrete or asphaltic concrete mixing plants; junk shop; junk yards or automobile
wrecking yards.
3. Bulk Requirements
Bulk requirements shall be as specified under each zoning district as described
herein, except as otherwise specifically approved for a planned unit development.
In addition, no building or structure shall be converted so as to conflict with, or
further conflict with, the bulk requirements of the district in which such building
or structure is located.
4. Yard Requirements
Yard requirements shall be as specified under each zoning district as described
herein, except as otherwise specifically approved for a planned unit development.
5. Operation Within Enclosed Buildings
Except as allowed as per Sections X.B.6, X.B.7, and X.F.2.f below, all activities
including all types of manufacturing, storage, merchandise display, business
operations, service, or maintenance, shall be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings.
6. Utilities and Mechanical Equipment
a. All utilities shall be placed underground.
b. Rooftop equipment, exclusive of flues, exhaust stacks and vents, shall be
completely screened from view from any adjacent private or public street
or from any point along the exterior property line designated as an interior
side, corner side, or front yard. Screening shall be of permanent
construction material equal to or greater in height than the object to be
screened and architecturally compatible with the principal building.
c. Ground-level mechanical equipment shall be completely screened from
view from any adjacent private or public street or from any point along the
exterior property line designated as the front, interior side, or corner side
Section X
Manufacturing Districts
3 X
yard. The screen shall be of permanent construction material
architecturally compatible with the principal building or be screened by
the use of landscape material that affords a minimum of 80 percent opacity
during the vegetation's dormant season. Minimum height of this screening
shall be at least one foot (1') higher than the object being screened.
d. Screening methods and materials to be utilized for both rooftop and
ground-level equipment shall be specified on the building permit
application required for each lot.
7. Parking and Loading
a. All drives, loading dock and berth aprons, parking areas, outside display
or storage yards, and walkways throughout the site shall be paved with
asphalt or concrete material.
b. Loading docks and berths fronting on any public or private street or
opening onto a yard which is adjacent to a residential district shall be
within completely enclosed buildings. All loading docks and berths on
lots which contain industrial or warehousing uses or activities in the RA
District shall be within completely enclosed buildings.
c. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations established in Section XI of this Ordinance.
d. Overnight parking of trucks outside of an enclosed building shall be
prohibited except as follows:
1. A maximum of eight trucks may be parked on a lot or parcel, except
that four of the trucks may not exceed a Class 2 GVWR rating (not
to exceed 10,000 pounds). All other trucks permitted to be parked
overnight shall not exceed 24,000 pounds. Said trucks shall be
parked behind the principal building unless the existing
configuration of the property precludes parking of trucks in the
rear yard in which case delivery trucks shall be parked in a
side yard behind the front wall of the principal building.
2. Overnight parking of trailers outside of an enclosed building shall be
permitted, but limited to one-half the number of total trucks parked
outside, not to exceed four trailers, each not to exceed a 5,000-pound
flat weight rating. Parking of more than four such trailers shall
require a special use (Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-18).
8. Compliance with Performance Standards
Any use established in any zoning district which involves the manufacturing,
fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing,
warehousing, shipping or testing of materials, goods, or products, shall be
operated in such a manner as to comply with applicable performance standards
Section X
Manufacturing Districts
X 4
governing noise, vibration, air pollution, toxic substances, water pollution, fire
and explosive hazards and glare established herein in general or specifically for
the district in which such use shall be located; and no use, already established on
August 1, 1995, or whenever this ordinance becomes applicable to such use due
to annexation of the property on which the use exists, whichever is later, shall be
so altered or modified as to conflict with such applicable performance standards
for the district in which such use is located.
9. Land Adjoining County Line Road
Any land which adjoins or abuts County Line Road shall have a minimum totally
green space buffer of at least 200 feet from the nearest right-of-way boundary line
of County Line Road. Also, any existing lakes, ponds, streams or creeks visible
from County Line Road shall be preserved and maintained.
10. Exterior Building Facades
All exterior building facades in the Manufacturing Districts shall be of high
quality materials that may include but are not limited to brick, natural stone,
precast stone, architectural pre-cast panels or glass. The use of plastic siding,
vinyl siding, or aluminum siding and the use of engineered stucco systems,
including but not limited to those commonly known as “Dryvit” or exterior
insulation and finish systems (EIFS) are discouraged as exterior building façade
materials for all buildings in the Manufacturing Districts. Traditional cement
based stucco may be used as an exterior building material subject to the following
restrictions:
1. The majority of a building’s façade should be brick, natural stone, pre-cast
stone, architectural pre-cast panels, or glass.
2. The first 8 feet from the top of the building’s foundation should be brick,
natural stone, pre-cast stone, or architectural pre-cast panels with the intent
of creating the appearance of a strong building foundation.
3. Stucco shall be installed as per the manufacturer’s specifications.
(paragraph 10 added by Ordinance A-834-01-12).
C. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Any use established in the manufacturing districts (or which is otherwise elsewhere in
this Ordinance required to comply with these performance standards) after August 1,
1995, or any use in any district (including but not limited to legal nonconforming uses,
regardless of when such uses were established) involving manufacturing, fabricating,
assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, warehousing, shipping or
testing of materials, goods, or products, shall be so operated as to comply with the
performance standards as set forth in Section IV.W of this Ordinance. (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-05-10)
1 X.D
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION X.D
RA RESEARCH ASSEMBLY DISTRICT
D. RA RESEARCH ASSEMBLY DISTRICT
The RA Research-Assembly District is established to provide an environment suitable for
Research-Assembly activities that require a pleasant and nuisance-free environment and
will be compatible with adjacent residential and business uses.
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Offices; business, professional, governmental or institutional; such offices
used primarily for these purposes may also include accessory fabricating,
processing, assembly, testing, storing, repairing, or servicing operations
providing that all of such accessory operations used in conjunction with
office and administrative businesses shall not occupy more than 30 percent
of the total floor area developed on the lot.
b. Medical and dental laboratories.
c. Research and Testing laboratories.
d. Schools; commercial or trade schools which are conducted entirely within
enclosed buildings.
e. Accessory uses customarily incidental to principal uses including but not
limited to off-street parking and off-street loading spaces, business signs,
and dwelling units or lodging rooms for watchmen or other personnel
engaged in occupational activities requiring residences on the premises.
2. Special Uses:
a. Heliports.
b. Import and export establishment; wholesale sales only.
c. Planned unit developments.
d. Public utility, transportation and governmental service uses.
e. School for dog trainers.
Section X.D
Research Assembly District
X.D 2
f. Training centers, engineering and sales.
g. Wholesaling establishments.
h. Yoga training studio.
i. Indoor Sales of Luxury and Exotic Automobiles (Added by Ordinance A-
834-19-11).
3. Lot Size Requirements:
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Lot
Width
a. Permitted Uses: 3 Acres 200 feet
b. Special Uses:
(1) All special uses except
those listed herein
3 Acres 200 feet
(2) Planned Unit
Developments
18 Acres As approved by
the Village
(3) Public Utility,
Transportation and
Governmental Service Uses
As approved by the Village
4. Floor Area Ratio:
Not to exceed 0.4.
5. Building Height:
Not more than 35 feet; except, in a Planned Unit Development (PUD), building
height shall be governed only by the application of the floor area ratio regulation,
provided that a building or structure over 35 feet in height shall be not nearer to
an exterior boundary of the PUD than two times the building height.
6. Yard Requirements:
a. Permitted Uses:
(1) Front Yard: 60 feet
(2) Interior Side Yard 40 feet
(3) Corner Side Yard 60 feet
(4) Rear Yard 40 feet
Section X.D
Research Assembly District
3 X.D
(5) Yards Adjacent to Residential Districts 50 feet or 150 feet as
per Section X.C.9.b
b. Special Uses
Yards shall be the same as for permitted uses, except in planned unit
developments, yards as regulated above shall be required at the exterior
boundaries of the planned unit development. Yards at other locations shall be as
specifically approved. If such yards are not provided for by specific approval,
they shall be as provided for in this district.
1 X.E
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION X.E
LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
E. LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
The LI Light Industrial District is established to accommodate limited industrial and
allied activities that are located on relatively large sites of three acres or more.
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Offices; business, professional, governmental or institutional.
b. Film production and recording studios.
c. Radio and television broadcasting studios.
d. Research and Testing laboratories.
e. Schools; commercial or trade schools which are conducted entirely within
enclosed buildings.
f. Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, testing, storing,
repairing, warehousing, shipping and servicing uses, provided that no such
use listed as a permitted or special use in the GI District will be permitted
(except for permitted use F,1,a where it would be permitted hereunder).
g. Accessory uses customarily incidental to principal uses including but not
limited to off-street parking and off-street loading spaces, business signs,
and dwelling units or lodging rooms for watchmen or other personnel
engaged in occupational activities requiring residences on the premises.
2. Special Uses:
a. Automobile Sales and Service (Amended by A-834-22-13).
b. Heliports.
c. Import and export establishment; wholesale sales only.
d. Planned unit developments.
Section X.E
LI Light Industrial District
X.E 2
e. Public utility, transportation and governmental service uses.
f. Training centers, engineering and sales.
g. Wholesaling establishments.
h. Sales and servicing of road paving equipment, provided all servicing or
repair of equipment shall be done within completely enclosed buildings.
i. Retail banking facility located in an operations center of a bank.
j. Drive-through banking facility used in conjunction with the operations
center of a bank.
k. Medical or dental clinics (but not including facilities devoted primarily to
emergency medical services) (Amended by A-834-16-07).
l. Retail uses accessory to either a permitted use or a special use in this
district (Amended by A-834-16-07).
3. Lot Size Requirements:
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Lot
Width
a. Permitted Uses: 3 Acres 200 feet
b. Special Uses:
(1) All special uses except
those listed herein
3 Acres 200 feet
(2) Planned Unit
Developments
18 Acres As approved by
the Village
(3) Public Utility,
Transportation and
Governmental Service Uses
As approved by the Village
4. Floor Area Ratio:
Not to exceed 0.4.
5. Building Height:
Not more than 35 feet; except, in a Planned Unit Development (PUD), building
height shall be governed only by the application of the floor area ratio regulation,
provided that a building or structure over 35 feet in height shall be not nearer to
an exterior boundary of the PUD than two times the building height.
Section X.E
LI Light Industrial District
3 X.E
6. Yard Requirements:
a. Permitted Uses:
(1) Front Yard: 60 feet
(2) Interior Side Yard 40 feet
(3) Corner Side Yard 60 feet
(4) Rear Yard 40 feet
(5) Yards Adjacent to Residential Districts 50 feet or 150 feet as
per Section X.C.9.b
b. Special Uses
Yards shall be the same as for permitted uses, except in planned unit
developments, yards as regulated above shall be required at the exterior
boundaries of the planned unit development. Yards at other locations shall be as
specifically approved. If such yards are not provided for by specific approval,
they shall be as provided for in this district.
1 X.F
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION X.F
GI GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
F. GI GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
The GI General Industrial District is established to accommodate a broader range of
limited industrial, business and allied activities.
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Any establishment of which the principal use is manufacturing,
fabricating, processing, assembling, disassembling, repairing, cleaning,
servicing, testing, warehousing, shipping and storing of material, products,
and goods.
b. Data processing service centers.
c. Film production and recording studios.
d. Greenhouses, including retail and wholesale sales.
e. Team Athletic Training and Practice Facilities, occupying less than 5,000
square feet of floor area, located in a permanent building with no outdoor
facilities, and not including any retail, health or fitness facilities, or other
activities that may be made available to the public. (Added by PC-10-
2003; Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-16)
f. Newspaper printing offices.
g. Offices; business, professional, governmental or institutional.
h. Pilot plants for experimentation and development of new and existing
processes and products.
i. Printing and publishing establishments.
j. Radio and television production studios.
k. Research laboratories for conducting experiments in scientific fields.
l. Schools, commercial or trade.
Section X.F
GI General Industrial District
X.F 2
m. Training center, engineering or sales.
n. Warehouses.
o. Wholesale establishments.
p. Accessory uses customarily incidental to principal uses including but not
limited to off-street parking and off-street loading spaces, business signs,
and dwelling units or lodging rooms for watchmen or other personnel
engaged in occupational activities requiring residences on the premises.
2. Special Uses:
a. Automobile and truck and equipment sales, rental and service. (Amended
by Ordinance A-834-9-01)
b. Building material sales and storage (dimension lumber, millwork, cabinets
and other building materials(s) -- including milling, planning, jointing or
manufacturing of millwork.
c. Contractor's office and shops.
d. Dwelling units for watchmen and operating personnel and their families
when the nature of operations require such personnel to reside on the
premises where they are employed.
e. Health and Wellness Clinics, including health and exercise facilities by
appointment only. (Added by Ordinance A-834-27-04; Amended by
Ordinance A-834-06-16)
f. Team Athletic Training and Practice Facilities, occupying 5,000 square
feet or more of floor area, located in a permanent building with no outdoor
facilities, and not including any retail, health or fitness facilities, or other
activities that may be made available to the public (Added by Ordinance
No. A-834-04-05; Amended by Ordinance A-834-06-16)
g. Kennel
h. Martial arts training schools. (Added by Ordinance A-834-01-04)
i. Medical Cannabis Dispensing Facility, licensed by the State of Illinois as
per the State of Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act. (Added by Ordinance A-834-37-13)
j. Medical or dental clinics but not including facilities devoted primarily to
emergency medical services. (Added by Ordinance A-834-28-11)
Section X.F
GI General Industrial District
3 X.F
k. Outside storage; provided that storage is located to the rear of the principal
building, is screened on all sides, does not exceed the height of the
screening, and is not visible from any adjacent streets or residential areas.
l. Parking lots and storage garages.
m. Planned unit developments; provided that no use shall be permitted in
such planned unit developments that is not a permitted or special use in
this or any other Manufacturing District set forth in this Ordinance.
n. Public utility, governmental service and similar uses as follows:
(1) Bus transit facilities, including shelters, passenger stations, parking
areas, and service buildings.
(2) Electric distribution centers and substations.
(3) Compressor stations, well head stations, well separator, and other
similar above-the-ground facilities customarily used for the
distribution of natural gas as a part of the operations of a natural
gas company or non-exempt operations of a public utility
company.
(4) Gas regulator stations.
(5) Public utility and governmental service establishments, other --
including offices, storing, testing, repairing and servicing.
(6) Railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations.
(7) Telephone exchanges and service buildings.
(8) Water-filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, wells, and
sewage-treatment plants and lift stations -- public or community.
o. Retail uses accessory to either a permitted use or a special use in this
district.
p. Self-service storage facilities as defined by the Illinois Self-Service
Storage Facility Act, including watchmen quarters, provided such facilities
are on a Frontage Road adjacent to a state highway; that such facilities are
of such construction materials and architectural design that their
appearance is similar to office buildings; and provided the facilities are
landscaped to project an office image.
q. Sexually Oriented Business as defined in Section XIV, B, of this
Section X.F
GI General Industrial District
X.F 4
Ordinance shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any sexually
oriented business within 1,000 feet of another such business or
within 1,000 feet of any religious institution, school, boys’ club,
girls’ club, or similar existing youth organization, or public park or
public building, or within 1,000 feet of any property zoned for
residential use or used for residential purposes. Such sexually
oriented business uses are classified as follows:
(a) adult arcade;
(b) adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video
store;
(c) adult cabaret;
(d) adult motel;
(e) adult motion picture theater;
(f) adult theater;
(g) massage parlor;
(h) sexual encounter establishment;
(i) escort agency; or
(j) nude or semi-nude model studio.
(2) This Ordinance shall be read consistently with all Sections of the
Village of Burr Ridge Liquor Ordinance, Section 25.28, which
prohibit adult entertainment where alcoholic beverages are served.
(3) The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest property line of each business property.
The distance between any sexually oriented business and any
religious institution, public or private elementary or secondary
school, boys’ club, girls’ club, or similar existing youth
organization, or public park or public building or any properties
zoned for residential use or used for residential purposes shall also
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects from the property line of the property where
the sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property
line of the premises of a religious institution, public or private
elementary or secondary school, boys’ club, girls’ club, or similar
existing youth organization, or public park or public building or
any properties zoned for residential use or used for residential
purposes. (Added by Ordinance A-834-3-97)
r. Schools, workshops, training centers for developmentally disabled
persons. (Added in August 2002)
s. Banks and financial institutions (Added August 22, 2005)
Section X.F
GI General Industrial District
5 X.F
t. Driving through facilities accessory to any permitted or special use.
(Added August 22, 2005)
u. School or training course for dog trainers. (Added in September 12, 2005)
3. Lot Size Requirements:
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Lot
Width
a. Permitted Uses: 2 Acres 150 feet
b. Special Uses:
(1) All uses except PUDs 2 Acres 150 feet
(2) Planned Unit
Developments
18 Acres As per PUD
4. Floor Area Ratio:
Not to exceed 0.4.
5. Building Height:
Not more than 35 feet; except, in a planned unit development, building height
shall be governed only by the application of the floor area ratio regulation,
provided that a building or structure over 35 feet in height shall be not nearer to
an exterior boundary of the planned unit development than two times the building
height.
6. Yard Requirements:
a. Permitted Uses:
(1) Front Yard: 40 feet
(2) Interior Side Yard 20 feet
(3) Corner Side Yard 40 feet
(4) Rear Yard 40 feet
(5) Yards Adjacent to Residential Districts 50 feet or 150 feet as
per Section X.C.9.b
b. Special Uses
Yards shall be the same as for permitted uses, except in planned unit
developments, yards as regulated above shall be required at the exterior
boundaries of the planned unit development. Yards at other locations shall be a
Section X.F
GI General Industrial District
X.F 6
specifically approved. If such yards are not provided for by specific approval,
they shall be as provided for in this district.”
1 XI
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION XI
OFF-STREET PARKING AND
OFF-STREET LOADING
A. SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
The off-street parking and off-street loading provisions of this Ordinance shall apply as
follows:
1. Accessory off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as
required by the regulations of this Section (unless specifically provided otherwise in
this Ordinance) for all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established in each district after the effective date of this Ordinance. However,
where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance,
and provided that construction is begun within six months of such effective date and
diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities in the amounts
required for the issuance of said building permit may be provided in lieu of any
different amounts required by this Ordinance.
2. When the intensity of use of any building, structure, lot, or premises shall be
increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity,
or other units of measurement as specified herein, additional parking and/or loading
facilities shall be provided in the amount required for the increased intensity of use
in accordance with the applicable standards set forth herein.
3. Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a
new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use.
However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the
amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the
existing use, if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. PERMISSIVE PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of offstreet
parking and loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, provided
that there is adherence to all regulations herein governing the location, design, and operation
of such facilities.
C. OFF-STREET PARKING
1. Existing Parking Facilities
Accessory off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of this
Ordinance and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not
hereafter be reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use under
the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Control of Off-Street Parking Facilities
In cases where parking facilities are permitted on land other than the lot on which
the building or use served is located, such facilities shall be on a lot in the possession
of the same title holder of record as the lot occupied by the building or use for which
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
XI 2
the parking facilities are accessory. A covenant running with the land must be
recorded (in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage or Cook County, Illinois,
or the Cook County Registrar of Titles, whichever is applicable) on the lot upon
which the accessory off-street parking is located, which prohibits any other use on
that lot, except as may be approved by the Village, and a certified copy of the
recorded covenant must be deposited with the Community Development Director.
The covenant shall not be released until such time as either one of the following
conditions occur:
a. The building or structure on the lot containing the principal use is removed
and the principal use terminated; or
b. Another lot of the required size within the required distance is properly
developed and used for the required accessory off-street parking in place of
and in lieu of the initial lot used for accessory off-street parking, with the
same requirements, covenants and conditions attaching to such substitute
accessory use lot as required for approval of such initial use lot.
3. Use
Accessory off-street parking facilities, as accessory to uses listed herein, shall be
solely for the parking of automobiles of patrons, occupants, or employees. Except as
otherwise permitted in the regulations for a specific district, truck parking and
storage of any vehicles is prohibited unless within a completely enclosed building or
structure. When bus transportation is provided for patrons, occupants or employees
of a specific establishment, additional open or enclosed off-street parking spaces for
each bus to be parked on the premises shall be provided in accordance with
applicable regulations for such buses herein provided for.
4. Computation
When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this
Ordinance results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or
greater shall be counted as requiring one additional parking space.
5. Collective Provision (Shared Parking)
Off-street parking facilities for separate uses (which are located on either the same or
different lots) may be provided in a shared parking area provided that the total
number of parking spaces is equal to the sum of the parking spaces required for each
use sharing the parking area, and provided that all regulations governing location of
accessory parking spaces, in relation to the use served, are adhered to.
6. Dimensions
Off-street parking areas shall conform to minimum dimensions for parking space
size and width and width of access aisles as set forth in Appendix V. Enclosed
parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
7. Access and Driveways
Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway
of a width and design in accordance with standards herein set forth in Appendix VI
and in Section IV relating to distance from lot lines. All off-street parking facilities
shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley with
the location and design of the intersection of the parking area access driveway and
the street or alley being in accordance with regulations herein set forth in Appendix
VI.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
3 XI
8. In Yards
a. Off-street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be located in required
interior side yards and rear yards subject to compliance with the landscaping
and setback requirements contained in Section XI.C.11, herein.
b. In Business Districts, parking in the front and corner side yards shall be
allowed in accordance with the specific parking regulations set forth in the
Business District regulations.
c. In no event shall parking be permitted in the Manufacturing, Office, and
Transitional Districts anywhere in front of the building, whether in the front
yard, the interior side yard, side yard adjoining the street or any buildable
area in front of the building, nor anywhere in the side yard adjoining a street.
9. Design and Maintenance
a. Open and Enclosed Parking Spaces
(1) Accessory off-street parking spaces located on the same lot as
occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or enclosed in a
building or structure.
(2) Accessory off-street parking spaces that may be permitted in a
location other than on the same lot occupied by the use shall be open
to the sky except when an off-site storage garage or parking building
or structure is approved for such required parking.
(3) Required open parking spaces in residential areas must be located in
special parking bays or in parking areas serving two (2) or more
dwelling units. Spaces provided merely in the street right-of-way
shall not be counted in determining the number of parking spaces
being provided.
b. Surfacing
(1) All open off-street parking areas and driveways for all uses except
single-family residences shall be improved with an all-weather hard
surface pavement including, at a minimum, a two inch (2”)
bituminous concrete surface course, with a twelve inch (12”)
minimum thickness aggregate base course, and six inch (6”) high
perimeter concrete curbing (Type B or Type B6:12) installed in
accordance with Illinois Department of Transportation specifications.
(2) All parking and driving areas for attached and detached single-family
residences shall be improved with an all-weather hard surface
(perimeter curbing shall not be required). (Amended by Ordinance
A-834-9-01)
c. Lighting
(1) Illumination of an off-street parking area shall be arranged so as not
to reflect direct rays of light or glare into adjacent residential districts
and streets.
(2) Intensity of illumination of parking areas shall not be less or more
than the following standards: Except as otherwise specifically
provided elsewhere in this Ordinance, parking lot lights must be no
more than 20 feet high and be limited by the following factors: an
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
XI 4
average lighting level of 1.0 foot candle with a minimum of 0.75 foot
candle; a uniformity ratio of not greater than 4-to-1, and lighting
distribution shall be provided by cut-off type fixtures. All such
parking lot lighting shall be extinguished or reduced in intensity to
not more than an average of 0.5 foot candles no later than 30 minutes
after the close of business.
(3) Amortization: Lighting for accessory off-street parking areas
regulated by this Section XI.C.9.c in existence on the effective date
of this Ordinance and which is not in compliance with this Section
XI.C.9.c, shall be regarded as non-conforming parking lot lighting.
Such non-conforming parking lot lighting may be continued for a
period of one (1) year from the effective date of this Ordinance if
properly repaired and maintained as provided herein and as provided
by other ordinances of the Village of Burr Ridge.
At the end of this one (1) year period, all such non-conforming
parking lot lighting shall thereafter comply with the requirements of
Section XI.C.9.c.
d. Repair and Service
No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in offstreet
parking areas. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any
accessory parking facilities.
10. Location
After the effective date of this Ordinance, required accessory off-street parking
spaces shall be located on the same lot as the principal building or use served, except
upon approval of a special use as per Section XIII.K, herein, authorizing all or a part
of the required off-street parking spaces to be located on a lot that does not contain
the building or use served.
Unless such permitted off-site parking spaces are shared with and located on the
same property as another use, they shall be located in a district where parking lots or
storage garages are allowable principal uses. However, off-site parking areas shall
comply with the regulations of Section XI.C.2 of this Ordinance for required
accessory parking spaces not located on the same lot as the building or use served.
11. Landscaping
All portions of a lot not parked or built upon or used for an accessory use shall be
maintained in landscaping. In addition to and exclusive of driveways and aisles,
open areas shall be provided within and around the perimeter of parking and loading
areas to accommodate trees, shrubs and other landscape materials. The dimensions
of required landscape areas shall be measured from the back of curb of the parking
area. Required landscape areas shall be provided as required herein.
a. Perimeter Landscape Areas
(1) Residential Uses - A landscape area at least 8 feet wide shall be
provided along each side of the parking area of a lot used for
multiple-family residences.
(2) Non-residential uses: Parking lot setbacks and landscape areas shall
be provided along each side of a parking area in compliance with the
following:
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
5 XI
(a) Adjacent to a residential use or property zoned for residential
use, the landscape area shall be at least 30 feet in width.
(b) The width of landscape areas between parking areas and the
front or corner side lot line shall be at least 15 feet.
(c) The setback from all other lot lines and the width of all other
landscape areas shall be at least 8 feet.
(3) Landscape Plantings - Landscape plantings shall be located within
landscaped areas as follows (except as altered by action of the Board
after receiving the recommendation of the Plan Commission):
(a) Residential Uses:
(i) No screening shall be required for parking areas
containing 4 cars or less.
(ii) Parking areas containing more than 4 cars shall be
planted with a continuous row of densely branched
deciduous or evergreen shrubs or trees. The size of
this plant material at the time of installation should be
a minimum of 3 1/2 feet in height for any shrubs and
for any trees a trunk diameter of at least 3 inches
measured 2 feet above the ground.
(b) Non-Residential Areas: The following landscaping shall be
provided for all parking areas:
(i) In Front of the Principal Building or Structure:
Permanent screening at least four (4) feet high shall
be constructed and maintained in front yard areas
adjacent to permitted side yard parking and/or
adjacent to permitted front and corner side yard
parking in the Business Districts. This screening may
consist of a planted earth berm, densely planted
evergreen shrubs or trees or a combination of both,
with such shrubs or trees to be at least the same size
as set forth above in 11.a.3.(a).(ii) hereof.
(ii) Side and Rear Yards: Permanent peripheral
screening at least five (5) feet high shall be
constructed in side and rear yards adjacent to parking
areas. This screening may consist of a planted earth
berm, densely planted evergreen shrubs or trees, or a
combination of both, with such shrubs or trees to be
at least the same size as set forth above in
11.a.3.(a).(ii) hereof.
b. Parking Lot Landscape Islands: Every parking lot in excess of fifteen
spaces shall contain planting islands for shade trees in compliance with the
following standards:
(1) There shall be one island for every 15 parking spaces and one shade
tree for each island.
(2) Each parking lot landscape island shall be a minimum of 9 feet wide
and 18 feet in length.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
XI 6
(3) Required shade trees shall have a minimum 3 inch diameter
measured two feet above ground level.
(4) Parking lot landscape islands generally shall be located at the ends of
each row of parking (one double island to be located at the end of a
double row of parking) and every 15 parking spaces within a row.
Spacing and location of parking lot landscape islands shall be carried
out as shown on Appendix VII.
c. Maintenance of Landscape Areas and Screening: All such landscaped
areas and screening shall, once installed, be maintained in such manner as to
retain at least the intended standards of the initial landscaping and to
conform to the landscaping requirements of the Village.
12. Employee Parking
Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum
number of employees on duty or residing on the premises, or both, at any one time.
13. Required Spaces
There shall be provided for each building and use hereafter erected, structurally
altered or enlarged, at least the minimum number of accessory off-street parking
spaces in accordance with the following requirements (in multi-use and/or multi-user
buildings, the number of spaces shall be computed separately on the basis of each
particular use):
a. Dwelling and Lodging
Uses:
Required Parking:
(1) Hotels and Motels One space for each lodging room or dwelling
unit plus 1/2 space for each employee.
Additional spaces shall be provided for
restaurants, retail uses, and assembly rooms as
set forth in this Section.
(2) Multiple-Family Dwellings
(including semi-detached
and attached dwelling units)
In addition to parking spaces located either
underground or in detached or attached
garages, there shall be at least two parking
spaces for each dwelling unit.
(3) Single-Family Dwellings In addition to parking spaces located either
underground or in detached or attached
garages, there shall be at least two but not more
than four parking spaces for each detached
dwelling and at least two parking spaces for a
single-family attached dwelling.
(4) Two-Family Dwellings In addition to parking spaces located either
underground or in detached or attached
garages, there shall be at least two parking
spaces for each dwelling unit.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
7 XI
b. Public and Semi-Public
Uses:
Required Parking:
(1) Free-standing Auditoriums One parking space for each 3.2 seats, or for
each 90 lineal inches of seating space in the
main auditorium or assembly hall, whichever
results in the greater number of parking spaces.
(2) Churches, Chapels,
Temples, or Synagogues
One parking space for each four seats or for
each 90 lineal inches of seating space in the
main sanctuary or meeting area, whichever
results in the greater number of parking spaces;
provided, however, the number of required
spaces may be reduced by not more than 50
percent if the place of worship is located within
500 feet of any public or commercial parking
lot where sufficient spaces are available by
permission of the owner(s) without charge
during the time of services to made up the
additional spaces required.
(3) Colleges, Junior Colleges
and Universities
For each classroom and administration
building, one parking space for each two
employees, plus one parking space for each
three students based upon the maximum
number of students for which a building is
designed to accommodate.
(4) Clubs and Lodges, Private One parking space for each lodging room and
one parking space for each four seats in the
main meeting room, in accordance with
designed seating capacity.
(5) Gymnasiums, Stadiums,
Grandstands, Meeting
Halls, Convention Halls,
and Exhibition Halls
One parking space for each 3.2 seats or for
each 90 lineal inches of seating space,
whichever results in the greater number of
parking spaces.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
XI 8
(6) Hospitals 1 parking space per bed for 100 beds or lesser
size; 1.1 parking spaces per bed for 101 to 300
beds; 1.2 parking spaces per bed for 301 to 500
beds; and 1.3 parking spaces per bed for over
500 beds.
(7) Libraries, Museums, Art
Galleries, and Aquariums
One parking space for each 500 square feet of
floor area.
(8) Sanitariums, Health
Resorts, Institutions for care
of Aged and for Children or
Nursing and Convalescent
Homes
One parking space for each three beds, plus
one parking space for each two employees.
(9) Schools, Boarding or Non-
Boarding
Parking spaces that are provided for an
auditorium, gymnasium, stadium, or
grandstand that is accessory to a school may be
used to satisfy all or a part of the following offstreet
parking requirements, provided the Plan
Commission approves the location of the
parking spaces with respect to the distance
from the school building to be served:
(a) Commercial or trade, music, dance
or business: One parking space for each two
employees, plus one space for each three
students, based on the maximum number of
students for which the building is designed to
accommodate.
(b) High School: One parking space per
six students based on maximum design
capacity of the school, or one parking space
per four seats or 90 inches of seating space in
the main auditorium or gymnasium, whichever
is greatest.
(c) Nursery, Elementary, or Junior
High: One parking space for each faculty
member and each other full-time employee.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
9 XI
c. Recreational Uses -
Commercial or Non-
Commercial
Required Parking:
(1) Bowling Alleys/ Billiard
Hall
Four parking spaces per bowling lane plus two
parking spaces per billiard table plus one
parking space per five spectator seats.
Additional parking spaces shall be required for
accessory uses such as restaurants, bars, etc. as
provided herein.
(2) Health Salons, Health
Clubs, Swimming Pools,
Skating Rinks, and Dance
Halls -- Commercial
One parking space for each three persons,
based upon the maximum number of persons
that can be accommodated at the same time in
accordance with the design capacity of the
building, and one parking space for each two
employees, or one space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is greater.
(3) Parks, Golf Courses,
Outdoor Recreation and
Indoor Recreation Uses
One parking space for each three park users,
based on maximum utilization, unless
otherwise specified. Three spaces per golf
hole, driving range tee or tennis/racquetball
court, plus one space per employee on the
largest shift. In addition, additional spaces as
specified herein shall be required for any
accessory uses such as eating establishments.
d. Business, Commercial,
and Industrial Uses:
Required Parking:
(1) Car Wash
One parking space for each employee, plus
four spaces per bay or stall, for self-service
establishments. One parking space for each
employee, plus sufficient area for 15 stacking
spaces per bay or stall for cars awaiting
washing and 5 reservoir spaces for cars after
washing, for automated establishments.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
XI 10
(2) Automobile Service
Stations
One parking space for each gasoline pump,
plus two for each service stall. Additional
parking spaces shall be required for accessory
retail uses such as a mini-mart with one
parking space for each 250 square feet of floor
area.
(3) Banks (a) Banks without drive-through facilities
shall provide one parking space for each 300
square feet of floor area.
(b) Banks with drive-through facilities shall
provide one parking space for each 300 square
feet of floor area. In addition, for each driveup
window there shall be sufficient stacking
room for three cars, and a bypass lane shall be
provided. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-15-
13).
(4) Beauty Parlors/ Barber
Shops
One parking space for each 200 square feet of
floor area.
(5) Retail Goods and/or Service
Businesses - Those Not
Specifically Identified
Herein
One parking space for each 250 square feet of
floor area.
(6) Professional Office Uses –
Those Not Specifically
Identified Herein
One parking space per 250 square feet of floor
area. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-9-01)
(7) Restaurants - Not Including
Drive-In Establishments
One parking space for each 100 square feet of
floor area plus one space per employees.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
11 XI
(8) Restaurants - Drive-In Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall
provide 14 parking spaces for each 1,000
square feet of floor area plus 11 stacking
spaces for the drive-in window (per window)
with a minimum of five such spaces designated
for the ordering station. The spaces shall be so
designed so as not to impede pedestrian and
vehicular circulation on the site or on any
adjacent sidewalk or street.
(9) Furniture and Appliance
Stores, Motor Vehicle Sales
Establishments, and
Establishments for Repair
of Household Equipment or
Furniture
One parking space for each 400 square feet of
floor area.
(10) Medical and Dental
Clinics or Offices of
Physicians
Six parking spaces for each doctor or dentist.
(11) Manufacturing,
Fabricating, Processing,
Storing, Cleaning,
Testing, Assembling,
Repairing, or Servicing
establishments
Two parking spaces for each three employees
based upon maximum number of employees
that can be accommodated in accordance with
Building Code regulations.
(12) Movie Theaters
Amended Ordinance A-834-7-97
One parking space for each 2 1/2 seats plus one
parking space for each employee.
(13) Undertaking
Establishments and
Funeral Parlors
One parking space for each 100 square feet of
floor area.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
XI 12
(14) Warehouse, Storage,
Wholesale and Mail
Order Establishments
Four parking spaces plus one parking space for
each 1,500 square feet of floor space over
4,500 square feet or when the number of
employees is specifically indicated, two
parking spaces for each three employees
employed on the premises.
(15) Public Utility and
Public Service Uses
Two parking spaces for each three employees.
(16) Other Uses Parking spaces for other permitted or special
uses not listed above shall be provided in
accordance with requirements approved by the
Plan Commission and authorized by the Board
of Trustees.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
13 XI
14. Required Accessible Spaces
There shall be provided for each building, structure, and use hereafter erected,
structurally altered or enlarged, at least the minimum number of accessible parking
spaces in accordance with the following requirements:
Total Off-Street
Parking Spaces Required
Minimum Number of Accessible
Parking Spaces Required
1 to 20 1
21 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total number
Over 1, 000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
Each parking space shall be at least sixteen feet wide, including an eight foot wide
access aisle, and adjacent parking spaces shall not share a common access aisle.
All access aisles shall be diagonally striped.
D. OFF-STREET LOADING
There shall be provided off-street loading berths (not merely service entrances or doors) not
less than the minimum requirements specified in this Section in connection with any
building or structure which is to be erected or substantially altered and which requires the
receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles. Off-street
loading berths shall not be used for parking and/or storage of trucks or any vehicles but shall
be used solely for loading and unloading of goods and materials.
1. Location
a. Accessory off-street loading berths shall be on the same lot as the principal
use and they shall not be located thereon in a front yard or side yard
adjoining a street.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
XI 14
b. Open on-street loading berths may not be located in any yard adjoining a
residential district.
c. Open off-street loading berths located in an interior side yard or rear yard
shall be not less than 30 feet from an adjoining right-of-way line of an
interstate route and such off-street loading berths shall be effectively
screened therefrom by a wall or fence, of an approved architectural design,
not less than six feet or more than eight feet in height, or a densely planted
tree or shrub hedge as approved by the Village and maintained to not less
than six feet in height.
d. All loading berths in yards adjoining a residential district must be enclosed.
Doorways for vehicular ingress and egress of enclosed off-street loading
berths may be in a building wall that faces a lot line adjoining a street.
e. Off-street loading and unloading activities and parking spaces for trucks in
buildings with enclosed loading berths shall be entirely within the building.
2. Size
Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, a required off-street loading berth shall
be at least twelve feet in width by at least 50 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
3. Access
Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement. Access drives and intersection of driveways with streets shall be in
accordance with regulations herein set forth in Appendix VI.
4. Surfacing
All open off-street loading berths, access drives, aisles, and maneuvering spaces
shall be improved with an all-weather hard surface pavement including, at a
minimum, a two inch (2") bituminous concrete surface course, with a twelve inch
(12") minimum thickness aggregate base course, and six inch (6") high perimeter
concrete curbing (Type B or Type B6:12) installed in accordance with Illinois
Department of Transportation specifications.
5. Repair and Service
No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be
permitted within any required loading berth.
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
15 XI
6. Space Allowed
Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used
to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions
thereof.
7. Off-Street Loading Space Requirements
There shall be provided for each building and use hereafter erected, structurally
altered or enlarged, at least the minimum number of off-street loading facilities in
accordance with the following requirements:
Residential Uses: Required Loading:
a. Single-Family Dwellings None Required
b. Multiple-Family Dwellings in
buildings with 10,000 to 100,000
square feet of gross floor area
One Loading Berth
c. Multiple-Family Dwellings in
buildings with more than 100,000
square feet of gross floor area
One Loading Berth; plus one
additional loading berth for each
100,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof, over the first 100,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Commercial Uses: Required Loading:
d. Hotels; exceeding 100,000 square
feet of gross floor area
One Loading Berth
e. Retail Stores or Stores in a Single
Building; with 10,000 to 60,000
square feet of gross floor area
One Loading Berth
f. Retail Stores; with 60,001 to
100,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Two Loading Berths
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
XI 16
g. Retail Stores; exceeding 100,000
square feet of gross floor area
Three Loading Berths
h. Personal Service Establishments
exceeding 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area
One Loading Berth
i. Restaurants; exceeding 10,000
square feet of gross floor area
One Loading Berth
Office Uses: Required Loading:
j. Offices and Financial Institutions
with 80,000 to 100,00 square feet
of gross floor area
One Loading Berth
k. Offices and Financial Institutions
with 100,001 to 500,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Two Loading Berths
l. Offices and Financial Institutions
exceeding 500,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Two Loading Berths; plus an
additional loading berth for each
500,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof, over the first 500,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Industrial Uses: Required Loading:
m. Industrial, Research,
Manufacturing, and Warehouse
with 6,000 to 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area
One Loading Berth
n. Industrial, Research,
Manufacturing, and Warehouse
with 10,001 to 40,000 square feet
of gross floor area
Two Loading Berths
Section XI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
17 XI
o. Industrial, Research,
Manufacturing, and Warehouse
with 40,001 to 100,000 square feet
of gross floor area
Three Loading Berths
p. Industrial, Research,
Manufacturing, and Warehouse
exceeding 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Three Loading Berths; plus an
additional loading berth for each
100,000 square feet of gross floor
area, or fraction thereof, over the first
100,000 square feet
Non-Listed Uses: Required Loading:
q. All other Uses; with 10,000 to
60,000 square feet of gross floor
area
One Loading Berth
r. All other Uses; with 60,001 to
100,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Two Loading Berths
s. All other Uses; exceeding 100,000
square feet of gross floor area
Two Loading Berths; plus an
additional loading berth for each
200,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof, over the first 100,000 square
feet of gross floor area
All Uses: Required Loading:
t. Uses listed herein for which
loading berths are required but
which are located in buildings of
less floor area than the minimum
prescribed
Off-street loading shall be
accommodated within parking areas
or service drives in a manner that does
not interfere with emergency access,
pedestrian or vehicular circulation,
and is not within a required front or
corner side yard. Such loading
facilities shall be subject to the
approval of the Community
Development Director
1 XII
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION XII
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES AND USES
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the regulation of legal nonconforming uses,
buildings, and structures, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which
those nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses shall be gradually eliminated upon
reaching the end of their respective normal useful life or upon their discontinuance or
partial or total destruction, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under
which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall be permitted to continue
until such time as they are eliminated in accordance with the authority granted by Illinois
law.
Any uses, buildings, or structures which did not conform with all applicable codes of the
public entity having jurisdiction (i.e. County or Village) at the time they were built or the
use of the land established, are considered illegal nonconforming uses and must be abated
unless otherwise allowed by special use approval as per Section XII.F of this Ordinance.
The regulations contained in this Section purposefully distinguish between different types
of nonconformances. There are two general classes of nonconformance of concern to the
Village: (1) nonconformance as to use, and (2) nonconformance as to bulk.
1. Nonconformance as to Use
A use not listed as a permitted use, or otherwise made allowable by special or
conditional use permit, within the zoning district in which it is located is
considered nonconforming as to use. Nonconforming uses can exist in buildings
or structures designed or intended for such nonconforming use. Alternatively,
they can exist in buildings or structures not designed for such uses but rather in
buildings or structures intended for uses permitted in the applicable zoning
district. It is the intent of these provisions to distinguish between those two types
of use nonconformance.
2. Nonconformance as to Bulk
A building or structure conforming in terms of use but not meeting the standards
established for bulk and yard requirements in the zoning district in which they are
located represent nonconformance as to bulk. This can occur in one of two ways:
it either complied with the bulk regulations of the Village when constructed but
those regulations have been subsequently amended in a manner causing the
nonconformance, or it was located in an unincorporated area and complied with
Section XII
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses
XII 2
all county bulk regulations and since then was annexed to the Village which had
different bulk regulations causing the nonconformance. It is the intent of these
provisions to keep this type of nonconformance from further divergence from the
bulk regulations established in the zoning district in which it is located and to
eventually eliminate them.
B. AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES, AND USES
Any nonconforming building, structure, or use which existed lawfully at the time of the
adoption of this Ordinance, and any such building, structure, or use which shall become
nonconforming upon the adoption of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendments
thereto, or which lawfully existed in an unincorporated area and became nonconforming
upon annexation to the Village may be continued subject to the regulations which follow.
C. RESTRICTIONS ON NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND
USES
Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located may be continued, subject to the provision of this
Section XII.C.
1. Repairs and Alterations
a. Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Nonconforming Use.
Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or
structure designed or intended for a nonconforming use, provided that no
structural alterations which increase the bulk of the building or structure
shall be made in or to a building or structure, except those required by law
or except to make the building or structure, and/or the use thereof,
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. For the
purpose of this Section, repairs shall include the replacement of storage
tanks where the safety of operation of the installation requires such
replacement, and other replacements of, or substitutions for, machinery or
equipment not involving structural alterations to the building or structure,
except as herein above provided.
b. Building or Structure Designed or Intended and Used for a Permitted
Use. Repairs, alterations and structural changes may be made to a
building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed, intended
and actually being used for a use permitted in the district in which is
located but which is nonconforming as to bulk, provided, however, that
such repairs, alterations or structural changes conform to the regulations of
the district in which such building or structure is located and further
provided they do not increase the degree of nonconformance with the bulk
regulations of said district.
Section XII
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and Uses
3 XII
c. Building or Structure Designed for But Not Used for a Permitted Use.
Repairs, alterations, and structural changes may be made to a
nonconforming (as to bulk) building or structure, all or substantially all of
which is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it
is located even though the actual use of such building or structure is not
permitted in such district, provided said repairs, alterations, or structural
changes conform to the regulations of the district in which said building or
structure is located.
2. Additions and Enlargements
A nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming as to bulk, and is
designed or intended for a permitted use, shall not be added to or enlarged in any
manner unless such additions or enlargements thereto are made to conform to all
of the yard regulations of the district in which it is located. A nonconforming
building or structure which is nonconforming as to actual use shall not be added
to or enlarged in any manner.
3. Relocation of Building or Structure
No building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location
on the same or any other lot unless every portion of such building or structure
which is moved, and the use thereof, is made to conform to all of the regulations
of the district in which it is to be located.
4. Restoration of Damaged Building or Structure Designed or Intended for
Nonconforming Use
a. A nonconforming building or structure which is destroyed shall not be
rebuilt unless the new building or structure conforms to all of the
regulations (including permitted uses thereof) of the district in which it is
located; provided, however, if such building or structure was
nonconforming only as to bulk regulations, it may be rebuilt in the same
location provided that the degree of nonconformance is not increased and
further provided that it is determined by Village Board action that there
exists no reasonable alternative location which would eliminate or
substantially reduce the degree of nonconformance.
b. A nonconforming building or structure, except those identified by Village
Board action as being of historic significance, which is damaged by fire or
other casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost of restoration to the
condition it was in before the occurrence shall exceed 50 per cent of what
it would cost to rebuild the entire building or structure shall not be
restored unless said building or structure, and the use thereof, shall
conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Section XII
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses
XII 4
c. In the event such damage is less than 50 percent of the cost of rebuilding
the entire building or structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made
unless such restoration is started within sixty (60) days from the date of
partial destruction and completion accomplished within one year from the
date of partial damage.
If the restoration is not started within sixty (60) days of official notice by
the Community Development Director and diligently prosecuted to
completion, the building or structure shall be removed and the area
cleared. However, any building or structure designated by the Village
Board as being historically significant shall be allowed one year to start
restoration.
5. Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use
If the nonconforming use of a building, structure, or land is discontinued for a
continuous period of six (6) months, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent
use of the building, structure, or land shall conform to the use regulations of the
district in which such building, structure, or land is located.
6. Expansion of Nonconforming Use
a. Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a onconforming Use.
The nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, all of which is
designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall not be expanded or extended throughout the building or
structure in which said use is presently located, nor changed to any other
nonconforming use.
b. Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Permitted Use. The
nonconforming use of part of a building or structure, all or substantially all
of which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted
in the district in which it is located, shall not be expanded or extend into
any other portion of such building or structure nor changed to any other
nonconforming use.
c. Land. The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or
structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be
expanded or extended beyond the area it occupies.
7. Change of Nonconforming Use
a. Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Nonconforming Use.
The nonconforming use of part or all of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, may not be changed to another
Section XII
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and Uses
5 XII
nonconforming use.
b. Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Permitted Use. No
nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use when
such nonconforming use is located in a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for
a permitted use.
c. Land. The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or
structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be
changed to any other use, except to a use permitted in the district in which
the land is located.
D. ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
In all Residence Districts, any building or structure, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use allowed only in a non-residential district, and any building
or structure which is located in a non-residential district and which is designed or
intended for a use allowed only in another non-residential (or residential) district shall be
removed or shall be altered, remodeled or converted for a permitted use within six (6)
months after the amortization period of such building or structure, which is hereby
established as set forth below:
1. Assessed Valuation* More than $50,000
In accordance with the types of construction classification set forth in the
Building Code of the Village of Burr Ridge, Illinois.
a. Fireproof Construction and Non-Combustible Construction -- 40
years from date of original building permit or ten (10) years following
annexation into the Village of the property on which the nonconforming
building or structure is located or July 1, 2001 -- whichever last occurs.
b. Exterior Masonry Wall Construction -- 30 years from date of
original building permit or ten (10) years following annexation into the
Village of the property on which the nonconforming building or structure
is located or July 1, 1997 -- whichever last occurs.
2. Assessed Valuation* Not Less than $10,000 But Not More than $50,000
Eight years from date of original building permit or July 1, 1995 -- whichever last
occurs.
Section XII
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses
XII 6
3. Assessed Valuation* Less than $10,000
Four years from date of original building permit or July 1, 1995 -- whichever last
occurs.
*Note: Assessed valuations referred to in (1), (2), and (3) above are the
unequalized assessed valuations as determined by DuPage or Cook County,
Illinois, as most recently determined.
E. ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES
This Section is intended to gradually eliminate inappropriate uses of buildings or
structures designed or intended for uses allowed within the district in which it is located.
1. In all Business and Transitional Districts any use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in a
Business or Transitional District, but is being used for a use permitted only in a
Residential, Office or Manufacturing District, shall be terminated by July 1, 2006.
2. In all Manufacturing Districts any use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in a
Manufacturing District but is being used for a use permitted only in a Residential,
Office, Business or Transitional District, shall be terminated by July 1, 2006.
3. The nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued and cease by January 1,
1997 in each of the following cases:
a. Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with such
use.
b. When the only buildings or structures or other physical improvements are
accessory or incidental to such use.
4. A nonconforming use of land which is accessory to the nonconforming use of a
building or structure shall be discontinued on the same date the nonconforming
use of the building or structure is discontinued.
5. Improvements underground or substantially at ground level, which comprise all or
substantially all of the improvements employed in a nonconforming use of land,
which have a current unequalized assessed value in excess of $5,000 shall be
deemed a nonconforming structure and shall be subject to the applicable
provisions of this Section.
Section XII
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and Uses
7 XII
F. SPECIAL USE PROVISION FOR ELIMINATION OF NON-CONFORMING
USES
1. Legal and Illegal Non-conforming Use Distinguished
For the purposes of this section only, any non-conforming use in existence on the
effective date of this Ordinance or upon annexation to the Village of the property
on which the use exists subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance, is a
legal non-conforming use only if, in the opinion of the Community Development
Director, the use was permitted at the time the use came into existence under the
then applicable Village or County zoning ordinance use restrictions. All other
non-conforming uses in existence on the effective date of this ordinance are
hereby deemed illegal.
The Community Development Director shall make the determination of whether a
non-conforming use in existence at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance
is legal or illegal, as defined herein, upon review of any evidence pertaining to
prior use and prior zoning ordinance use restrictions which is submitted by the
owner of the property (or his or her designee). The sole remedy to appeal such a
decision is to seek a special use permit as provided for in Section XII.F.2 of this
Ordinance.
2. Illegal Non-Conformance with Use Standards Adjacent to Residential Uses.
Any use, permitted or non-conforming, shall become subject to and be brought
into compliance with the performance standards of this Ordinance upon
annexation into the Village of Burr Ridge. It is the purpose and intent of these
provisions of this Ordinance, to bring those uses which are non-conforming under
the performance standards of this Ordinance, for manufacturing and industrialtype
uses in any district involving manufacturing, fabricating, assembly,
disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, warehousing, shipping,
delivery, loading and/or unloading of goods, or testing of materials, goods or
products, which are adjacent to or within 500 feet of any residential use(s), into
immediate compliance with such performance standards. A grace period of up to
nine (9) months to achieve compliance with a particular performance standard(s)
may be allowed upon a showing by the property owner that compliance with a
particular use/performance standard will require substantial expenditures, or
additional time, to achieve the retrofitting, modifications or adjustments to
vehicles, equipment, machinery, plantings, or construction required to comply
with the particular use/performance standard(s).
A property owner seeking additional time to comply with the performance
standards of this Ordinance shall make a showing of such need to the Community
Development Director, who is then authorized to determine whether the property
owner has demonstrated the need for the grace period set forth herein. The
property owner may pursue an appeal of such determination as provided under
Section XII
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses
XII 8
Section XIII.I of this Ordinance. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-5-10)
3. Special Use Option
The owner or occupier of an illegal non-conforming use in existence on the
effective date of this Ordinance may apply for a special use permit in accordance
with Section XIII of this Ordinance. Upon receipt of such an application, the
Board of Trustees, upon recommendation from the Plan Commission, may grant
special use approval, subject to such conditions as the Board of Trustees finds
necessary for compliance with the special use standards set forth in Section XIII
of this Ordinance.
1 XIII
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION XIII
ADMINISTRATION
A. ORGANIZATION
The primary administration of this Ordinance is hereby vested in five (5) entities of the
government of the Village of Burr Ridge as follows:
1. Community Development Director,
2. Plan Commission,
3. Zoning Board of Appeals, and
4. Village Board of Trustees.
This section shall first set out the authority of each of the above offices, and then describe
the procedure and substantive standards with respect to the following administrative
functions:
1. Issuance of zoning certificates,
2. Issuance of zoning occupancy certificates,
3. Variations,
4. Appeals,
5. Amendments,
6. Special uses,
7. Planned unit developments.
B. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Community Development Director shall be that
person or persons designated by the Village Board of Trustees as the head of the
Community Development Department. The duties are as follows:
1. Enforcement Powers
a. Issue all zoning certificates and maintain records thereof.
b. Issue all zoning certificates of use and occupancy and maintain records
thereof.
c. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and use of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this Ordinance.
d. Issue violation notices requiring compliance and advising suspected violators
of their right to appeal; to issue citations for violations of this Ordinance; and
to designate enforcement officers with the same authority. (Amended by
Ordinance No. A-834-03-05)
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 2
e. Require that all construction or work of any type be stopped when such work
is not in compliance with this Ordinance; and revoke any permit which was
unlawfully issued.
f. Enforce all orders of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Administrative Duties
a. Supervises all activities regarding planning and zoning and coordinates the
consideration by the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and
Village Board of Trustees of all documents, applications, site plans, planned
unit developments and other matters as specified in this Ordinance.
b. Receives, reviews and forwards all applications for variations and all appeals
to the Zoning Board of Appeals for consideration.
c. Receives, reviews and forwards all applications for amendments, special
uses and planned unit developments to the Plan Commission for
consideration.
d. Conducts all pre-application conferences as set forth in this section.
e. Conducts plan reviews and coordinates the preparation of technical reports to
the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Village Board of
Trustees.
C. THE PLAN COMMISSION
1. Creation
The Plan Commission for the Village of Burr Ridge, as originally created by
Ordinance No. 66 and as revised in Article 1 of Chapter 3 of the Burr Ridge
Municipal Code, is the Plan Commission referred to in this Ordinance.
2. Jurisdiction
The Plan Commission shall discharge the following duties under this Ordinance (as
well as any other duties assigned to the Commission under the terms of this
Ordinance or by direction of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village):
a. Review all applications for amendments to this ordinance (text or map), hold
hearings thereon, and report findings and recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees in the manner prescribed herein.
b. Review all applications for special uses, hold hearings thereon, and report
findings and recommend action to the Village Board of Trustees as
prescribed herein.
c. Coordinate the enforcement of this Ordinance with the Official
Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Burr Ridge as amended from time to
time.
d. To hear and report to the Village Board of Trustees, with recommendation,
those matters not treated above, which the Village Board of Trustees has
referred to it.
Section XIII
Administration
3 XIII
D. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
1. Creation
a. The Plan Commission for the Village of Burr Ridge is hereby established as
the Zoning Board of Appeals and the members of such Commission shall
constitute the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals (with the exception
that the Alternate Member of the Plan Commission shall not be a member of
the Zoning Board of Appeals) under this Ordinance and under Chapter 3 of
the Burr Ridge Municipal Code. Said Commission shall consist of seven
members with staggered terms of five years each so that only one term of
office expires each year. The successor to each member so appointed shall
serve for a term of five years.
b. All appointments to the Zoning Board of Appeals (Plan Commission) shall
be made by the Village President, subject to the approval of the Village
Board of Trustees.
One of the members so appointed shall be named as Chairman at the time of
appointment. The Village President, subject to approval by the Village
Board of Trustees, shall have the power to remove, after a public hearing,
any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals (Plan Commission) for cause.
Vacancies shall be filled as soon as possible for the unexpired term of any
member whose office has become vacant. In the event that the office of
Chairman is vacant for any reason, the Village President shall immediately
appoint at his option, either one of the remaining members on the Board, or
any member who is appointed to fill such vacancy on the Board as the new
Chairman. Such appointment shall be subject to the approval of the Village
Board of Trustees at its next scheduled meeting.
c. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals (Plan Commission) shall be
held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may
determine. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this
Zoning Ordinance shall be given under oath. The Chairman, or in his
absence the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public at which time every person has the right to be heard or to be
represented by a duly authorized agent or attorney. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also
keep records of its examinations and other official actions. In every case the
Board shall include in its official report the reasons a request for a variation
is denied. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and
every order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be of public
record.
d. The concurring vote of four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals (Plan
Commission) shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision,
or determination of the Community Development Director or to recommend
in favor of the application on any matter which it is authorized by this
Ordinance to render a recommendation, or to recommend any variation or
modification in the ordinance to the corporate authorities of the Village.
2. Jurisdiction
a. To review and decide on appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Community Development Director under this
Ordinance.
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 4
b. To hear and make recommendations, including findings of fact, to the
Village Board of Trustees upon applications for variations from the terms of
this Ordinance in the manner prescribed by and subject to the standards
established herein.
c. To hear and report to the Village Board of Trustees, with recommendation,
those matters not treated above which the Village Board of Trustees has
referred to it.
E. THE VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1. Creation
The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Burr Ridge, hereinafter referred to as
the "Village Board" or "Board of Trustees," as established in accordance with the
Statutes of the State of Illinois, is the Village Board of Trustees referred to in this
Ordinance.
2. Jurisdiction
The Village Board of Trustees shall discharge the following duties under this
Ordinance:
a. Receive from the Plan Commission, and approve (with or without
modifications) or disapprove, all proposed amendments (both text
amendments and rezonings) and special uses and/or return the matter to the
Plan Commission for further consideration.
b. Receive from the Zoning Board of Appeals and approve (with or without
modifications) or disapprove, all proposed variations from this Ordinance
and/or return the matter to the Zoning Board of Appeals for further
consideration.
c. Any other duties required by this Ordinance or state law.
d. The provisions of this Section XIII.E.2 shall not be interpreted to prevent the
Board of Trustees from executing any power it may have.
F. ZONING CERTIFICATES
1. Certificate Required
Except as hereinafter provided, no permit, including a building permit, pertaining to
the use of land, buildings, or structures shall be issued by an officer, department, or
employee unless the application for such permit has been examined by the
Community Development Director or his duly appointed representative, and he has
issued a Zoning Certificate indicating that the proposed building, structure or use
complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance. Any permit or certificate issued
in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and void, specifically
including, but not limited to, any building permit for any building, structure, or use
which is not allowed in the zoning district in which it is located or, if allowed as a
special use, then where no special use has been granted for it.
2. Plans and Drawings
Every application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by:
a. A site plan of the piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks, or parts or
portions thereof, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the piece
Section XIII
Administration
5 XIII
or parcel, lot, lots, block or blocks, or portions thereof, according to the
registered or recorded plat of such land; and
b. Additional drawings drawn to a scale in such form as may, from time to
time, be prescribed by the Community Development Director showing the
ground area, height, and bulk of the building or structure, the building lines
in relation to lot lines, the use to be made of the building, structure, or land,
the number of dwelling units and number of bedrooms in such dwelling
units, and such other information as may be required by the Community
Development Director for the proper enforcement of this Ordinance.
c. The Community Development Director may, in those cases where in his
judgment it is necessary, require certification of said site plan by a registered
or licensed professional engineer, registered or licensed architect, or
registered or licensed land surveyor.
3. Compliance with Performance Standards
An application for a zoning certificate for a building or structure (or portion thereof)
and use which requires compliance with the Performance Standards as herein set
forth in the general regulations of the Manufacturing Districts shall have affixed to it
the certification of a professional engineer, licensed by the State of Illinois, and who
is qualified to review the engineering aspects of the various performance standards
regulations. Such certification shall state that the building or structure (or portion
thereof) and the operation of the use thereof, or the use of land when no building or
structure is involved, complies with all provisions of this Ordinance pertaining to
such Performance Standards.
4. Issuance of Certificate
The Community Development Director shall, upon receipt of such application,
approve and authorize the issuance of a zoning certificate, provided there is
compliance with all other relevant provisions of this Ordinance. The issuance of a
zoning certificate shall not relieve the applicant and owner from fully complying
with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance unless the Board of Trustees
approves a variation therefrom by separate ordinance. Final compliance shall be
determined at the time of application for a certificate of occupancy.
G. ZONING CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
1. When Required
No land, building or structure shall be occupied or used until and unless a Zoning
Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the Community Development Director in
accordance with the requirements of this Section XIII.G.
a. Existing Uses: Within nine (9) months of the effective date of this
Ordinance, no person shall continue to use or occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy, of any non-residential use, building or structure in existence at
the time of the effective date of this Ordinance without first obtaining a
Zoning Certificate of Occupancy as provided for herein.
b. Change in Use, Occupancy, Ownership: Upon the effective date of this
Ordinance, no person shall change the use, occupancy or ownership, or
permit the change in use, occupancy or ownership, of any non-residential
use, building or structure, without first obtaining a Zoning Certificate of
Occupancy as provided for herein. A "change in use" shall include, but not
be limited to, any change where the business entity becomes a new business
entity even though the zoning use is the same (e.g., if "X Cleaners" becomes
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 6
"Y Cleaners", and takes over this same space, whether by lease, purchase, or
any other means, this shall constitute a "change of use" requiring a new
Zoning Certificate of Occupancy).
For purposes of this section, "change" of "ownership" shall refer to the
conveyance of any real property interest involving the transfer of title,
equitable title, beneficial interest, or leasehold interest, or in the case of nonreal
property "changes" for a corporation, trust, partnership, sole
proprietorship, or other business form, the transfer (by sale, gift, exchange,
assignment or any other transfer of any kind) of an interest (e.g., shares or
beneficial interest) representing more than 25% of the business or more than
25% of the assets of any such business.
c. New Construction: No person shall occupy or use, or permit the occupancy
or use, of any building, or portion thereof, constructed after the effective date
of this ordinance, nor use any land, vacant on the effective date of this
Ordinance, for any purpose (including but not limited to customer parking)
without first obtaining a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy. Zoning
Certificates of Occupancy for sexually oriented businesses as defined in
Chapter 9 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code, shall only be issued after the
applicant has complied with all requirements for occupancy as specified in
said Chapter 9 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code. (Amended by Ordinance
A-834-3-97)
2. Requirements
The Community Development Director shall issue Zoning Certificates of
Occupancy, as required herein, only upon a finding of compliance with the
following:
a. The regulations of this Ordinance pertaining to parking and loading, and
permitted uses; and
b. The decisions, conditions or special requirements resulting from the granting
of special use permits, or the applicable terms of any lawfully existing
annexation agreement affecting the construction of buildings and/or
structures on and the use of property.
3. Application
Every application for a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy, as required herein, shall be
made directly to the Community Development Director on forms provided for by the
Community Development Director.
4. Issuance
The Community Development Director shall review all applications for a Zoning
Certificate of Occupancy and within a reasonable period from the application date,
shall either issue a Zoning Certificate of Occupancy or deny such an application in a
writing that sets forth the reasons why the Certificate cannot be issued.
H. VARIATIONS
1. Purpose
The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend variations from the regulations of
this Ordinance to the Village Board of Trustees under the standards set forth below.
Such variations shall be considered only in specific instances hereinafter set forth,
and where the Zoning Board of Appeals holds a public hearing and makes findings
of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed.
Section XIII
Administration
7 XIII
2. Application and Notice of Hearing
a. An application for a variation may be made by any governmental office,
department, board, bureau, or commission or by any person, firm, or
corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to
exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold
interest, an option to purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest
applicable to the land or land and improvements described in the application
for a variation.
b. An application for a variation shall be filed with the Community
Development Director, who shall forward such application to the Zoning
Board of Appeals for processing.
c. Notice of all public hearings conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
wherein an application for a variation is to be considered shall be published
at least once not more than thirty nor less than fifteen days before said
hearing in one or more newspapers published within the Village or, if no
newspaper is published within the Village, then in a newspaper(s) with a
general circulation within the Village of Burr Ridge as required by law.
3. Standards for Variations
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend variations from the regulations
of this Ordinance unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to
it in each specific case that:
a. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the
owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict
letter of the regulations were to be carried out.
b. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be
used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing the
zoning district in which it is located.
c. The conditions upon which an application for a variation is based are unique
to the property for which the variance is sought, and are not applicable,
generally, to other property within the same zoning classification.
d. The purpose of the variation is not based primarily upon a desire to increase
financial gain.
e. The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this Ordinance and has not
been created by any persons presently having an interest in the property.
f. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which
the property is located.
g. The granting of the variation will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood or locality.
h. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property or substantially increase the congestion of the public
streets, or increase the danger of fire, or impair natural drainage or create
drainage problems on adjacent properties, or endanger the public safety, or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 8
i. The proposed variation is consistent with the official Comprehensive Plan of
the Village of Burr Ridge and other development codes of the Village.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the Village Board of
Trustees may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises
benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards
established in this section and the objectives of this Ordinance.
4. List of Variations
Variations from the regulations of this Ordinance which meet the standards
established above, may be recommended by the Zoning Board of Appeals and
granted by the Village Board of Trustees only in the instances described herein and
in no others. The listing of the following variations does not in any way obligate the
Village of Burr Ridge to approve such variations. Each variation requested must
meet the standards for variations contained herein:
a. To permit any yard or setback to be less than the setback or yard required by
the applicable regulations.
b. To permit a modification to the area, width, or shape of a lot or lots.
c. To permit a modification to the parking and loading regulations including
but not limited to parking variations whereby land is set aside to accomodate
future increases in parking demand (i.e. land banking of parking).
d. To reduce the land area required for use of the planned unit development
provisions of this Ordinance from that amount required in each zoning
district.
e. To increase the maximum gross floor area of any use so limited by
applicable district regulations.
f. To increase the maximum allowable building height of any use in any
district.
g. To permit outside storage in a manufacturing district.
h. To permit modifications to the regulations for accessory buildings,
structures, and uses including but not limited to fences, sheds, and pools.
Recommendations for approval, approval with conditions or disapproval shall be
referred to the Village Board, incorporating the Zoning Board of Appeals findings of
fact for final action.
The Village Board of Trustees may authorize applications for variations other than
those listed above. In such cases, the Village Board of Trustees must direct the
Zoning Board of Appeals to hear the variation request, hold a public hearing and
submit recommendations. Provided, however, in no event shall a specific use be
permitted by variation which otherwise would not have been allowed.
5. Revocation
Where a variation has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance,
such approval shall become null and void unless work thereon is substantially under
way within 12 months of the date of issuance, unless extended by the Village Board
of Trustees.
Section XIII
Administration
9 XIII
I. APPEALS
1. Authority
An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals from any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Community Development
Director or by any person aggrieved by action taken under the regulations of this
Ordinance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review and make a final ruling on
the appeal.
2. Initiation
An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any person, firm or
corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau, or commission (including
any of the Village), aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision or
determination under this Ordinance by the Community Development Director or
other authorized official of the Village of Burr Ridge. For purposes of this Section,
an aggrieved person shall include any person who is in opposition to the original
decision.
3. Processing
An appeal shall be filed with the Community Development Director, with a copy to
any other authorized official of the Village of Burr Ridge involved in the matter
being appealed. The Community Development Director shall forward such appeal,
including all papers from any other authorized official which constitute the record
upon which the appeal action is taken, to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the review of the appeal
and shall give due notice thereof to the party filing the appeal and to the Community
Development Director.
4. Stay of Proceedings
Once an appeal is taken, such appeal shall stay all proceedings and all construction
or development which is the object of the appeal, unless the Community
Development Director certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril, and in that
event, the specific directions of the Community Development Director shall be
followed until the appeal has been finally decided.
5. Decisions
All decisions by the Zoning Board of Appeals, after its deliberation, from any order,
requirement, decision, or determination relating to this Ordinance made by the
Community Development Director shall in all instances be final administrative
determinations.
J. AMENDMENTS
1. Authority - Declaration of Public Policy
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare,
conserving the value of property throughout the community, and lessening or
avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways, the Village Board of
Trustees may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the
regulations imposed in the districts created by this Ordinance or amend district
boundary lines, including rezoning or reclassifying specific property, provided that
in all amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this Section, due
allowances shall be made for existing conditions, the policies, standards, and
principles of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Burr Ridge, as
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 10
amended, the conservation of property values, the direction of building development
to the best advantage of the entire community, and the uses to which property is
devoted at the time of the adoption of such amendatory ordinance.
2. Application, Notice and Hearing
a. Amendments may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, Plan Commission,
and by a person, firm, or corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may
become a freehold interest, an option to purchase, or any exclusive
possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land which is
described in the application for an amendment.
b. An application for an amendment to this Ordinance shall be filed with the
Community Development Director in such form and accompanied by such
information as required by the Community Development Director. The
Community Development Director, upon receiving an application for
amendment, shall transmit the application, along with all pertinent data filed
therewith, to the Plan Commission for review, public hearing and
recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees.
c. The Plan Commission shall schedule a public hearing on any proposed
amendment in accordance with the Statutes of the State of Illinois. Such
public hearing shall be scheduled within 60 days of receipt of a complete
application for amendment unless an extension of time is requested in the
application and approved by the Plan Commission. Notice of time and place
of public hearings shall be published at least once in a newspaper published
within, or if none, then of general circulation within the Village of Burr
Ridge not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before such public
hearing. Notice will be sent as required by the Statutes of the State of
Illinois.
3. Recommendation of the Plan Commission - Findings of Fact
The Plan Commission shall submit written recommendations to the Village Board of
Trustees within 60 days of the conclusion of the public hearing. Extension of this
time period may be allowed by mutual consent of the applicant and Plan
Commission. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change
the zoning classification of particular property, the Plan Commission shall make
findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to,
but not limited to, the following matters:
a. Existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question.
b. The zoning classification(s) of property within the general area of the
property in question.
c. The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the
existing zoning classification.
d. The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in
question, including changes, if any, which have taken place in its present
zoning classification; and
e. The impact upon the objectives of the Official Comprehensive Plan of the
Village of Burr Ridge, as amended.
The Plan Commission shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed amendment
unless it finds that the adoption of such amendment is not detrimental to the public
interest. The Plan Commission may recommend the adoption of an amendment
Section XIII
Administration
11 XIII
changing the zoning classification of the property in question to any higher
classification than that requested by the applicant. For the purpose of this paragraph,
the R-1 District shall be considered the highest classification and the G-I District
shall be considered the lowest classification.
4. Action by the Village Board
a. The Village Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this
Ordinance until it shall have received a written report and recommendation
from the Plan Commission on the proposed amendment incorporating their
findings of fact as specified in Section XIII.J.3.
b. The Village Board may grant, grant with modifications, or deny any
application for an amendment, or refer it back to the Plan Commission for
further consideration.
c. In case a written protest against any proposed amendment signed and
acknowledged by owners of 20 percent of the frontage proposed to be
altered, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining
or across the alley therefrom, or by owners of 20 percent of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage to be altered, is filed with the Village Clerk,
the amendment cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of two-thirds
of all members of the Board of Trustees. In such cases, a copy of the written
protest must be served by the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the
proposed amendment and also a copy upon the applicant's attorney, if any,
by certified mail at the addresses of such applicant and attorney shown in the
application for the proposed amendment.
K. SPECIAL USES
1. Purpose
The development and execution of this Ordinance is based upon the division of the
community into districts within which districts the use of land, buildings, and
structures, and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the
land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses
which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any
particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of
those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use in the
particular location. Such conditional permitted uses (also referred to as special uses)
fall into three categories:
a. Uses publicly operated or traditionally associated with a public interest, and
b. Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
the use and enjoyment of neighboring property or public facilities.
c. Planned unit developments.
A use may be a permitted use in one or more zoning districts and a special use in one
or more other zoning districts.
2. Initiation of a Special Use
Any person, firm, corporation, office, department, or other legal entity having a
freehold interest in land, or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or
a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 12
possessory interest which is specifically enforceable, may file an application with
the consent of the property owner to use such land for one or more of the special
uses provided for in this Ordinance in the zoning district in which the land is located.
3. Pre-application Conference
With the exception of planned unit developments (see Section XIII.L et. seq. below),
prior to official submittal of an application for a special use, the applicant shall meet
with the Community Development Director for a pre-application conference as to
the scope and nature of the proposed special use. The purpose of the conference is
to allow the applicant to informally present the proposed development to the
Community Development Director and to present a general concept prior to the
preparation of detailed plans. Prior to the scheduling of a pre-application
conference, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development Director
material including, at a minimum, the following:
a. To the extent applicable, a written "Letter of Intent" from the applicant
establishing the applicant's intentions as to development of the special use.
b. To the extent applicable, a location map.
c. To the extent applicable, sketch plans regarding land use, dwelling or
building types and density, street and lot arrangements and tentative lot sizes.
d. To the extent applicable, tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage
disposal, surface drainage and street improvements.
e. To the extent applicable, parking provisions.
f. Other material the applicant may wish to present or the Community
Development Director may request.
4. Application for Special Use
An application for a special use shall be filed with the Community Development
Director on a form prescribed by the Community Development Director. The
application shall be accompanied, at a minimum, by the following:
a. An accurate topographic and boundary line map of the project area and a
location map showing its relationship to surrounding properties.
b. The pattern of public and private roads, driveways, and parking facilities and
intended design standards.
c. The size, arrangement, and location of lots of proposed building groups.
d. Location, type and size of proposed landscaping.
e. The use, type, size and location of structures.
f. The location of sewer and water facilities.
g. Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of
proposed buildings and structures.
h. The location of open space areas and areas dedicated for public uses such as
schools, parks, etc.
i. Existing storm drainage pattern and proposed storm drainage system
showing basic topographic changes.
Section XIII
Administration
13 XIII
j. Statistical data on total size of project area, area of useable open space,
density computation and proposed number of residential units by type, and
any other similar data pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the
proposed development.
k. A copy of intended and/or existing deed restrictions.
Where conditions warrant, the Community Development Director or the Plan
Commission may require additional documentation or may waive any of the above
requirements.
Such application shall be forwarded by the Community Development Director to the
Plan Commission for public hearing and recommendation to the Village Board of
Trustees.
5. Hearing for Special Use
The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application at such time
and place as shall be established by the Plan Commission after due notice as
required by law. Such hearing shall be scheduled not more than 60 days from the
date that a complete application for a special use has been received by the
Community Development Director. Notice of time and place of public hearings
shall be published at least once in a newspaper published within, or if none, then of
general circulation within the Village of Burr Ridge not more than 30 days nor less
than 15 days before such public hearing. Notice will be sent as required by the
Statutes of the State of Illinois.
6. Plan Commission Findings
For each application for a special use, the Plan Commission shall, within 60 days of
the conclusion of the public hearing on the application, report its written findings
and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees unless an extension of such
time limit has been requested by the applicant and approved by the Plan
Commission.
7. Standards
No special use shall be recommended by the Plan Commission or approved by the
Village Board unless it is found that:
a. The use meets a public necessity or otherwise provides a service or
opportunity that is not otherwise available within the Village and is of
benefit to the Village and its residents.
b. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use will not be
detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or
general welfare.
c. The special use will not be injurious to the uses and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood in
which it is to be located.
d. The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
e. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary facilities have
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 14
been or will be provided.
f. Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress
so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
g. The proposed special use is not contrary to the objectives of the Official
Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Burr Ridge as amended.
h. The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations
may, in each instance, be modified pursuant to the recommendations of the
Plan Commission or, if applicable, the Zoning Board of Appeals.
8. Conditions and Guarantees
Prior to the granting of any special use, the Plan Commission may recommend and
Village Board of Trustees may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the special use
as is deemed necessary or desirable for the protection of the public interest and to
secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Section
XIII.K.7, above. In all cases in which special uses are granted, the Village Board of
Trustees shall approve a specific site plan, including landscape plans if applicable,
and shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof
that the special use will comply with all conditions stipulated in connection
therewith.
9. Action by the Village Board of Trustees
a. The Village Board of Trustees shall not act upon a proposed special use
permitted under this Ordinance until it shall have received a written report
and recommendation from the Plan Commission on the proposed special
use.
b. The Village Board of Trustees may grant, grant with modifications, or deny,
by ordinance, or refer back to the Plan Commission for further study, any
application for special use. The Board shall approve a specific site plan,
including landscape plans if applicable, and may establish such conditions
and restrictions, along with appropriate guarantees, upon the establishment,
location, construction, operation, and maintenance of a proposed special use
as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Section
XIII.K.7.
c. In all cases where the Village Board of Trustees permits the establishment of
a special use, the ordinance establishing the special use shall contain a
specific description of the special use, along with any conditions, restrictions
or guarantees made part of the basis for such approval.
10. Deviations and Changes
Except as provided below for minor changes, any modifications to the approved site
plan for a special use shall require a new pre-application conference, a new
application and a new public hearing as set forth above. If the developer or owner of
land affected by the special use wishes to deviate from the approved site plan, a
written request shall be filed with the Community Development Director, setting
forth in detail the changes requested, accompanied by site plans clearly indicating
the scope of the changes.
The Community Development Director shall make a written determination of the
nature of the proposed changes, including whether they are minor or substantial as
Section XIII
Administration
15 XIII
herein set forth. If the Community Development Director determines that the
proposed change is minor, then it shall be referred to the Plan Commission for
review and a recommendation to the Village Board of Trustees. No public hearing
shall be required. After review and consideration of a minor change, the Plan
Commission may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees such modifications
as it deems appropriate without the requirement for further public hearings, and the
Village Board of Trustees shall then make such decision on the proposed minor
change as it deems appropriate. There is no specific right to any such modifications
and, therefore, the decision of the Village Board of Trustees shall be final. If the
decision is to approve any such minor change, the applicant shall be bound to
develop the special use in accordance with such decision and the modified site plan
and any modifications to the conditions and guarantees which the Village Board of
Trustees shall require.
a. Minor Changes - A minor change is any change in the site plan or design
details which is consistent with the standards and conditions applying to the
special use heretofore granted and which does not alter the concept or intent
of the special use permit. A minor change shall not increase the project's
density, the height or number of buildings and structures or the number of
signs; shall not reduce open space, and shall not add new parking or other
paved areas or new lighting.
b. Substantial Changes - A substantial change shall be any change other than
a minor change.
11. Effect of Denial of Special Use
No application for the same or substantially similar special use, which has been
denied wholly or in part by the Village Board of Trustees, shall be resubmitted for a
period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of
new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the Village
Board of Trustees.
12. Revocation
In any case where construction of a special use (other than a planned unit
development) has not been commenced within six months of Board approval or has
not been substantially completed within two years of Board approval, all in
accordance with the terms of the special use originally granted, then the special use
and authorization thereof, shall be null and void unless extended by the Board of
Trustees.
In connection with a planned unit development, in any case where commencement
of the plat process for said planned unit development has not occurred within three
months after approval of the planned unit development by the Village Board, or in
any case where construction has not been commenced within six months after
approval of a plat of subdivision for the planned unit development (or any portion
thereof), or in any case where construction has commenced within the required time
period but does not thereafter continue with reasonable progress, the special use
which was originally granted shall be null and void unless time is extended by the
Board of Trustees.
L. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
1. Purpose and Description of Planned Unit Developments
The purpose of the planned unit development provisions of this Ordinance is to
provide a mechanism to accommodate development of an area of the minimum size
established in specific district regulations set forth in this Ordinance which is in the
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 16
public interest, and which would not otherwise be permitted pursuant to this
Ordinance. It is anticipated that Planned Unit Developments will offer one or more
of the following advantages: designs which reflect the historic open character of
single family areas of the Village, designs which enhance the appearance of
neighborhoods by conserving streams, areas of natural beauty, and natural green
spaces, designs which counteract possible urban monotony and congestion in streets,
designs which promote compatible architecture between adjacent buildings and
structures, and designs which will substantially buffer and provide appropriate
transitions between differing types of land use and intensities of development from
each other so as to minimize any adverse impact which new development may have
on existing or zoned development. These provisions are also intended to provide an
opportunity to accommodate developments that involve one or more uses and that
may be located in more than one zoning district.
In general, the planned unit development provisions of this Ordinance are intended
to provide the following:
a. A choice in the type of environment available to the public by allowing
development that would not be possible under the strict application of other
sections of this Ordinance.
b. Development and/or permanent reservation of open space, recreational areas
and facilities.
c. A land use plan which permits preservation of green space, natural
vegetation, topographic and geological features and historic resources.
d. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities which
results in better urban design, higher quality construction and the provision
of aesthetic amenities.
e. The efficient use of land, so as to promote economies in the provision of
utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings, and other facilities.
f. Innovations in development so that the growing needs and demands of the
population may be met by a greater variety in type, design, and layout of
buildings and structures, and by conservation and more efficient use of open
space ancillary to said buildings and structures, all in a manner so as to be
consistent with the character of the zoning district in which the planned unit
development is located.
g. A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare.
The planned unit development requirements and regulations allow for far more
flexibility than those pertaining to other uses.
It is not intended that the Village will automatically grant the maximum density
increases for all planned unit developments, but it is expected that the Village Board
shall grant only such increases or uses which are consistent with the benefits
accruing to the Village as a result of the planned unit development. Therefore, the
Plan Commission and Village Board may as a condition of approval require
conditions, limitations and/or design factors which will promote proper development
of a planned unit development.
2. Procedure
A planned unit development shall be granted as a special use in the district in which
it is permitted in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this
Section. To the extent that the procedures and standards set forth in this Section are
Section XIII
Administration
17 XIII
inconsistent with the requirements set forth in other sections of the Ordinance or any
other development control ordinance of the Village, this Section shall apply, except
that all required improvements shall comply with construction standards, design
standards and all other engineering standards contained within the Village's
Subdivision Regulations Ordinance.
Applications shall be made on forms provided by the Village and shall be
accompanied by the required plans and documents. The application, and each step
set forth herein shall be reviewed and certified by the Community Development
Director as complete and to be in accordance with the planned unit development
requirements.
a. Community Development Department Review
Prior to filing a formal application for approval of a planned unit
development, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development
Director a written request for a pre-application conference with the
Community Development Director.
The purpose of such a conference is to allow the Community Development
Director, or delegate, to inform the applicant of all applicable ordinances,
rules, regulations, plans, policies, standards, and procedures which are at that
time officially adopted and which may affect the proposed development or
the consideration of said development by the Plan Commission. Such a
conference also allows the applicant to present a general concept of his
proposed development prior to the preparation of detailed plans. At the
conference the applicant shall present material including at a minimum the
following:
(1) A written "Letter of Intent" from the applicant establishing the
applicant's intentions as to development of a specific planned unit
development located within or to be annexed to the Village of Burr
Ridge.
(2) A location map.
(3) Sketch plans regarding land-use, dwelling-type and density, street
and lot arrangements and tentative lot sizes.
(4) Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, surface
drainage and street improvements.
(5) Parking provisions.
(6) Other material the applicant may wish to present or the Community
Development Director may request.
The Community Development Director shall advise the applicant of the
zoning requirements and official village plans and policies which might
affect the proposed development as well as the procedural steps for approval.
b. Pre-application Conference
Prior to filing the preliminary plan referred to below, the applicant shall
request a pre-application conference with the Plan Commission. The request
shall be accompanied by the documents previously submitted to the
Community Development Director with such changes as the applicant has
made subsequent to the applicant's meeting with the Community
Development Director, and shall include the documentation required in
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 18
Section XIII.L.3 hereof. At the pre-application conference, the Plan
Commission shall advise the applicant of planning objectives which may
affect the property and any other issues of concern to the Plan Commission.
The application shall likewise be referred to the Village Engineer and other
appropriate staff for review. The Plan Commission shall obtain the report of
its staff on the proposed development, recommending such changes in
building location, pattern of roadways, landscaping, and other matters as
may be required to achieve a site plan consistent with the purposes and
standards set forth in this Ordinance and the goals of the Comprehensive
Plan. If, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, the proposed plan could be
improved in respect to the criteria listed herein by modification of the
location of open space, buildings, structures, or any other detail, the
proposed plan shall be so modified or the developer shall provide in writing
the objections to the modifications.
c. Preliminary Plan.
After the pre-application conference the preliminary plan of the planned unit
development shall be submitted when ready to the Community Development
Director, who will review it and, once it is complete, shall so certify that the
application is complete and shall forward it to the Plan Commission for its
consideration, public hearing and subsequent recommendation to the Village
Board. The Community Development Director shall submit minutes of the
pre-application conference to the Plan Commission and to the Village Board
of Trustees. The Plan Commission may request review of the planned unit
development by and recommendations from other appropriate Village
departments and any other taxing body it deems affected by the proposed
development. The Plan Commission may require workshop meetings to
discuss and review the proposal and may assign review responsibilities to
appropriate Plan Commission subcommittees.
The required procedure for consideration and approval of the preliminary
plan shall be:
(1) Submission of the following:
(a) Written application for approval of a planned unit
development shall be made on forms and in the manner
prescribed by the Village.
(b) The preliminary plan and supporting data shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Section XIII.L.3 hereof.
(c) A statement of conformity with the Village's Subdivision
Ordinance along with a list of any requested variations from
these regulations.
(d) Copies of the preliminary planned unit development plan and
supporting data shall be submitted to the Village for
certification as to conformity with these regulations and any
recommendations and suggestions regarding the overall
design.
(2) Copies of the preliminary planned unit development plan and
supporting data shall be made available by the applicant to any
school district, sanitary district, library district, park district, fire
protection district, and other taxing bodies which might be affected
by the development.
(3) The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on application for
Section XIII
Administration
19 XIII
approval of a planned unit development.
(4) Following the review of the preliminary plan and other supporting
data and after the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall make its
findings and recommendations and send a report to the Village Board
of Trustees which shall include findings of fact upon which its
recommendations are based as specified in Section XIII.L.7 hereof.
Such findings and recommendations shall include a recommendation
for approval, disapproval, or approval with modifications. This
report to the Village Board of Trustees must be submitted within 70
days after the last session of the public hearing of the Plan
Commission or the Commission must indicate to the Village Board
of Trustees why such a report cannot be rendered within that time
period.
(5) The Village Board shall, within 120 days after receipt of the Plan
Commission's report, approve, approve with modifications, refer
back to the Plan Commission for further review, disapprove the plan
or provide a written explanation to the petitioner on why an
extension is required for Village Board of Trustees action. The time
period for action shall be exclusive of any time extensions or
continuances requested by the petitioner.
(6) Approval of the preliminary plan for a planned unit development
shall not constitute approval of the final planned unit development
plan nor subdivision approval and all procedures for approval of a
final plan and the planned unit development shall fully comply with
all procedures of the Subdivision Regulations Ordinance of the
Village, if applicable, and other applicable ordinances. Approval of
the preliminary plan shall be deemed an expression of approval of
the concepts and details of the preliminary plan of planned unit
development which are set forth in the application for approval of the
planned unit development, and as a specific guide to the preparation
of final documents which are required as part of the application for
approval of the final planned unit development plan. Further, it
indicates approval of the details set forth in the application and a
commitment by the applicant to the details set forth in the
application.
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure until the final
plan and appropriate plats of subdivision have been filed, approved, and
recorded with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles, if applicable, as
provided below.
d. Final Plan
The purpose of the final plan is to designate with particularity the land
subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other lands, not
so subdivided, into common open areas and building sites. The preliminary
plan shall generally locate buildings and structures, whereas the final plan
shall show the exact location of each building and structure to be constructed
and a designation of the specific internal uses proposed for each building and
structure. The final plan also functions to inform all who deal with the
planned unit development of the restrictions placed upon the land and acts as
a zoning control device, and shall be approved by separate ordinance.
The required procedure for consideration and approval of the final plan shall
be:
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 20
(1) Within 60 days after approval by the Board of Trustees of the
preliminary plan, the final plan and supporting data, all as required
by Section XIII.L.3, shall be submitted to the Community
Development Director for certification that the final plan is in
conformity with these regulations and with the approved preliminary
plan, including all conditions, exceptions and the like contained in
the Board of Trustees' approval of the preliminary plan. If the
previously approved preliminary plan has sufficient detail and
conforms with the conditions of approval set forth by the Board of
Trustees, as determined by the Community Development Director,
then the Community Development Director may recommend that it
also be approved as the final plan.
(2) Within 30 days of receipt from the applicant of the final plan
documents, the Community Development Director shall send his
findings and recommendations to the Board of Trustees which shall,
within 30 days, approve, refer the plan to the Plan Commission,
approve with modifications, or disapprove the plan. Disapproval of
the final plan shall include a clear statement of the reasons therefor.
If the Board of Trustees refers the final plan to the Plan Commission,
the Plan Commission shall make such review and provide the Board
of Trustees with a written recommendation and findings within 30
days.
(3) Approval of the final plan shall be set forth in ordinance form. Said
ordinance shall detail with particularity all conditions, exceptions and
the like and shall include as an exhibit the final plan documents or
specific reference to the final plan documents.
(4) If lands within the planned unit development are to be formally
subdivided (i.e. as defined by the Village of Burr Ridge Subdivision
Ordinance), adoption of the ordinance approving the final planned
unit development plan shall not constitute subdivision approval.
Approval of the final plat of subdivision may occur at the same time,
however, if all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations
Ordinance have been met.
3. Specific Content of Plans
Planned unit development plans and supporting data shall include all documentation
listed in this Section of this Ordinance and any other data requested by the Village in
order to complete its review of the project. In developing plans and specifications
for all required improvements, the applicant must also conform to the standards set
forth in the Village's Subdivision Regulations Ordinance or specifically state where
and for what purpose the applicant wishes to be granted exceptions to those
regulations.
a. Pre-application Stage
(1) General Site Information: Data regarding site conditions, land
characteristics, general land use, zoning, available community
facilities and utilities, surface water drainage characteristics, existing
covenants, and other related general information about land-uses
within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed site perimeter. A
summary of the site data must be provided, including the percentage
of the site to be occupied by buildings and structures, the percentage
of the site to be occupied by parking, drives, streets and all other
paved areas, and the percentage of the site which will remain open
green space.
Section XIII
Administration
21 XIII
(2) Sketch Plan: A scaled drawing in simple sketch form showing the
proposed location and extent of the land uses, major streets, lots and
other features as they are related to the site.
(3) Legal Description: A property survey and legal description of the
site proposed for development.
b. Preliminary Plan Stage
(1) Detailed Plan: A drawing of the planned unit development shall be
prepared at a scale not less than 1" = 50' and shall show such
designations as proposed streets (public and private), all buildings
and structures, their yards and their use, common open space,
recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities
to indicate the character of the proposed development. The
submission may be composed of one or more sheets and drawings,
and shall include:
(a) Boundary lines - bearings and distances.
(b) Easements - general location, width and purpose of proposed
easements.
(c) Existing land-use - within 500' of all sides of the site.
(d) Other conditions on adjoining land - actual direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or
retaining walls; character and location of major buildings and
structures, railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby
nonresidential land-uses or adverse influences; for adjoining
platted land refer to subdivision plat by name and upon
request of Village, show approximate percent built up, typical
lot size and dwelling type.
(e) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
(f) Streets on, and adjacent to, the tract - street names and rightof-
way widths, walks, culverts, etc.
(g) Proposed public improvements - highways and other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future
construction on or near the tract.
(h) Utilities on, and adjacent to, the tract - location, size and
invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and
size of water mains; location of fire hydrants and street lights;
direction and distance to, and size of, nearest water mains and
sewers adjacent to the tract showing invert elevation of
sewers.
(i) Ground elevations on the tract and on the first 50 feet on all
adjacent tracts of land showing one (1) foot contours for land
which slopes less than one-half (1/2) percent along with all
breaks in grades, at all drainage channels or swales, and at
selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions;
for land that slopes more than one-half (1/2) percent showing
two (2) foot contours. Any land within the 100 year
floodplain, as determined by the Village Engineer, shall be
shown on these drawings.
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 22
(j) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Village
Engineer - location and results of tests made to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and groundwater conditions, depth to
groundwater, unless test pits are dry at a depth of five (5)
feet; location and results of soil percolation test if individual
sewage disposal systems are proposed.
(k) Other conditions on the tract - water courses, marshes, rock
outcrop, identification of all wooded areas, and also including
identification of each tree on the subject property (whether in
"wooded areas" or isolated), eight inches (8") in diameter or
greater (measured one foot above ground) and their location
and species, existing buildings and structures and other
significant features.
(l) Title information, legal description; title under which the
proposed development is to be recorded, with names and
addresses of current and proposed owners and developers,
and notation stating acreage. Owners shall include beneficial
owners of any land trust.
(m) Size, arrangement and location of lots, buildings, structures,
or proposed building groups.
(n) Open space - all parcels of land intended to be dedicated for
public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with
the purposes indicated.
(o) General location, purpose and height of each building and
structure, other than detached single-family residences, on
individually platted lots.
(p) Map data - name of development, north point, scale and date
of preparation.
(q) Miscellaneous - such additional documents as may be
required by the Plan Commission or the Community
Development Director. The Community Development
Director shall inform the applicant of such requirements after
the pre-application stage and again after the initial
presentation of the preliminary plan to the Plan Commission.
(2) Variations: Identification and explanation of those aspects of the
proposed planned unit development that vary from the Zoning
Ordinance requirements applicable to the underlying zoning district,
and also from the Subdivision Regulations Ordinance of the Village.
(3) Character: Explanation of the character of the planned unit
development and the reasons why it has been planned to take
advantage of the flexibility of these regulations. This item shall
include a specific explanation of how the proposed planned unit
development meets the objectives of all official plans which affect
the land in question.
(4) Ownership: Statement of present and proposed ownership of all
land within the project including the beneficial owners of any land
trusts.
Section XIII
Administration
23 XIII
(5) Schedule: Development schedule indicating:
(a) Stages in which project will be built, with emphasis on area,
density, use and public facilities, such as open space to be
developed with each stage. Each stage shall be described and
mapped as a unit of the project. Overall design of each unit
shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic
material.
(b) Dates for beginning and completion of each stage (unit).
(6) Market Analysis: If requested by the Village, documentation
indicating the extent of market demand for the uses proposed in the
planned unit development including analysis of demographics, sales
potentials, competitive alignment, assessment of market share and
market positioning of each component of the planned unit
development.
(7) Covenants: Proposed agreements, provisions, and/or covenants
which will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of
the planned unit development and any of its common open space.
Proposed condominium declarations and by-laws of condominium
form of ownership if it is to be used in the planned unit development.
(8) Residential: Provide information on the density of residential uses,
including dwelling units per gross acre, dwelling units per net acre;
gross and net residential density (dwelling units per acre of land
devoted to residential sectors of the planned unit development; gross
being all land, net being gross acres minus land used for public or
common usage); the number of dwelling units by type, and the
number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit type. Information should
be provided for each unit in the planned unit development.
(9) Nonresidential Intensity: Provide information on the type and
amount of nonresidential uses including locations, sizes, floor area
ratio, and height of all buildings and structures; the amount and
location of common open space; and any other data pertinent to a
comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development.
(10) Service Facilities: Provide information on all service facilities,
driveways, private streets, paths and off-street parking facilities.
(11) Architectural Plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all primary
buildings and structures shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design
of the buildings and structures, and the number, size and type of
dwelling units.
(12) Landscape Plan: A detailed landscape planting plan, including
location, size and type, for the site, including permanent signs and
street fixtures.
(13) Cost-Revenue Analysis: A study shall be prepared indicating the
fiscal impact of the planned unit development on major taxing
bodies, which may include but not be limited to, the school
district(s), fire protection district(s), municipal corporation, library
district(s), and the park district(s). Information will include detailed
estimates on: expected population of the development; the operating
cost to be incurred by each taxing body; any additional major capital
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 24
investments required, in part or in whole, because of the planned unit
development; revenue generated for each taxing body by the planned
unit development to offset fiscal problems created by the planned
unit development. The study should include a cash flow analysis
based on the proposed staging of the planned unit development.
(14) Traffic Analysis: If requested by the Village, a study of the impact
caused by the planned unit development on the street and highway
systems operating in the Village will be required.
(15) Environmental Analysis: If requested by the Village, the major
impacts of the planned unit development on the environment shall be
analyzed and shall disclose all major negative impacts. Generally,
these impacts would include effects on discrete ecosystems,
deteriorated air quality in the immediate vicinity and along aerial and
collector highway corridors leading to the planned unit development
to a distance established by the Village Engineer; any deterioration in
the groundwater or surface water quality; effect on sensitive land
areas as identified by the Village Board of Trustees from time to
time, such as floodplains, wetlands, streams, creeks, forests, and
areas with substantial tree growth, aquifer recharge areas, historic
buildings or structures, prairie landscapes, and mineral resource
reserves.
c. Final Plan Stage
A final detailed plan shall be prepared by the petitioner in substantial
accordance with the approved preliminary plan. The purpose of the final
plan of development is to designate with particularity the final development
details and to designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building,
structure, and use of land. Final plans and supporting data shall show in
detail the design, location and internal use of all buildings and structures and
overall land development as well as such additional information as the
Village Board of Trustees or the Plan Commission may have required when
approving the preliminary plan. The final plan of the planned unit
development shall include the same detailed information required for the
preliminary plan and other information requested by the Village. If the
previously approved preliminary plan has sufficient detail and conforms with
the conditions of approval set forth by the Board of Trustees, as determined
by the Community Development Director, then the Community
Development Director may recommend that it also be approved as the final
plan.
4. Exceptions
a. Use Exceptions
The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board of Trustees
may authorize that there be permitted in part of the area of a proposed
planned unit development specified uses not otherwise permitted by the use
regulations of the districts in which said development is located, provided
that the Plan Commission shall find:
(1) That the uses permitted by such exception are necessary or desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose and character
of the planned unit development.
(2) That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such nature or
so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the
neighborhoods surrounding the planned unit development, or upon
Section XIII
Administration
25 XIII
the internal character of any part of, or all of, the planned unit
development, itself.
b. Bulk Exceptions
In the case of any planned unit development, the Plan Commission may
recommend and the Village Board of Trustees may authorize exceptions to
the applicable bulk regulations of this Ordinance within the boundaries of
such planned unit development, provided that the Plan Commission shall
find:
(1) That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of
such development, as well as the neighboring property, that would be
obtained under the bulk regulations of this Ordinance for buildings
and structures developed on separate zoning lots;
(2) That the overall floor area ratio for the planned unit development
would not exceed by more than five (5%) percent the maximum floor
area ratio which would be determined on the basis of the floor area
ratio required for the individual uses in such planned unit
development, as stipulated in each zoning district.
5. Bulk Regulations (Residential)
The following bulk regulations shall serve as minimum regulations for any
residential planned unit development and petitioners may be required to comply with
more stringent and/or different bulk regulations as determined during the approval
process for any planned unit development. Bulk regulations for non-residential
planned unit developments shall be established during the review of the planned unit
development.
a. Lot Width and Lot Width Area
Lot width and lot area shall be as approved by the Board of Trustees after
receiving the recommendations of the Plan Commission, provided:
(1) that the lot area for single-family detached dwellings be not less than
an average of 16,000 square feet and no lot shall have an area of less
than 14,000 square feet, except in a cluster-type lot arrangement, the
minimum lot area may be reduced;
(2) that for single-family semi-detached and attached dwellings and
multiple-family dwellings no minimum lot width or lot area may be
required; and
(3) that for other permitted and special uses allowed the lot areas and lot
widths shall be as required in the R-1 District.
b. Floor Area Ratio
(1) Single-family detached dwellings - 0.20 unless otherwise approved
by the Board of Trustees after receiving the recommendation of the
Plan Commission.
(2) Single-family semi-detached and attached dwellings, and multiplefamily
dwellings not to exceed 0.50.
(3) Other permitted or special uses - as in the R-1 District.
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 26
c. Yards
Along the periphery of such planned unit developments front, side and rear
yards shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which
said development is located.
All yards for single family detached dwellings not located along the
periphery of a planned unit development shall be as approved by the
Corporate Authorities after receipt of the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, and if no specific approval is given, such yards shall be
provided as required by the regulations of the District in which said
development (or portion thereof) is located.
For other residential uses, minimum yards shall be provided in compliance
with the following:
Front Interior Corner Rear
Yard Side Yard Side Yard Yard
(1) Single-family 40 ft 10 ft* 40 ft 30 ft
clustered
dwellings
(2) Single-family 30 ft 15 ft 30 ft 30 ft
semi-detached,
attached and
multiple-family
dwellings
(3) *Interior side yards for single-family clustered dwellings on interior
lots may be less than 10 feet provided the side yards shall have a
combined width of 10 feet and the separation between buildings on
adjoining lots shall be 10 feet.
(4) *The interior side yard for single-family clustered dwellings on
corners lots may be eliminated provided the minimum separation
from buildings on adjoining lots shall be 10 feet.
(5) In addition to setbacks from property lines, the minimum yard
requirements for single-family attached and multiple-family
dwellings shall be provided around the perimeter of each building.
The yard requirements for a principal building shall not encroach
into the yard requirements for any other principal building.
(6) All permitted uses not listed above shall comply with the setback
requirements of the R-1 Single-Family Residence District.
d. Building Height
Not more than two and one-half stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower.
e. Dwelling Unit Floor Area
The minimum floor area in square feet of single-family semi-detached,
single-family attached and multiple-family dwelling units, excluding
garages, balconies, basements, utility rooms, and areas common to the
Section XIII
Administration
27 XIII
operation and maintenance of the entire building shall be 900 square feet
except dwelling units containing more than one bedroom shall be as follows:
(1) two-bedroom dwelling units - 1,200 square feet
(2) three-bedroom dwelling units - 1,600 square feet
(3) units with over three bedrooms - 300 additional square feet for each
bedroom
f. Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
In accordance with regulations herein set forth in Section XI.
6. Designation of Permanent Common Open Space
a. Definition: Permanent common open space shall be defined as parks,
playgrounds, landscaped green space not immediately adjacent to residential
uses, schools, community centers or other similar areas in public ownership
or areas covered by an open space easement.
b. Designation: No plan for a planned unit development shall be approved,
unless such plan provides for permanent common open space equivalent to
at least ten percent (10%) of the total development area in the planned unit
development unless the planned unit development regulations for the
specific zoning district classification provide otherwise.
c. Location and Dimensions: Permanent common open space shall be at least
20 feet away from any building walk and shall have a minimum dimension
of 50 feet; provided, however, where buildings or structures are not parallel
to each other, the required spacing shall be measured at the mid-point of the
distance along which they face each other, however, the spacing between the
buildings and structures at the narrowest point shall be no less than one-half
the required distance.
d. Use: Permanent common open space shall be used for passive and active
types of recreation conducted only for the residents of the planned unit
development or members of a not-for-profit recreation club or be dedicated
to a public body for use as a park site, as approved by the Village.
e. Buildings or Structures: Permanent common open space shall have not
more than five percent of the area of such open space devoted to buildings or
structures for recreational uses, or for accessory uses for such buildings or
structures including open or enclosed parking area, unless otherwise
approved by the Village.
7. Findings of Fact
In reporting its findings and recommendations on a planned unit development
preliminary plan to the Village Board of Trustees, the Plan Commission will submit
findings of facts upon which it has based its recommended action. These findings of
fact will relate to the specific proposal and shall set forth with particularity in what
respects the proposal would or would not be in the public interest, including, but not
limited to, findings of fact on the following:
a. In what respects the proposed plan is or is not consistent with the stated
purpose of the planned unit development regulations.
b. The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and standards
Section XIII
Administration
XIII 28
of the planned unit development regulations.
c. The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including but not limited to, the density, dimension, area, bulk, and use,
required improvements, construction and design standards and the reasons
why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public interest.
d. The extent of public benefit produced, or not produced, by the planned unit
development in terms of meeting the planning objectives and standards of
the Village. Any specific beneficial actions, plans or programs agreed to in
the planned unit development proposal which are clearly beyond the
minimum requirements of this Ordinance shall be specifically listed as
evidence of justified bulk premiums and/or use exceptions.
e. The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in which said
design does or does not make adequate provision for public services, provide
adequate control over vehicular traffic, open space and further the amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
f. The relationship and compatibility, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
plan to the adjacent properties and neighborhood.
g. The desirability of the proposed plan to the Village's physical development,
tax base and economic well-being.
h. The conformity with the recommendations of the Official Comprehensive
Plan as amended, and all other official plans and planning policies of the
Village of Burr Ridge.
i. Conformity with the standards set forth in Section XIII.L.7 of this
Ordinance.
8. Changes in the Planned Unit Development
A planned unit development shall be developed only according to the approved or
recorded final plan and all supporting data. The approved final plan and supporting
data, together with all approved amendments, shall be binding on the applicants,
their successors, grantees and assigns and shall limit and control the use of premises
(including the internal use of buildings and structures) and location of buildings and
structures in the planned unit development, as set forth therein.
If the developer or owner of land affected by the planned unit development wishes to
deviate from the approved plans, a written request shall be filed with the Community
Development Director setting forth in detail the changes requested, accompanied by
site plans clearly indicating the scope of the changes.
The Community Development Director shall make a written determination of the
nature of the proposed changes, including whether they are minor or major changes
as herein set forth.
a. Major Changes
Major changes may be approved only by submission of a new application
with a new preliminary plan and supporting data, and following the
"preliminary approval" steps, holding of a new public hearing by the Plan
Commission and subsequent amendment of the final planned unit
development plan by final action of the Village Board of Trustees.
Major changes are those which alter the concept or intent of the planned unit
Section XIII
Administration
29 XIII
development, including but not limited to increases in the density; increases
in the height of buildings or structures; internal use of buildings and
structures; reductions of proposed open space; a proposed change in the
proportion of housing types; changes in standards of or alignment of roads,
utilities, water, electricity, and drainage; or changes in the final governing
ordinance.
b. Minor Changes
The Plan Commission may, after review and consideration of minor changes
which do not change the concept or intent of the development, recommend
to the Village Board of Trustees such minor changes in the planned unit
development as it deems appropriate without the requirement for further
public hearings and without going through the "preliminary approval" steps,
and the Village Board of Trustees shall then make such decision on the
proposed minor change as it deems appropriate. There is no specific right to
any such modifications and, therefore, the decision of the Village Board of
Trustees shall be final. If the decision is to approve any such minor change,
the applicant shall be bound to develop the planned unit development in
accordance with such decision and the modified site plan and any
modifications to the conditions and guarantees which the Village Board of
Trustees shall require. Minor changes shall be any change other than a
major change.
XIV 1
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION XIV
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
A. RULES
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with
the following rules of construction unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Board of Trustees of the Village of Burr Ridge or the context clearly requires otherwise:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the past and the future tense.
2. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural
the singular.
3. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
4. The word "may" is permissive.
5. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
6. The word "person" shall include a firm, proprietorship, joint venture, association,
agent, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, and any other form
of legal entity, as well as an individual, so that where the word "person" is used it is
clear that any entity which would be subject to the Zoning Ordinance would be
defined as a person.
7. All "measured distances" shall be to the nearest foot. If a fraction is one-half foot or
more, the full foot next above shall be taken. Unless otherwise specified, all
distances shall be measured horizontally.
8. The word "building" includes all other structures of every kind regardless of
similarity to buildings.
9. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for",
"intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
B. DEFINITIONS
In further amplification and for clarity of interpretation of the context of this Ordinance, the
following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth herein. Words contained in this
Ordinance and not defined hereinafter shall assume such definitions as prescribed in the
most recent edition of Webster's unabridged dictionary which apply in the context in which
they are used herein.
ABUTTING: Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common
border by a right-of-way, alley, or easement.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: An accessory building, structure or use is one
which:
1. Is clearly incidental to, subordinate in purpose to, and serves the principal building
or use.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
2 XIV
2. Is subordinate in building area, intensity of use or purpose to the principal building
or principal use served.
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal
building or principal use served.
4. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or principal use served,
except as may be specifically provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance or by
separate Ordinance.
ADJACENT: The terms adjacent and contiguous are used as synonymous terms, and mean
parcels of land in contact with or touching another parcel of land, in contradistinction to
lying across a street or alley therefrom.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, pasturage,
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and the necessary accessory uses for
parking and for treating or storing the produce, provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
Agriculture shall not include the raising of hogs, pigs or other livestock which are fed from
garbage or offal.
ALLEY: A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as a secondary
access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street or streets.
AMENDMENT: Any addition to, deletion from, or change in this Ordinance, including
text amendments and/or map amendments (commonly referred to as rezonings). See
Section XIII for amendment requirements and procedures.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, game, table or device which is designed,
intended or used as entertainment, and may be operated by the public upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or the use of which is made available for any valuable
consideration and is not considered a gambling device under Illinois law. Amusement
device shall include, but not be limited to, devices commonly known as pinball machines,
pool tables, video games, electronic games, kiddie rides, mini-theater projection devices and
video screens, and all games or operations similar thereto, or which are commonly found in
"game rooms" and arcades, whether or not registering a score under whatever name they
may be indicated. Not included within the definition of amusement device are such devices
as food, soft drink and cigarette vending machines.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the medical
care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.
ANIMALS, HOUSEHOLD DOMESTIC: Animals that are customarily kept for personal
use or enjoyment within the home and as defined by Chapter 6 of the Burr Ridge Municipal
Code. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus or apparatuses at a fixed location designed for
telephonic, radio, data, Internet, or other communications through the sending and/or
receiving of electromagnetic waves, including equipment attached to a tower or building for
the purpose of providing personal wireless services as defined herein. (Added by Ordinance
A-834-9-97
ANTENNA HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the lowest grade level within
five feet of the base of an antenna support structure to the highest point of the structure even
if said highest point is an antenna. Added by Ordinance A-834-9-97
APPEAL: A contention that the Community Development Director or other authorized
official has misinterpreted or incorrectly applied a provision of this Ordinance. See Section
XIII for appeal requirements and procedures.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
XIV 3
ARCADE: Any establishment containing more than two amusement devices operated on
the premises for the amusement of the general public.
ATTIC: The space between the ceiling beams of a top habitable story and the roof rafters
excluding any space defined as a half-story or a story. (Amended by Ord. A-834-4-02)
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building, structure, or land used for
dispensing or offering for sale of automotive fuels or oils having pumps and underground
storage tanks; also, where battery, tire and other similar services are rendered, but only if
rendered wholly within a building. When dispensing, sale or offering for sale of any fuels or
oils is incidental to the conduct of automobile repairs, the premises shall be classified as an
automotive repair establishment. Automobile service stations shall not include the sales or
storage (new or used) of automobiles, trailers or other vehicles, but may include
convenience food stores when specifically approved.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR: The general repair, engine rebuilding or reconditioning of
automobiles, collision service such as body, frame and fender straightening and repair, and
painting of automobiles.
AWNING: Any roof-like cover which projects from the wall of a building or structure and
which is so erected as to permit its being raised to a position against the building or structure
when not in use.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building below the first ground floor level, but having 4.5
feet or more of its floor to clear ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining
ground. (Amended by Ord. A-834-4-02)
BERM: A man-made hill or contour of land that acts as a landscaping or grading feature or
that is intended as a visual and/or sound barrier between a lot and adjacent properties, alleys
or streets.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public
parks, other permanent open areas, alleys, or other lines or demarcation such as railroad
rights-of-way and shorelines of waterways. A block may be located in part beyond the
boundary lines of the corporate limits of the Village of Burr Ridge.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Burr
Ridge.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of the lot remaining after compliance with the minimum
open space and/or yard requirements of this Ordinance.
BUILDING: Any structure permanently affixed to the land which is built, used, designed,
or intended for the support, shelter, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or
property of any kind. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced fire or
party walls extending continuously from the ground through all stories to and above the
roof, each part shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjoining open spaces by a permanent roof and by exterior walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance and exit doors; or, when adjoining another building or buildings on one
or two sides, a roof and such exterior wall adjoining open space and party wall adjoining the
other building.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average top of foundation or the
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
4 XIV
average of the brick ledge whichever is lower in the elevation facing the front lot line to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-10-06)
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A non-accessory building in which the primary use of the lot
on which the building is located is conducted.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located,
placed, or affixed to the place where it is intended to be placed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and the
location of same with respect to one another, and includes:
1. Size or area and height of buildings and structures;
2. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets or other
buildings;
3. Gross floor area of buildings and structures in relation to lot area (floor area ratio);
4. All open spaces allocated to buildings and structures; and
5. Amount of lot area and lot width provided for each dwelling unit.
CANOPY: A roof-like structure projecting from a wall and supported in whole or in party
by vertical supports from the ground or side of the building and erected primarily to provide
shelter from the weather, but also sometimes serving as an architectural feature.
CARPORT: A roofed automobile shelter, with at least two open sides, usually formed by
extension of the roof from the side of a building.
CAR WASH: A building, structure, or portion thereof, with machine- or hand-operated
facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing or waxing of automobiles.
CEILING: The overhead inside lining of a room.
CELLAR: That portion of a building below the first ground floor level having less than 4.5
feet of its floor to clear ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground. A
cellar is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of height
measurement.
CHILD CARE CENTER: An institution or place in which are received three or more
children, not of common parentage, apart from their parents or guardian, for part of all of a
day, but not later than 9:00 p.m. The term "child care center" includes but is not limited to
the following: nursery schools, child care centers, day nurseries, kindergartens and play
groups, but does not include bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools operated by public
or private elementary or secondary school systems.
CLINIC, MEDICAL, DENTAL AND OPTICAL: A building or portion thereof
containing one or more individual practitioners or associations or groups of physicians,
dentists, ophthalmologists, or similar professional health care practitioners, including nurses
and assistants. The clinic may include accessory laboratory facilities, but shall not include
inpatient care or operating rooms for major surgery.
CLUBS OR LODGES, PRIVATE, FRATERNAL OR RELIGIOUS: A group or
association of persons who are bonafide members paying dues, and which owns, hires, or
leases a building or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members
and their guests, the affairs and management of which (not primarily for profit or to render a
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
XIV 5
service that is customarily carried on as a business) are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members. The sale or service of food
and alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be permitted, provided it is
secondary and incidental to the principal use of promoting some other common objective of
the organization and provided further that there is compliance with all other federal, state
and local regulations governing food service and alcoholic beverages.
CONTIGUOUS: The terms contiguous and adjacent are used as synonymous terms, and
mean parcels of land in contact with or touching another parcel of land, in contradistinction
to lying across a street or alley therefrom.
CONVALESCENT, NURSING OR REST HOME: An establishment for the care of the
aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such home does not
contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease or injury, maternity
patients or mental illness.
CONVENIENCE FOOD STORE: A retail establishment designed for convenience and
accessibility and offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other
goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 7000
square feet.
COURT: An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings and which is bounded on two or more sides by such building or
buildings.
CURB LEVEL: Curb level is either:
1. The established level of the curb pavement edging, along the front lot line and at a
point directly in front of the center line of the building wall facing the front lot line;
or
2. If a curb pavement edging does not exist, the established level along the center line
of the roadway pavement at a point directly in front of the center line of the building
wall facing the front lot line; or
3. In cases of exceptional differences in grade elevations between lot corners or within
the area of a lot, as determined by the Community Development Director, the
established curb level may be the average elevation of the finished ground grades at
the building foundation walls even though such average elevation is higher than such
established level of the curb pavement edging, or center line of the roadway
pavement.
DAY CARE CENTER: See Child Care Center
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level
meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in "decibels".
DENSITY, GROSS: The numerical value obtained by dividing the total number of
dwelling units in a development by the gross area (in acres) within the development. The
result is the number of dwelling units per gross acre of land.
DISTRICT: A portion of the corporate area of the Village, within which certain uniform
regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of
this Ordinance.
DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THRU ESTABLISHMENT: Any place or business operated for
the sale and purchase at retail of food and other goods, or the tendering of services, which
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
6 XIV
facility is designed and equipped so as to allow its patrons to be served or accommodated
while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy (including home occupations allowed under this Ordinance), including singlefamily
dwellings, two-family dwellings, semi-detached and attached dwellings, multiple
family dwellings and townhouses, but not including mobile or motor homes, hotels, motels
or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling joined to two other dwellings by party walls, or
vertical cavity walls, and above-ground physically unifying horizontal structural elements.
DWELLING, CLUSTER SINGLE-FAMILY: A residential building containing not
more than one dwelling unit which is entirely surrounded by open space. As opposed to a
development of single-family detached dwelling units, a development of cluster singlefamily
dwellings concentrates buildings on lots which may be no larger than the footprint of
each dwelling in specific areas on a site in order to allow the remaining land separating
dwellings and/or clusters of dwellings to be used for recreation, common open space and
preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A residential building containing not more than one
dwelling unit which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A residential building, or portion thereof,
containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A residential building containing not more than one
(1) dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED: A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party
wall, or vertical cavity wall, and above-ground physically unifying horizontal structural
elements.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building consisting of two (2) dwelling units only, one
above the other.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a building, which are
arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one (1)
family, and which shall include permanently installed complete kitchen and bath facilities.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY: A dwelling unit within a principal or accessory
building, used or intended for use by domestic servants of the family occupying the
principal dwelling or employees and other persons authorized to reside on the premises of a
non-residential use. Such dwelling unit that is accessory to a principal dwelling shall not be
otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. The term accessory dwelling unit also includes a
guest house.
EASEMENT: Land or an interest in land which has been designated by lawful agreement
between the owner or owners of the land and another person or persons for a specified use
only by such person or persons, including, but not limited to, municipal uses and private and
public utility purposes and cable television.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove directly off of the principal room,
provided such dining alcove does not exceed 125 square feet in area.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received
from the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution system only.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
XIV 7
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the
transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the transmission system and,
generally, to the local distribution system.
ENGINEER, VILLAGE: The person or firm duly appointed and designated by the
Village as the Village Engineer.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A building, structure or land used in whole or in part as
a place of business, the ownership or management of which is separate and distinct from the
ownership or management of any other place of business located on the same or any
adjoining lot.
FAMILY: Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption living
together as a single housekeeping unit within a dwelling unit, including foster children,
domestic servants, and not more than two guests or roomers. The word "family" shall also
include not more than five (5) unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping
unit.
FENCE: A structure which is a barrier and is used as a boundary or means of protection or
confinement, which is made of manufactured material.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including gates, which has, for each one foot wide segment
extending over the entire length and height of the fence, 50 percent of the surface area in
open spaces which afford direct views through the fence.
FENCE, SOLID: Any fence which is not an open fence.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA: Land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, as defined in
Chapter 7 of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land required to
store and convey the base or 100-year frequency flood in the manner set forth in Chapter 7
of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building
or structure, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center line of
walls separating two buildings or structures. (Amended by Ord. A-834-4-02)
FLOOR AREA FOR DETERMINING OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF
STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the
several floors of the building or structure, or portion thereof, as measured from the exterior
faces of exterior walls, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working
space such as counters, racks or closets, and any floor area devoted to retailing activities, to
the production or processing of goods or to business or professional offices. However,
"floor area" for the purposes of measurement for off-street parking and loading requirements
shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise
noted herein); floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including aisles,
ramps and maneuvering space; or mechanical or storage floor area other than area devoted
to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional
offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The floor area of the building or buildings on a lot
divided by the area of such lot, or, in the case of planned developments, by the net site area.
The "floor area ratio" requirements as set forth under each zoning district shall determine the
maximum floor area allowable for the building or buildings.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
8 XIV
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and an index of
the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE: The length of all the property fronting on a street or streets (private or
public) measured along the line of the street, or, if dead ended, then all of the property
abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT: The length of all the property of such lot fronting on a
street or streets (private or public), measured between side or rear lot lines along the line of
the street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building, structure, or portion of a main
building housing the motor vehicles of the occupants of the premises and in which no
occupation or business for profit is conducted.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a building or structure, measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls, but excluding open terraces and carports.
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a hotel or
motel or apartment hotel accommodation as his domicile and place of permanent residence.
HEDGE: A row or fence of bushes or shrubs.
HELIPORT: A landing area used for the landing and taking off of helicopters, including
all necessary passenger and cargo facilities, fueling and emergency service facilities.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation, profession, activity or use engaged in by the
occupant of a dwelling which is clearly an incidental and secondary use of a residential
dwelling unit for dwelling purposes and complies with the requirements for Home
Occupations contained in Section IV.R of this Ordinance.
HOSPITAL: A medical institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of
facilities for the diagnosis, treatment and care of individuals suffering from illness, disease,
injury, deformity or other abnormal physical conditions.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: An establishment which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding, rooming or lodging house, and which provides customary
hotel or motel services such as maid services, the furnishing and laundering of linen,
telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture, and bellboy
service. Not more than 5% of the accommodations in a hotel may be in dwelling units
occupied or intended for occupancy by permanent guests.
IMPERMEABLE SURFACE: A surface which does not allow water to be absorbed so it
may percolate into deeper ground. Such surfaces are those constructed of portland concrete,
bituminous concrete (asphalt), composed stone or gravel, or any other surface that allows
little or no water penetration.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A special or exclusive type of planned industrial area designed and
equipped to accommodate a community of industries, providing them with all necessary
facilities and service in attractive surroundings among compatible neighbors. Industrial
parks may be promoted or sponsored by private developers, community organizations or
government organizations.
JUNK (or SALVAGE) YARD: An open area where waste or scrap materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited
to, scrap iron and other metals, damaged vehicles not to be restored, paper, rags, rubber tires,
and bottles. A "junk or salvage yard" includes an auto wrecking yard, used lumber yards
and places or yards for storage of salvaged structural steel materials and equipment.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
XIV 9
KENNEL: Any premises or portion thereof on which more than three dogs, cats, or other
household domestic animals over six months of age are kept, or on which more than two
such animals are maintained, boarded, trained, groomed, bred, or cared for in return for
remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale. Any premise of five acres or more in area
used for a single-family detached dwelling, agricultural, institutional or recreational use
where more than three such domestic animals owned by the occupant of the principal use
are kept, bred and offered for sale shall not be considered a kennel.
LABORATORY: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing.
Manufacturing and sale of product or products is not permitted within a laboratory.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin operated self-service machines for use by
customers on the premises to wash, dry and/or iron clothing, provided that no pick-up or
delivery service is maintained.
LIVESTOCK: Horses, ponies, donkeys, sheep, goats and cattle.
LIQUOR STORE, PACKAGE: A business establishment where alcoholic beverages are
kept and sold in their original containers and where such alcoholic beverages are not
consumed on the premises.
LOADING BERTH: A space within the principal building or on the same lot as the
principal building providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and vans and
with access to a street or alley.
LODGING HOUSE (including BOARDING and ROOMING HOUSE): A residential
building, or portion thereof, other than a motel, apartment hotel, or hotel, containing lodging
rooms which accommodate three or more persons who are not members of the keeper's
family and where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation on a weekly
or monthly basis.
LODGING ROOM (ROOMING UNIT): A room rented as sleeping and living quarters,
but without cooking facilities, and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of
rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall
be counted as one "lodging room" for the purpose of this Ordinance.
LOT: A single parcel of land which is legally described and recorded as such, or which is
one of two or more numbered lots or parts of such lots legally described and recorded as a
part of a recorded subdivision plat, and, in any case, is located within a single block
(regardless of whether or not the "block" is recorded as such) and has its principal frontage
on a street or an easement or other common-use right-of-way. No parcel shall be considered
a lot, even though it is called or designated a lot, if it does not have a lot line which abuts a
street for a distance of greater than fifty percent (50%) of the lot width. A lot is also one of
two or more contiguous lots or parts of lots of record comprising the tract of land which is
designated by the owner at the time of application for a building permit as the site to be
used, developed, or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. Therefore, a lot
may or may not coincide with a single lot of record. The term "lot" shall also include any
parcel of land under single ownership even though it is not recorded as a subdivided lot,
including any parcels that result from a tax division of any land.
LOT AREA, GROSS: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has at least two sides abutting for their full lengths upon
streets, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135
degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the
tangents to the curve at its points of beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
10 XIV
of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner. In the case of a corner lot with a
curved street line, the corner is that point on the street lot line nearest to the point of
intersection of the tangents above described. A lot abutting a cul-de-sac turnaround shall not
be considered a corner lot even if the curve of the turnaround complies with the terms of this
definition.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot which is any lot other than a corner lot or a reversed corner lot.
LOT LINES: The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated
public street or, where no public street exists, is along a public way. On a corner lot, the lot
line having the shortest length abutting a street shall be the front lot line for the purposes of
establishing front and corner side yard setbacks.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A lot line which does not abut a street right-of-way line.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is, or is most
nearly, parallel to the front lot line. In the case of a triangular or pie-shaped lot where the
two side lot lines come together opposite the front lot line, a line not less than ten feet in
length within the lot, which is parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot
line. (Amended by Ordinance A-834-8-00)
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook or DuPage County, Illinois, or
which has been registered in the Torrens land title system with the Registrar of Deeds in
Cook County, Illinois; or a single parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the
office of said Recorder of Deeds prior to the adoption of this 1996 Comprehensive
Amendment. (See Section IV.D)
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel
public streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a "through lot" both street lines shall be
deemed front lot lines and front yards shall be provided as required, except as otherwise
provided in Section IV.G.2.a.
LOT WIDTH: The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at the narrowest width within the first thirty (30) feet immediately in back of the
required front yard line as established herein. For a lot with a curvilinear front lot line, the
lot width shall be measured on a straight line tangent to the required setback line.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block which (at the time of
filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used,
developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning
lot or lots" may or may not coincide with a lot of record. Furthermore, the designation by
the owner or developer shall not be conclusive as to whether the zoning lot is buildable or
otherwise approved.
MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, the principal use of which
is manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing,
or testing of materials, goods or products.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
XIV 11
MARQUEE: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a
building.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate story between the floor and ceiling of a main story and
extending over only part of the main floor.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation, and so constructed as to
permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to its frame, from the
place of its construction to the location, or subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be
a permanent home and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one
or more persons. Even if the structure is placed on a permanent foundation, with wheels,
tongue, hitch and axle or lug bolts permanently removed, it shall be construed as a mobile
home.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building, structure, or area in which freight brought
by motor truck or railroad is received, assembled, sorted, stored and/or rerouted for local
intra-state or inter-state shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer, or semi-trailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
NO-ACCESS STRIP: A strip of land along the rear lot line, adjoining a thoroughfare
right-of-way, of a through lot, and which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or
property deed as land over which motor vehicular travel shall not be permitted.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL: Matter or material which is capable of causing
injury or illness to living organisms, or is capable of causing detrimental effects to the health
or the psychological, social or economic well-being of humans.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in
order to classify sound according to pitch.
ODOROUS MATTER: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is detectable by
humans.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA OR LOT: Land which is improved and used or a
structure which is designed and used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles, including
motorized construction equipment and machinery, either as accessory off-street parking
spaces or as a principal (commercial) use when permitted herein by the applicable district
regulations in any zoning district.
OPEN AREA: That area of a lot, or tract that is not covered by a building or structure.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Open space within or related to a development, not in
individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for
the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling or renting
merchandise, including but not limited to motor vehicles, stored or displayed out-of-doors
prior to sale.
PARKING SPACE: An enclosed or unenclosed surface area permanently reserved for the
temporary parking or storage of one automobile and appropriately connected with a street or
alley by a surfaced driveway affording adequate ingress and egress. Such space and the
ingress and egress shall meet all requirements of this ordinance.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
12 XIV
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material which is suspended in or discharged into the
atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or a solid at atmospheric temperature and
pressure.
PARTY WALL: An interior wall of adjoining buildings extending from its footing below
grade to the underside of the roof, which divides and is in common use by such adjoining
buildings.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE/PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITIES: As defined in Title 47, United States Code, Section 332 (c) (7) (C) as
amended now or in the future. Added by Ordinance A-834-9-97
PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION: A legal entity, building, structure and/or facilities
devoted to the betterment and/or improvement of community life, including but not limited
to such institutions as the YMCA, YWCA, boys and girls clubs, and educations and
charitable foundations.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: Land or contiguous parcels of land of a size
sufficient to create its own environment, controlled prior to its development by a single
landowner or by a group of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be developed
as a single entity, the environment of which is compatible with adjacent land, and the intent
of the zoning district or districts in which it is located; the developer or developers may be
granted relief from specific land use regulations and design standards and may be awarded
certain premiums in return for assurances of an overall quality of development, including
any specific features which will be of exceptional benefit to the community as a whole.
RESERVOIR PARKING or RESERVOIR SPACES: Off-street parking spaces
allocated to temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
RESIDENTIAL: The use of land or buildings for dwelling purposes.
RESTAURANT: An establishment that serves unpackaged food and beverages in
individual servings, or in nondisposable containers to customers who consume these foods
while seated within the building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: See DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THRU ESTABLISHMENT
and also RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of
foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready-to-consume individual servings, for
consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out, and where either: 1) the
foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic or other disposable
containers, and where customers are usually not served their food, frozen deserts, or
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are
consumed; or 2) the establishment includes a drive-in or drive-thru service facility or offers
curb service.
REST HOME: See CONVALESCENT, NURSING OR REST HOME.
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information
Circular 8333, as may be from time to time amended or replaced, and on which are
illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of
smoke density.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission or the light-obscuring capacity of
smoke.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
XIV 13
ROADSIDE STAND (FARM STAND): A structure for the display and sale of
agricultural products, with no space for customers within the structure itself.
ROADWAY (RIGHT-OF-WAY): A strip of land which is a public right-of-way, with
unencumbered fee simple title in the Village or other appropriate public entity or with a
permanent roadway easement or easement by prescription, which affords primary means of
access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties.
ROOMING UNIT: See LODGING ROOM.
SATELLITE DISH, NON-COMMERCIAL EARTH: Any TV antenna which is
designed for receiving television or radio signals from satellites or other sources.
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted for the purpose of concealing
from view the area behind it.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot or property line and the
nearest front, side or rear yard line.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency, or semi-nude or nude model
studio as adopted and set forth in Chapter 9 of the Burr Ridge Village Code. (Amended by
Ordinance A-834-13-06)
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments on a single site with
common parking facilities, planned, developed and managed as a unit related in location,
size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves.
SHRUBBERY: The linear planting or growth of several-stemmed woody plants.
SIGN: Every name, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration,
display, flag, illustration or insignia, and the structure displaying or supporting any of the
same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building or outdoor structure, or erected
or maintained upon land, including billboards, ground signs, wall signs, roof signs,
illuminated signs, projecting signs, temporary signs, marquees, awnings, canopies and street
clocks, which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business when placed out of doors in view of the general public (See
Chapter 55 [Signs] of the Burr Ridge Municipal Code).
SMOKE: The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust, or combustion
process which is made up of particulate matter.
SMOKE UNIT: The number obtained when the smoke density in the Ringelmann Number
is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this calculation: (a) a
Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a minute during the period of
observation; (b) each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is
observed; and (c) the various products are then added together to give the total number of
smoke units observed during the entire observation period.
SOUND LEVEL: The intensity of sound of an operation or use as measured in decibels.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards
Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.
SPECIAL USE: A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a particular district or
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
14 XIV
districts. After due consideration, in each case, of the impact of such use at the particular
location, such special use may or not be granted, subject to the terms of this Ordinance.
STORY: That part of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above, and if there be no floor above, then the ceiling
above. The floor of a story may have split levels, provided that there are not more than four
feet difference in elevation between the different levels of the floor. A basement shall be
counted as a story and a mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story when it covers over
one-third the area of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next
below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of
which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four and one-half feet above
the finished floor of the story immediately below, except that any partial story used for
residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his family occupying the floor
immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story.
STREET: The paved area of a public right-of-way, with unencumbered fee simple title in
the Village or other appropriate public entity or with a permanent roadway easement or
easement by prescription, which affords primary means of access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road,
boulevard, lane, throughway, or however otherwise designated. A street does not include a
driveway to a building.
STREET LINE: The street right-of-way line abutting a property line of a lot.
STRUCTURE: Anything which is constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the ground.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as the addition,
removal, or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundation.
TAVERN (COCKTAIL LOUNGE): An establishment serving alcoholic beverages in
which the principal business is the sale of such beverages at retail for consumption on the
premises and where sandwiches and snacks may be available for consumption on the
premises.
TENT: Any temporary structure or enclosure, the roof of which and/or one-half or more of
the sides are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, fabric, or a similar pliable material.
THREE-COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM: A complement of instruments or
seismographs which can record, simultaneously, vibration vectors in three mutuallyperpendicular
directions.
THRESHOLD LIMIT VALUE (TLV): The maximum allowable concentration
permitted an industrial worker for eight hours exposure per day, five days a week, as
adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
TOWER, FREESTANDING: A structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guy towers, or monopole towers. The term encompasses personal wireless service facilities,
radio transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers or personal communications services towers, alternative tower structures, and similar
structures. Added by Ordinance A-834-9-97
TOWNHOUSE: See DWELLING, ATTACHED and DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED.
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
XIV 15
TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIAL: Any substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which, by
reason of an inherent deleterious property when emitted in any amount, is potentially
injurious to plants, animals or human being.
TRAILER: A movable or portable unit to be towed on its own chassis and which is used
for recreational or temporary office or lodging purposes, and is not designed for permanent
or long-term residence.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land, and buildings and structures thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: See ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any building, structure, or land that conforms with all of the
regulations of this Ordinance or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of the
codes, ordinances and other legal requirements existing at the time of the enactment of this
Ordinance or any amendment thereto, for the building, structure or land.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations and, when
applicable, performance standards of this Ordinance for the district in which such use is
located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land, buildings, or structures as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. A "principal use" may be a "permitted use" or a "special use".
USE, SPECIAL: See Special use.
VARIATION: A relaxation of the provisions of this Ordinance where such action will not
be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and
not the result of actions or the situation of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this
Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or waterway, except devices moved by human power.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise when money is inserted
and which is designed to be operated by the customer.
VIBRATION: The periodic displacement of a body or medium in alternately opposite
directions from the position of equilibrium when that equilibrium has been disturbed.
VIBRATION FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second of a vibration.
WALL: A linear structure which serves to support, retain or screen.
WATCHMAN'S QUARTERS: Working facilities for an owner/operator or employee to
provide a 24-hour security in any zoning district where such accommodations are a
permitted use. Watchman's quarters shall not serve as a primary residence for a watchman.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a building or structure, unoccupied and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in Section IV of
this Ordinance. A "yard" extends along a lot line, and to a depth and width specified in the
yard requirements for the zoning district in which such zoning lot is located.
YARD LINE: A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the applicable yard
extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point than the required depth or width
Section XIV
Rules and Definitions
16 XIV
of the applicable yard. A building, structure or other obstruction shall not encroach into the
area between the yard line and such adjacent lot line, except for such permitted obstructions
in yards as are set forth in this Ordinance.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line which adjoins a public
street and between the front and rear yards to a width specified in the yard requirements for
the zoning district.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between the
side lot lines to a depth specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district or to the
depth equal to the point at which the required lot width is established, whichever is greater.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A yard located immediately adjacent to another lot or to an
alley separating such side yard from another zoning lot.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side
lot lines to a depth specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard line and the rear
yard line to a width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district.
YARD, TRANSITIONAL: Any yard adjacent to a more restrictive zoning district.
ZONING DISTRICTS: The districts into which the Village of Burr Ridge, Illinois, has
been divided, as set forth on the Zoning District Map, for the purposes of zoning regulations
and requirements.
XV 1
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION XV
VIOLATION, PENALTY, ENFORCEMENT
A. VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply
with, or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
B. ENFORCEMENT
The Community Development Director is hereby designated and authorized to enforce this
Ordinance or to appoint an enforcement officer with the same authority. However, it shall
also be the duty of all officers, citizens, and employees of the Village, particularly of all
members of the police department, to assist the Community Development Director by
reporting to him any new construction, reconstruction, improved land uses, or any other
activity which appears to constitute a violation of this Ordinance. (Amended by Ord. A-
834-03-05)
I & II 1
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
APPENDIX I AND II
Appendices I and II have been relocated to Section IV of the Zoning Ordinance.
Page 1
APPENDIX III
PRIOR R-4 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
E. R4 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT (Amended by A-25-3-69)
1. Permitted Uses
As in the R1 District
2. Conditional Permitted Uses
a. As in the R1 District, except a planned development shall be regulated as
follows:
b. Planned Developments
(1) Land Area
An area of not less than 100 acres, except one-half of the
right-of-way of streets adjoining the tract may be included in the
required land area.
(2) Permitted Uses
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Single-family semi-detached and attached dwellings, and
multiple-family dwellings when located in unified areas
containing not less than four acres.
(c) Other permitted and conditional permitted uses allowed in
this district.
(3) Gross Density
When at least ten percent of the total area of the Planned
Development is devoted to open space:
Not more than 3.0 dwelling units per acre; however, at least 51% of
the total number of dwelling units shall be single-family detached
dwellings, and not more than 16.5% of the total number dwelling
units may be multiple-family dwelling units and, not more than
32.5% of the total number of dwelling units may be single-family
semi-detached and single-family attached dwelling units.
Appendix III
(4) Bulk Regulations
(a) Lot Width and Lot Area shall be as approved by the Board
of Trustees after receiving the recommendations of the Plan
Commission, provided:
(i) that not less than 20 percent of the lots used for
single-family detached dwellings shall have a
minimum lot area of 16,000 square feet and the
remaining lots used for single-family detached
dwellings shall
have a minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet.
(ii) that for other permitted and conditional permitted
uses allowed in this district, the lot areas and lot
widths shall be as required in the R1 District.
(b) Floor Area Ratio
(i) Single-family detached dwellings -- as regulated in
"E5" of this district unless otherwise approved by the
Board of Trustees after receiving the recommendation
of the Plan Commission. (Amended A-25-6-84)
(ii) Single-family, semi-detached and attached dwellings,
and multiple-family dwellings -- not to exceed 0.6;
provided, however, that the proportionate share of any
space owned in common by lot owners shall be
computed in the area of each lot for determining the
floor area ratio for single-family semi-detached and
attached dwellings, said share of common space so
included to the ratio of the area of each lot to the area
of the common space.
(iii) Other permitted or conditional permitted uses -- as
herein regulated in "D-5" of this District.
(c) Yards
Yards, as regulated in "E8" of this district, shall be required at
the exterior boundaries of the planned development. Yards at
other locations shall be as approved by the Board of Trustees
after receiving the recommendation of the Plan Commission,
but if such yards are not provided for by specific approval of
the Board of Trustees they shall be as provided for in "E8" of
this district. (Amended A-25-6-84)
(d) Space Between Structures
As in the R3 District.
Appendix III
Page 3
(e) Building Height
(i) Single-family detached dwellings, single-family
semi-detached and attached dwellings -- not more
than two and one-half stories or 30 feet, whichever is
lower.
(ii) Multiple-family dwellings -- not more than three
stories or 40 feet, whichever is lower.
(iii) Non-residential uses -- not more than 45 feet.
(5) Dwelling Unit Floor Area
The minimum floor area in square feet of single-family
semi-detached, single-family attached and multiple-family dwelling
units, excluding garages, balconies, basements, utility rooms, and
area common to the operation and maintenance of the entire building
shall be 900 square feet, except dwelling units containing more than
one bedroom, shall be as follows:
(a) two-bedroom dwelling units -- 1200 square feet
(b) three-bedroom dwelling units -- 1600 square feet
(c) units with over three bedrooms -- 200 additional square feet
for each bedroom.
(6) Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
In accordance with regulations herein set forth in Section IX, except
in areas designated for single-family semi-detached, and attached
dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, two covered spaces shall be
provided for single-family semi-detached and attached dwellings and
required underground parking of one and one-half per dwelling unit.
Off street parking of one half space per dwelling unit shall be
provided for guest parking.
3. Lot Area
Appendix III
Page 4
a. Single-family detached dwellings -- not less than 20,000 square feet,
except as herein otherwise regulated for planned developments in this
district. Also, when recommended by the Plan Commission and approved
by the Board of Trustees, lots of a lesser size will be permitted if the total
number of lots does not exceed the number which would be possible if all
lots were not less than 20,000 square feet in area and, further, if the
reduction in size is not more than 25%. (Amended by A-25-1-80)
b. Non-residential uses -- as herein set forth for specific uses.
4. Lot Width
a. Single-family detached dwellings -- not less than 100 feet, except as herein
otherwise regulated for planned development in this district.
b. Non-residential uses -- as herein set forth in R1.
5. Floor Area Ratio
a. Single-family detached dwellings -- not to exceed .2.
(Amended A-25-6-84)
b. Non-residential uses -- not to exceed 0.2.
6. Building Height
a. Single-family dwellings -- not more than two and one-half stories or 30 feet,
whichever is lower.
7. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling
a. One story dwellings without cellar -- not less than 1,500 square feet.
b. One story dwellings with cellar -- not less than 1,200 square feet.
c. Dwellings having more than one story:
(1) not less than 950 square feet for a one and one-half story dwelling
and
(2) not less than 750 square feet for two story or two and one-half story
dwellings.
8. Except as may be herein otherwise required, yards shall be in accordance with
the following regulations:
Appendix III
Page 5
a. Front Yard -- not less than 30 feet in depth.
b. Side Yards -- two side yards having a combined width of not less than 20
feet with neither side yard less than ten feet in width, except on corner lots,
the side yard adjoining a street shall be not less than 40 feet in width and the
interior side yard not less than ten feet in width.
c. Rear Yard -- not less than 50 feet in depth.
d. Yards, General -- non-residential uses -- for buildings more than 30 feet in
height, each front, side, and rear yard as required above shall be increased in
width or depth by two feet for each additional one foot of building height
over 30 feet.
9. Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
In accordance with applicable regulations set forth herein Section IX.
Appendix IV
Page 1
APPENDIX IV
PRIOR R-6 RESIDENTIAL & CONGREGATE CARE DISTRICT
H. R-6 RESIDENTIAL AND CONGREGATE CARE DISTRICT
The R-6 District is intended to provide for medium density residential uses incorporating
large natural open spaces. Such a district is characterized by its transitional location adjacent
to both lower density single-family residential uses and higher density research assembly
uses. This district is intended to attract the user who desires a low-maintenance residential
lifestyle while still having the benefits of proximity to spacious, natural surroundings.
Accordingly, this district should be located next to major wetlands or park properties, or
other open space.
1. General Requirements
a. Subject Properties - Properties subject to this classification shall be those
parcels that are: (i) 50 acres or more; (ii) encumbered by a minimum of three
(3) acres of protected wetlands; and (iii) containing or contiguous to a
proposed or existing public park or forest preserve containing thirty (30) or
more acres. Such public park or forest preserve can either be in existence
prior to development or be dedicated (or donated) and developed as part of
the development.
b. Site Plan Approval Required for Conditional Permitted Uses -For all
conditional permitted uses allowed hereunder, the development and
construction of such conditional uses shall be in accordance with a specific
site plan which has been approved by the Board of Trustees (the Board, in its
discretion, may first refer the site plan to the Plan Commission for its
recommendation prior to Board approval). Such site plan shall include,
among other things, the layout and design of the buildings, building heights,
sign requirements, fence requirements, landscaping requirements, open space
requirements, a layout of road networks and other utilities, and parking
requirements. Such site plan shall not be limited to the above requirements,
but shall include all aspects of development of the subject property.
2. PERMITTED USES
a. Single family detached dwellings.
b. Public parks, playgrounds and forest preserves.
c. Accessory uses (customarily incidental to the above permitted uses -
including but not limited to home occupations, off street parking and off
street loading facilities).
3. CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES
Appendix IV
Page 2
a. Outdoor recreational uses (other than public parks) as approved by the Board
of Trustees after receiving the report and recommendation of the Plan
Commission, but not including gun clubs and other uses requiring lighting
for outdoor recreational use.
b. Planned developments
(1) Land Area - A tract that is developed under unified ownership or
control, having an area of not less than 50 acres, except one half of
the right of way of streets adjoining the tract may be included in the
required land area. For purposes of this Section, the term develop
shall be construed to mean the creation of the subdivision or
subdivisions including the installation of all public utilities, and if a
congregate care facility is to be developed on the subject site, it shall
also be construed to include the construction of such facility.
Nothing herein shall restrict the sale of individual lots or parcels to a
builder for the construction of individual dwelling units for
townhouse buildings.
(2) Permitted Uses for Planned Developments
(a) All permitted and conditional permitted uses allowed in this
district.
(b) Single family semi-detached and attached dwellings when
located in an area not more than 30 percent of the total area of
the planned development (including any land donated for
public parks or forest preserves).
(c) Congregate care facilities when located in an area not more
than 30 percent of the total area of the planned development.
For the purposes of this district, a congregate care facility
shall include living units for independent, healthy retirees,
assisted living for elderly adults who require limited
supervision in performing daily activities or attention to
medical needs, and licensed nursing facilities. The term
congregate care facility shall be construed to exclude nursing
homes. A mixed use congregate care facility and the
allowable percentages of the various types of living units
shall be as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(3) Maximum Gross Density
Appendix IV
Page 3
(a) For single family detached dwellings, as approved by the
Board of Trustees after receiving the recommendation of the
Plan Commission.
(b) For semi-detached and attached dwellings 1.3 dwelling units
per acre of the planned development, including any acreage
dedicated, donated or sold for a public park or forest preserve.
(c) For congregate care facilities, 6 dwelling units per acre
(including staff dwelling units, if any) in the planned
development, including any acreage dedicated, donated or
sold for a public park or forest preserve.
(4) Lot Width and Lot Area
As approved by the Board of Trustees after receiving the
recommendation of the Plan Commission.
(5) Yards and Distance Between Dwellings
As approved by the Board of Trustees after receiving the
recommendation of the Plan Commission.
(6) Building Height
(a) For single family detached dwellings not more than two and
one-half (2 1/2) stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower.
(b) For semi-detached and attached dwellings not more than two
and one-half (2 1/2) stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower.
(c) For congregate care facilities not more than three and onehalf
(3 1/2) stories or 45 feet, whichever is lower.
(7) Open Space
Green space unencumbered by buildings or impervious surfaces
(including parking areas and driveways) shall be provided in an
amount not less than eighty-five (85) percent of the total area of the
planned development, including any lands dedicated, donated or sold
for a public park or forest preserve. For purposes of this Section,
"green space" shall consist of landscaped areas in accordance with
the provisions of Section VIII,B,2,i of this Ordinance and/or any
public parks or forest preserves which are dedicated, donated or sold
as part of the planned development, and such green space must be in
addition to all required building setbacks and yards, except as
otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees.
Appendix IV
Page 4
4. LOT AREA
Single-family detached dwellings - shall not be less than 20,000 square feet, unless
otherwise permitted under a planned development within this district. In addition, as
approved by the Board of Trustees after receiving the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, lots of a lesser size will be permitted if the total number of lots does not
exceed the number which would be possible if all lots were not less than 20,000
square feet in area and, further, if the reduction in size is not more than 25%.
5. LOT WIDTH
Single-family detached dwellings - not less than 100 feet, except as herein otherwise
regulated for planned developments in this district.
6. FLOOR AREA RATIO
Not to exceed 0.20 per single family detached residential lot.
7. BUILDING HEIGHT
Single-family detached dwellings - not more than two and one-half (2 1/2) stories or
30 feet, whichever is lower.
8. YARDS
Except as may be herein required, yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulations:
a. Front Yard - not less than 30 feet in depth
b. Side Yards
Two side yards - each side yard shall have a width of not less than 17 feet,
except on corner lots, the side yard adjoining a street shall be not less than 30
feet in width.
c. Rear Yard - not less than 50 feet in depth.
9. OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING
In accordance with applicable regulations herein set forth in Section IX of this
Ordinance.
(Section VI.H. Added by A-454-8-90)
Page 1
APPENDIX V
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PARKING STALLS, AISLES AND MODULES
(See Diagram which follows)
On
Diagram Dimensions Based on the Angle of Parking
A The angle of parking 45? 60? 90?
B Width of stall ............... ............ ........... ............ ............ 9' 9' 9’
C Stall width, parallel to aisle ............................................ 12'9" 10'5" 9'
D Stall depth, perpendicular
to aisle ...................... ............ ........... ............ ............ 20' 21' 18'
E Stall length ................... ............ ........... ............ ............ 19' 19' 18'
F Aisle width .................. ............ ........... ............ ............ 13'* 17'* 24'
G MODULES
(consist of two rows of parking stalls and one aisle)
Interlock .......... ............ ........... ............ ............ 47' 55' --
Wall to wall ................. ........... ............ ............ 53' 59' 60'
* One way aisle only
** 1. Exterior ramp grades shall not exceed 6o. Interior ramp grades shall not exceed 10o.
Handicapped ramp grades shall be 1” per 1’.
2. Where parallel parking is permitted, the stall length shall be 24 feet and aisle width
shall be a minimum of 14 feet.
3. Parking space(s) for the physically handicapped shall be designed in accordance with
State requirements.
(Amended by Ord. No. A-834-12-04)
APPENDIX VI
ACCESS DRIVEWAY FROM STREETS TO
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES
The contents of Appendix VI have been inserted in Section IV.Y of the Zoning Ordinance.
BURR RIDGE ZONING ORDINANCE
APPENDIX VII
PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING ISLANDS
Every parking lot in excess of 15 spaces shall contain planting islands for shade trees
as follows:
? One island for every 15 spaces
? One tree per each island
? Minimum island size: 9 feet wide by 18 feet long
? Island at end of each row and every 15 spaces in a row